Story_ID: 648012
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.   Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, little tricky, but (laughter).  Jimmy Jam, J-I-M-M-Y, J-A-M [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, your birth name is?
Speaker 2: James Samuel Harris.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 6, 1959.
Speaker 1: And, place of birth?
Speaker 2: Minneapolis, Minnesota.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am the CEO of Flyte Tyme Productions [Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.].  And, I am a songwriter, record producer, musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Slash, slash (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December the 19th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my home in Westlake Village, California.
Story_ID: 648013
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer.  It's sort of a warm up and we've done it with everybody, so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I guess, yeah.  (Pause) Are we supposed to say what it is (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes.  You got it.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it varies.  But, right now I'm thinking of In-N-Out burger.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Double-double.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cabo [Cabo San Lucas, Mexico].
Speaker 1: And, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite phrase with my kids [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris] is always: better to have it and not need it than to need it and not have it.
Story_ID: 648014
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm going to ask about your family history in brief.  Can you give us your parents' names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My parents were, my mom was Bertha Harris.  My father was James Harris, Jr. [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.], I guess, so that makes me the third.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, your, what's your family background?  Are they, are they, were they born in Minneapolis [Minnesota], or are they from--?
Speaker 2: I'm--honestly, I'm not sure where my father was born.  My mother was actually born in Fergus Falls, Minnesota.  And, I believe at the time she lived there, they were only black family in the town, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any ancestry in the South as far as you know?
Speaker 2: Not as far as I know, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, what did you parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father worked sort of--well, he worked for a hydraulics company called Grease and Hydraulics [ph.].  And it was basically, actually, I'll tell you--well, I'll say first, when I was really young, he worked for a company called American Hoist and Derrick [American Hoist and Derrick Company].  And, I was too young to really know what he did at that company.  But, when he moved to Grease and Hydraulics I know that he had something to do, I mean, I know it was a hydraulics company.  I'm not sure what his exact job was but I know that he kind of worked on the line, manufacturing, you know, cylinders and that type of stuff.  And, my mom was a, basically a homemaker.  Although she periodically would work part time for Sabathani church [Greater Sabathani Baptist Church, Minneapolis, Minnesota] which was the church by us.  And, also a church called St. Peter's A.M.E. [St. Peter's A.M.E. Church, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which was like a daycare center type of situation.  So, she would go in and, and help the kids there.
Story_ID: 648015
Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' personalities or sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what they look like, what they're interested in, their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think it's probably split down the middle.  I would say that my musical talent came from my father [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.].  He was a keyboard player, played in bands for as long as I could remember.  He'd take me to, you know, shows with him, to the recording studio with him and all of that.  And, I know that's where I got my musical talent from.  I think the person I am as far as my ethics and morals and values, probably comes from my mom [Bertha Harris].  And, and, I think a little bit of my personality 'cause I'm very, I tend to be pretty outgoing in, in public situations.  I, I always, as my wife [Lisa Padilla Harris] always tells me, I'm always the last to leave, you know, the room, 'cause I going to shake every hand and, and all of that.  That part comes from my dad 'cause I remember him doing that on, on jobs and, and shows that he would play.  And, I would sit there as a kid and I'd be like, "Why do we have to," (laughter), "how do we, why do you have to say hi to every--you don't even know them, why are you saying hi to them?"  You know, that kind of thing.  And, I find my, I do exactly the same thing and my kids do the exact same thing to me.  So, I think it's pretty equal parts.
Story_ID: 648016
Speaker 1: Now, what neighborhood did you grow up in in Minneapolis [Minnesota]?  Or, or was it multiple nei- neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I grew up in one house.  We lived in South Minneapolis, 41st [Street] and Portland [Avenue], actually, 4100 Portland, right on the corner.  And, I remember the significance for me for living on the corner meant that there was a bunch more snow to shovel in the wintertime.  'Cause we had to shovel, I had to shovel the driveway, there was no we 'cause I was the only child so (laughter), I had to shovel the driveway.  I had to do the street, the, the sidewalks and then I had to do the elderly neighbor and then the elderly couple next to them.  So, I (laughter), that's what I remember about living on the corner.  And, the corner we lived on was the corner where the snowplow, for people that know about the way snowplows works, they always end up--there's a corner that they end up piling all the snow on; that was always my corner.  Just the way that it turned out, so.  But, South Minneapolis was where I grew up.
Speaker 1: So, you got a workout growing up in then, huh?
Speaker 2: I certainly did.  I certainly did.  My parents [Bertha Harris and James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.] didn't believe--I kept seeing our neighbors would all have, you know, snow blowers and stuff.  And, in the summertime, they had power lawnmowers.  No, for some reason it was a shovel in the winter and it was a push lawnmower in the, in the summer, so.
Story_ID: 648017
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings.  Do you have any siblings?
Speaker 2: I have half-brothers and sisters.  'Cause I was a, the only child of the marriage between my mom [Bertha Harris] and dad [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.].  I don't really know my dad's side of the family that well.  But, on, on my mom's side of the family, I had a half-brother, Milton [ph.].  Actually, I still do, he's still, he's still living.  And, a half-sister, Donna [ph.], who's still living.  And, I have a half-brother, Eugene [ph.], who actually passed away a while back.  Probably thirty years ago now.
Speaker 1: So, were they raised with you?  I mean--?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I would, their, they have kids that are my age basically, and actually older than me.  I mean, there was a long time gap between, you know, the marriages and stuff, so.  But, no, they were all older than me and they came and visited.  I remember we'd go visit them.  They were all, not Milton, but Donna was married to an [U.S.] Air Force gentleman.  So, they moved around a lot.  And, so, we would go visit them in different places.  And, Eugene was stationed in a whole lot of different places also.  So, we would always go visit, and then they'd come visit us.  But, we were probably the only ones that actually stayed in one place throughout my whole kind of growing up.  And, they, they moved with their families around a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were you parents like older than most people's parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  I think my mom was probably forty, she was in her mid-forties probably when she had me.  I don't know exactly how old but, yeah, she was in her mid-forties.  And, actually, my, my father was actually a little younger than my mom, so, yeah.  But, they were both, for parents that's been, back in that day particularly, yeah, pretty, pretty old to have kids.
Story_ID: 648018
Speaker 1: Now, what was your community like?  Was it, did you live in a black community or was it integrated?
Speaker 2: The community I lived in was very much integrated.  As a matter of fact, I lived right on the dividing line, I guess you could say between, on the south side of Minneapolis [Minnesota] everything up to about, 40, 40th Street from downtown, was pretty much, you know, a minority population.  And, everything from 40 on up, 40th Street on up was a white population.  And, I lived at 41st [Street].  So, literally, for instance, when busing happened, the school I was supposed to go to was called Central High School [Minneapolis Central High School].  It was in Minneapolis.  Prince went there.  Quite a few kind of famous people out of Minneapolis went there.  And, because of busing, I ended up being bused to a school called Washburn [Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which was basically ten blocks the other way on 50th [Street].  So, and, I remember being so mad because I'd always had grown up waiting to go to, to Cen- to Minneapolis Central.  But, ended up, you know, going to Washburn.  So, I was pretty, about as integrated as, as it could possibly be.
Story_ID: 648019
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory actually is standing in front of the television and, and basically bouncing around and, and dancing.  I just remember I loved sounds coming from the TV.  And, I would do that also in front of, you know--of course in the old days, the stereos were, you know, they were like coffins, right.  They were just one big thing.  And, my mom [Bertha Harris] always used to tell me, you know, "You got--you would love the music."  Like, whenever they played music, I would always just stand in front of it and bounce, and I remember that.  I don't know why, but I remember that.  And, I was probably, I don't know, three, I would say, maybe a little younger.  'Cause, 'cause, and maybe it's because I've seen, I've maybe seen pictures, partly, that make it a little clearer.  But, I totally remember that.  And, I remember our, our house and our living room and, and the furniture and the lamps, and the picture.  We had this picture of Jesus that I remember.  And, it's all, it's all very vivid.  And, and, part of it is probably because it was very consistent, you know.  There wasn't a lot of moving around and, you know, it wasn't like we were getting new furniture every, every day, or new lamps every day.  I remember we did one kind of, my, my mom did one sort of renovation and it was basically buying a couple of new lamps was about as serious as it got.  And, but, but, yeah, I always remember being moved by what I saw on TV.  And, I don't really remember what the images were but I just remember, just kind of standing in front of the TV and always being fascinated with the, probably more with the sounds than the actual sight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a lot of music in the household?
Speaker 2: A lot of music in the household.  Because when my mom wasn't playing records which she always was, continuously, my dad [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.] was playing on, we had an organ, he had an electric piano.  So, yeah, there was music nonstop around our house.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, he, he would rehearse in the basement with, you know, his little--he had a jazz trio.  They'd rehearse in the basement.  So, yeah, there was always music, and always instruments around too.
Story_ID: 648020
Speaker 1: We always ask this question like this: what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up [in Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Well, there was always, I remember the smell I remember always was food cooking.  I don't remember anything necessarily.  I only remember what my mom [Bertha Harris] made that I didn't like, which was liver, which always smelled really good.  And, I'd go, "Mom, what are you cooking?"  And, she'd go, "Liver."  And, I'd go, "Uh," I hated that.  But, she would do neck bones.  She loved neck bones.  She'd cook that.  That always smelled great.  That's probably the prominent smell I remember.  And, I remember our house was, you know, it wasn't a big house by any stretch of the imagination, but we ended up using every square inch of it.  They actually made me a room out of the attic, which became my room as I got a little older, you know, when I got like ten or eleven, or whatever.  You know, you'd, you'd take, you know, in the old days, you'd take the attic and then you'd--would put up, they had the paneling and stuff, and you'd put the paneling up and make walls and stuff, and kind of do that.  So, I remember that, and I loved that.  I loved the kind of freedom of that, and kind of being, it was upstairs, so being like on my own floor, I thought was pretty cool.  But, it was, it wasn't a busy house.  It wasn't like we had a whole lot of people over a lot, you know, family occasionally.  I liked the idea of I--'cause I was, like I say, I grew up an only child even though I had half-brothers and sisters.  But, I liked the idea of having my own stuff.  And, I think, I always treated my toys and whatever I had, I always treated very respectfully.  And, I really hated when people would come over and not do that.  And, I wasn't used to that.  So, I would be happy like when my, you know, one of my brothers' family would come, I'd be happy to see them and then I'd be just as happy to watch them go at the end of the week.  'Cause I'd be like, "Get out, no, get away from my stuff," you know.  I was very territorial about my stuff and had it a certain way and liked to keep it, keep my things nice.
Story_ID: 648021
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I actually started, I went to--I have a vague memory of going to nursery school.  But, I, but I don't really remember it.  I do remember liking the experience of it.  But, I was a really early reader.  And, at, I think, at three or four years old, I basically had a sixth grade reading and comprehension level.  And, I remember going to the, I think it was the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, I remember I, they tested me, and I went through this kind of series of tests and I didn't really understand it at the time.  And, evidently their recommendation was for me to skip kindergarten and go straight into first grade.  And, this was at a school called Field Elementary School [Eugene Field Elementary School; Eugene Field Community School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which was about five block from my house, five or six blocks from my house.  And, I remember hating the first grade experience.  Not only because I wasn't with my friends, but also because I had a teacher that to this day swears I was her fav- you know, that, that she was my favorite teacher (laughter).  But, I never understood anything she said, and she would teach things and I just didn't get it, and I didn't like it.  And, I told, I remember telling my mom [Bertha Harris].  I said, "I really don't like this."  So, I ended up doing, I ended up doing first grade over again, which was, so now it was where I was--should normally be.  And, I loved it.  And, I don't know whether it was because I was a year more mature and understood it, or whether it was just because I had a teacher that really was a great teacher that made things so clear that everything that I didn't understand the first time around, I totally understood the second time around.  And, I remember at that point, I loved school, absolutely loved it.  I was, you know, a pretty bright kid, everything came really easy.  I was pretty social and I had, you know, pretty good, I think, pretty good teachers.  I mean, I, my second and third grade teachers I don't really remember.  My fourth grade teacher I remember had the worst breath ever.  And, I don't remember his name.  But, I--yeah, elementary school was cool.  I re- I did enjoy that a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, did you have a favorite teacher in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, my first grade teacher, the second time around, would definitely be one them.  Actually, the teacher I di- I ended up not liking, I liked her as a person because I remember, you know, later on as I grew up and stuff, and she always would kind of keep up with what, you know, was going on in, you know, my career and all that kind of stuff.  And, she was actually just a really sweet lady.  I just--she didn't click for me as a teacher.  And, she also had like the finest daughter, oh my god.  Her daughter was so beautiful.
Speaker 1: Is that the first, first grade?
Speaker 2: This is the first, first grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is the one, this is the one I didn't like as a teacher.  But, I actually ended up liking her as a person.  She was a great person, and had a, and had a really beautiful daughter, I remember.  But, yeah, it would prob- it's weird because I don't remember her name but probably my first grade teacher because she was the one that kind of set me on the path of actually liking school.  Because I went from hating school the one, the first year, to absolutely loving it the second year; and she was the one that made that happen.
Story_ID: 648022
Speaker 1: Was there a good music program in the school [Eugene Field Elementary School; Eugene Field Community School, Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: There was.  There was.  As a matter of fact, I remember in fourth grade, now I could already, by ear, I could pretty much play any instrument that I picked up.  I just kind of had a talent for it.  But, I do remember in fourth grade they said, "You can play an instrument."  So, I picked the clarinet and I did that, I played the clarinet for a couple of years.  And, and what I--I liked it because first of all it was learning to read music which was good, which I didn't know how to do.  But, second of all, I just like the idea of having my own instrument, you know, I always prided myself on having the, you know, nicest case and the nicest, you know, keeping my instrument really shinny and, you know, the whole thing.  I mean, there was, there was a sense of pride in that, and there was sense of responsibility that I had to take, I had something I had to take care of.  So, I like that a lot.  In sixth grade though, after I was kind of discovering girls, I switched to the saxophone, 'cause the saxophone was a little cooler with the girls, and it was just as easy as the clarinet.  It was basically the same exact thing.  So, yes, we had a great elementary band and, and music program.  Yeah, it was great and definitely introduced me to, you know, the kind of the formal side of playing.  But, like I say, the other important thing that I really realized I enjoyed was just taking care of my instrument and having the responsibility of, of doing that.  I think was important just in sort of my foundation of, of my being, sort of.
Story_ID: 648023
Speaker 1: Did church influence you growing up?
Speaker 2: Church influenced me but maybe not in the way that it influences a lot of people.  My father [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.] was, I believe he was Baptist, I'm not sure.  And, my mother [Bertha Harris] was Presbyterian.  And, so what would happen was on Sundays we would kind of switch churches every Sunday.  And, we'd go to my dad's church and it was, you know, music and, you know, just, you know, the spirit was in the air and people were falling out, and, and it was--I enjoyed the music part of it.  I didn't get any message from, from the, from the preacher.  I just--I didn't get anything.  It was all, I mean, all I remember I'd hear, he'd go, "La, la, la, la, la, la, la," and everybody'd go, "Yeah, la, la."  And, I'd be like, "When are we, this is three hours, when are we get--?"  I, I just kind of felt that way.  But, when the music played, I loved the music.  So, I loved that part of it.  So, I don't, I don't real--I don't feel I got anything out of it.  My mom's church, which was Presbyterian, it was very white, it was just this guy.  And, when he would talk it was like having a normal conversation.  Nobody, there was no feedback from the crowd.  There was no, you know, the songs were okay.  They were all just kind of like, eh, okay.  But, his message was so crystal clean because it wasn't wrapped up in, well, histrionics is not, maybe not the right word.  But, but, it was just a very clear message.  And, what I liked--and it was short.  It was like the, the services were maybe forty-five, fifty minutes.  And, he would just come out and he'd tell a story and it would be just a, not nece- it would be a story that related to the Bible.  But, it would just be a story about his everyday life.  He'd talk about, "Well I went to the store one day and I saw this lady, and she said, 'Blah, blah,'" and would, and would tell the story.  And at the end of the story he would wrap it back into whatever the verse was that we were learning, or that he was talking about.  And, I loved it.  And, I always walked out of church feeling like I learned something.  So, once again, as I've said about a few things in my childhood, I think the music in my dad's church was amazing and influenced me just on what the power of music could be, you know, just how it could move people.  But, I think the message came out of my mom's church.  That, you know, kind of the golden rule, which was, you know, do unto others, that's kind of what I always lived by and continue to try to live by today.  That was, I was, the most important one to me.  So, yeah, so it was little of each.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648024
Speaker 1: You and I guess, this is in, did you have a middle school or junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Okay, so, in those days, elementary school, at least in Minneapolis [Minnesota], went to sixth grade, okay.  So, seventh grade and eighth grade really were only the two, well and ninth grade, seventh, eighth, and ninth were basically junior high; is what they call junior high school.  So, in seventh and eighth grade I went to Bryant Junior High [Bryant Junior High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, Bryant was basically the feeder, the feeder school, if you will, for Minneapolis Central [Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], where I thought I was going to be going to high school.  And, that was a pretty pivotal time in my life.  Because I once again was real- I, first of all, I loved Bryant Junior High.  It was much more ethnically diverse that the elementary school, Field [Eugene Field Elementary School; Eugene Field Community School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], that I went to because it was, you know, closer to downtown.  So, it just naturally, more African Americans, and I loved that.  And, I thought that was real cool.  That was also the time period that I met my partner Terry [Terry Lewis] which was very influential also.  And, it was also that time period that I met Prince which was also very, very cool.  So, yeah, so that seventh and eighth grade period at Bryant was, was very pivotal in my, in my life (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 648025
Speaker 1: Which happened first: did you meet Terry [Terry Lewis] first or Prince?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a great question.  I haven't even thought about that really.  Let me, let me process that.  I would say I met, I met Prince first because we had a, they had a, first of all, there was a teacher at Minneapolis Central [Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], Mr. Hamilton [James "Jimmy" Hamilton], who was a great music teacher.  I mean, fantastic music teacher.  And, at Bryant Junior High [Bryant Junior High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], they had put in, I think with the help of Central, they had put in this piano, this, well like a keyboard.  But, it was basically had keyboards on every side of it.  So, you could take like eight people at a time and basically have them practice what they needed to practice.  So, I, you know, I signed up for the music.  I said, "Okay, that's great.  I'll do that."  And, Prince also signed up for it.  Well, when we got into class, I remember the teacher handed us something like, you know, 'Mary Had a Little Lamb,' or something, 'London Bridge' ['London Bridge Is Falling Down'] or something really easy.  We could, we could play it by ear.  We didn't need to look at the music.  And, we figured out real quickly that if that's what it was going to be, you know, they'd give the assignment at the beginning of day and say, "Learn this."  And, then they say, we'd come back in an hour and play.  Great.  So, they put it in front of us and we had headphones on and stuff.  And, we would be like, we're really learning it.  Then, the teacher would walk out.  And, then me and Prince were just like, like we'd just be playing.  Like just--and he was amazing.  And, I thought I could play good.  Now, I, and I could.  He was on a whole nother level.  Like he could do stuff and I would just watch him playing and just be (shakes head), that crazy.  And, then of course, the teacher would walk back in and we'd go, "Oh, okay."  And, then we'd play (laughter), 'Mary,' you know, 'Mary Had a Little Lamb,' or 'London Bridge' but play it kind of slow like we were just learning.  And, the teacher would go, "Great.  Okay, tomorrow we're going to learn something."  We go, "Great."  And, for us it was like a great hour out of school every day, to, to just jam and to just play, so that was real cool.
Speaker 1: Now, what was, well, the artist Prince formerly known as?
Speaker 2: Prince was his name.  That was his actual name.  Prince Rogers Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, he had an older brother [sic.] named Duane Nelson.  And, Duane was--looked exactly like Prince, but was tall.  Like literally like a tall version of Prince.  And, and Prince was a heck of a basketball player too.  Duane was too, his, the older brother who was tall was a really good basketball player.  But, Prince could, he could play, 'cause he could handle the ball really well.  I mean his hand eye coordination for playing instruments worked really well with basketball also.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard this before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think Charlie Murphy or somebody was talking about it on, on television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did a, they did a whole spoof.  Charlie did a whole spoof about it on the Dave Chappelle show ['Chappelle's Show'].  But, the funny thing is, he could really play.  And, even I remember recording with Prince.  There was a studio out here, Sunset Sound [Sunset Sound Recorders].  And, I remember we used to record in The Time days, we used to do some recording there.  That was one of Prince's favorite studios.  And, they had a basket set up.  It wasn't like a court or anything.  It was just a basket, right.  And, Prince would play horse, right.  And, could beat anybody because he knew all the angles.  And, he would do those shots like, you know, remember the McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] commercials with Michael Jordan, I think it was Michael Jordan and Larry Bird where they were off the scoreboard, off the whatever; Prince could make those kinds of shots, right.  Because there would be the basket but then there was the roof of this building and a tree here, and a lamp post here and whatever.  And, he could literally make these crazy shots because he was so used to being there.  But, he, he just was really good about it; you know, he, you know, he just, he was very meticulous and I know that he spent a lot of time when he wasn't in the studio, he was out there perfecting those shots.
Story_ID: 648026
Speaker 1: So, you're in junior high school [at Bryant Junior High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] with Prince.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now, it was through Upward Bound, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it TRiO Upward Broun- Bound, I think I read that it was called, right?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, Upward Bound was actually a program at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, what happened was, I wasn't very good at math but I was a pretty bright kid.  I had good grades.  And, they chose six kids from the Minneapolis public school system [Minneapolis Public Schools], actually more than that, but six in sort of this one particular area which was called peer teaching.  And, the idea would be that you would learn a subject and because--and then be able to teach it to a grade below you, which would help the kids understand 'cause they'd look at you and go, "Well, if he can do it, I can do it," and then more relatable, right?  So, for some reason they decided that math was going to be the subject.  Now, I was at first, I remember thinking, why do they want me to teach math.  That's my worst subject.  And, then I realized, well, you know what though, this is an opportunity to maybe learn it and understand better, if I'm going to be teaching it to someone else.  So, I said, "Okay.  Yeah, I'll do it.  I'll do it."  So, this is between seventh and eighth grade.  The cool part about it was that it was like, I think it was, I think it was like six weeks maybe.  It was like a six week program.  And, I remember that we, we got a chance to stay in dorms, right.  We, we, you know, we could go home on the weekends if we wanted to.  But, it was like really being like a college student.  It was like freedom, you know.  And, I remember being like twelve years old, like, oh, man!  This is the best ever, right.  And, I was like, I was like twelve, I think about to turn thirteen that year.  So, I was like twelve turning thirteen.  And, I remember when we checked into the dorms and the whole thing.  I had a roommate, I don't even remember who my roommate was.  But, what I remember is walking by this door that was opened and seeing this dude in there play a red, black and green bass.  And, it was Terry Lewis.  And, I remember seeing him and going, man, who's this brother?  I like, I like this dude.  I didn't even know him.  But, I just like the fact that he could play.  And, that--he didn't know me from anything.  But, later on heard me play piano at some point and said, "We need to get together, you know, and do something."  And, you know, we've been together ever since.  That was 1972, so, (laughter), it's a long time we've been together.  But, that was really the, the kind of experience that, like I say, when I say that seventh and eighth grade period in my life was probably the most pivotal, that's why, 'cause that's when I met my partner for life.  So, you know, I even say that to my kids all the time.  I say, "You never know, you might meet somebody doing something," I mean, I never figured I'd meet my musical partner for life learning to teach math to, to kids, you know.  So, you never really know how that's going to happen, and I always tell my kids [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris] that, you know, it's, you never know.  So, that's why you go out and you experience stuff, you know, you take in stuff; and don't take the relationships you make for granted, because you never know, you know, how that's going to all turn out.
Story_ID: 648027
Speaker 1: Now, from what I understand, you all had different perspectives on music, had heard different things--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and were focused on different styles.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, I had grown up as I mentioned pretty, pretty integrated and there was, in Minneapolis [Minnesota] at the time, there was a lot of pop radio.  So, that's all I really heard.  And, so, my favorite groups were, you know, Seals and Crofts, and America, and the Carpenters, and, and actually at the time I met Terry [Terry Lewis], probably Chicago was my favorite group.  And, I remember Chicago had a new album coming out that, that week, I think that, that we met.  And, I remember there was a record store around the corner, you could walk to it.  And, I, I said to Terry, I said, "Man, I'm going to, I'm going to go get this new album, man."  He said, "What you getting?"  And, I said, "Chicago."  And, he looked at me, "Chicago?"  I said, "Yeah, Chicago's got a new album."  And, he's like, "Yeah, okay, cool."  So, when I came back and he we--I guess he went to the record store, he came back, and I said, "Well, what you got, man?"  He said, "I got a new Earth, Wind and Fire album, and I got a new, a New Birth, and Tower of Power."   And, I'm like, "Who are--I never heard of none of these groups."  And, he's like, "Okay, sit down.  Let me play you this stuff."  And, it like blew my mind 'cause it was just funky and musical and just incredible, I mean, you know.  And, I--so, he turned me on to a whole different way of even thinking about music and, and really that was where we, we really started having great conversations about music.  'Cause I turned him on to things that I liked.  And, he was musically open enough, even though it wasn't his thing, he was musically open enough to get why I liked it, you know.  And, we just kind of--we really hit it off.  We really did.  And, at the end of that year, or the end of that, you know, school program, they were going to do a dance.  And, so, Terry said, "Well, let's put a little band together and we'll play at the dance."  So, at the time, I played drums.  I mean, I didn't think of myself as a keyboard player, even though I played, you know.  But, I always thought of myself as a drummer.  I always thought I was a really good drummer.  So, I remember saying to Terry, you know, "Well, I'll play drums."  And, he said, "I already got a drummer."  And, I said, "No, no, I play drums though."  And, he said, "No, I already got a drummer."  He said, "Play keyboards."  And, I said, "Why?"  He said, "'Cause your dad [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.] plays keyboards."  I said, "So?"  He said, "Well, if your dad can play that means you can play."  I said, "Okay."  So, I still in my mind was thinking I'm the drummer until I heard Jellybean Johnson play, and that was Terry's (laughter) drummer.  And, I heard Jellybean play and I was like, "I'm going to go get the keyboards and do this."  And, that's how, that's really another pivotal thing 'cause that turned me from a drummer to a keyboard player.  That made me realize, 'cause I thought I was a good drummer, you know.  And, then I heard Jellybean playing and I knew, you know, keyboards was the destiny for me.  And, and, you know, it worked out really good.  We played the little gig at the end of the year.  He worked out good and, you know, we've been friends, you know, ever since that.
Story_ID: 648028
Speaker 1: All right.  So, this is, you're like a freshman in high school, or eighth--eighth grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  Not, not quite, because this is seventh, this is seventh and eighth grade.  So, ninth grade, ninth grade is still considered junior high at that point in time.  This was when busing came in.  And, so, instead of going to Bryant [Bryant Junior High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] where I had been going, I got shipped to a school called Ramsey [Alexander Ramsey Junior High School; Justice Page Middle School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which was the feeder school for Washburn [Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], where I eventually ended up in high school.  And, so, I had gone from, you know, Bryant which was this kind of, you know, very strong African American population to now to Ramsey where the only black population there was basically either getting bused in or in my case, as I like to tell my kids [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris], "I walked to school."  And, it was about a mile away, which is not a big deal.  But, yeah, I would walk to school 'cause it wasn't that far.  And, that was kind of, you know, I--I felt totally comfortable.  I didn't have a probably with it other than being told where I needed to go to school.  I just kind of thought, I should be able to go where I want to go, you know.  I didn't get the whole concept of, you know, we're going to, we need to balance the, the races and all that, I was like, whatever.  I didn't get that.  But, Ramsey was cool.  But, Ramsey was kind of the first, my first school that I really started thinking, I'm not sure how much I really like school.  Because I, I didn't feel challenged there at all.  The music program was good but not great.  Music teacher was certainly not, you know, Mr. Hamilton [James "Jimmy" Hamilton] who I'd--had mentioned earlier at Central High School [Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], who I thought I'd be, you know, playing some music for.  You know, they had plays and that and I would do those sometimes, you know, but I just, I don't know.  It just, it just wasn't challenging to me.  It was kind of for the first time school kind of felt like, eh, I'm not really, not really liking it.  The saving grace of it was I met three guys who were all jocks.  And, I remember they, they were Reggie [ph.], Jerry [ph.], and Gary [ph.].  And, I had known those guys in, I had met them, well, I met Gary actually in, in elementary school [Eugene Field Elementary School; Eugene Field Community School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] when I was in sixth grade.  And, I remember he was one of the people that, you know, he wasn't a musician but his dad was a, like a vice president of Musicland [Musicland Group, Inc.] or something.  So, he was the kid that always had all the new records and stuff.  So, I would always would go to his house and he, they had this huge stereo system and stuff, and I remember we'd listen to records and stuff.  Well, anyway, we reconnected back in Ramsey in ninth grade.  I hadn't really seen him for two or three years.  So, we reconnected and that was cool.  And, he was a big time jock at that point, ran track, played football, the whole deal.  And, these other two kids, Reggie and Jerry were kind of the same way.  They were like his, kind of like his boys.  So, I kind of fell in with them.  And, even though I wasn't that good of a jock, I just liked hanging out with them.  You know, they used to cut classes and do all that stuff and it didn't really matter, and I thought, okay.  Yeah, this is my crowd.  I'm going to hang out with these guys and cut classes.  But, I could still always make the grades because I was smart, and I could do that.  So, I remember ninth grade just being kind of--I always thought of it sort of, not a wasted year, but kind of not the kind of year that I, I thought it would be.  And, and at that same time in ninth grade I was just kind of putting together what would become sort of like my next group, you know, my next singing group and stuff, so.
Story_ID: 648029
Speaker 1: So, in the ninth grade you were putting together a group, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In ninth grade I had a group that was called Paradise.  And, it was just kind of guys that I knew from around the school [Alexander Ramsey Junior High School; Justice Page Middle School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], didn't involve Terry [Terry Lewis].  I should geographically say that Terry lived on the north side of Minneapolis [Minnesota], and I lived on the south side of Minneapolis.  So, Terry went to a school called North High [North Community High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and we weren't rivals or anything like that, school wise.  But, it was hard for us to actually connect and see each other.  So, Terry basically did his thing with his band, and I did my thing with kind of a bunch of different bands.  But, Paradise was kind of my ninth grade band, and it was a very ethnically mixed, you know, band.  We, I think we had like ten guys in the band, it was five, five black, five whites, something like that.  And, we'd do different gigs and stuff around the schools, and play at lunchtime and that kind of thing.  Noth- you know, nothing really making money but just kind of having fun.  And, I really enjoyed that.  I mean, that was probably the thing that made it, made ninth grade bearable was, was the music.  And, I realized that music really made anything in my life bearable, quite honestly.  As long as I could either have access to an instrument to play or, you know, back in the day, or you know, a record player, or something, I was cool.  That's all I needed.  That was sort of like my, you know, music was like my kind of my lifeblood, you know.  So, so, that was cool.  But, I remember that, that point in time, that was when I, I started getting in different bands.  I remember even around that same time and going into--well, high school started in tenth grade up there.  And, I remember making the transition to tenth grade [at Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], I started playing with a band called Sky [ph.], which was a white rock band.  And, they were in a suburb called Robbinsdale [Minnesota].  And, I don't even know, to this day, I can't remember how I ended up in that band.  But, that was a great experience too because they were older guys and they could play in clubs and stuff.  So, I remember my mom [Bertha Harris], like I'd get out of school and I'd do my homework and then my mom would take me to the club at eight o'clock, or whatever, and we'd play from nine o'clock to one in the morning.  And, then I'd go home and at six o'clock in the morning I was at my zero hour class or whatever.  But, it was just natural and I, I appreciated that my mom didn't just go, "Well, you're too young to do that, and you're just a kid," and you know, she didn't do any of that.  She really said, "This is what you want to do?"  'Cause it's like, "Well, these guys got a gig at the club."  And, she said, "That's fine."  She said, "I'll take you.  I'll go.  I'll bring you back."  I mean, she sat, and I, I see it now with parents, you know, 'cause I got kids that are all athletes [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris].  And, it's the same thing.  We go to tournaments 'til all hours, and drive all over the place to get them.  It's the same thing.  I mean, I wouldn't miss it.  I don't mind doing it.  And, it's kind of well, you do whatever you need to do for your kids.  So, I was fortunate that my mom had a really good understanding about that.  And, was very cool about letting me pursue sort of my musical passion, you know.  That, that was so important.
Story_ID: 648030
Speaker 1: So, this is 1973, something (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we're probably, yeah, we like, '73 [1973], '74 [1974] or something, yeah.  'Cause I'm, 'cause I'm like probably sixteen at this point, thir- fourteen, fifteen, like fourteen, fifteen years old probably at this point, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well yeah, by 1974 I guess, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so, what music were you gravitating towards at this point?  Were you, I mean, so you're playing rock and you're also playing with another group.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Paradise was more, Paradise was, was R and B.  But, it was like, I remember Tower of Power, we played Stevie Wonder.  We had a really good singer name Tony Green.  I remember Tony.  Tony was a great singer.  He could sing anything.  And, we had another singer in that group named Michael Dixon.  And, Michael Dixon was a, was a pretty pivotal person.  Because Michal Dixon ended up becoming my tenth grade counselor, and, at Washburn High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, it was interesting because he had, the first day I went to see him, he had a piano in his office.  And, I thought, I remember walking in and I go, "Wow, you got a piano in your office, how cool is that."  And, then he said, "Well, they ran out of office space so they put me in one of the little music rooms."  And, I said, "Wow, that's cool."  And, said, "Well, do you play?"  And, I said, "Yeah."  And he said, "Well, I sing."  And, I said, "You do?"  And, he said, "Yeah."  And, I said--remember sitting down that very day.  I sat down and started playing.  He started kind of singing along with me.  He had a voice kind of like, I always thought he kind of sound like Barry White a little bit, kind of a low baritone.  And, we kind of looked at each other, and we were like, "Wow, cool."  And, he said, "Well, I'm going to look at your classes."  And, he said, "How are your grades?"  And, I said, "Great, and pretty much straight A's."  He said, "Okay."  He said, "I can write you out of classes," and he says, "and, you can just come down here and play."  And, I said, "Okay, great."  And, literally, we sat and wrote, you know, I don't know, twenty or thirty songs just in his office, just sitting, he would sing them.  And, at that point in time, my musical--so you asked me my musical taste, I was very much into the Philadelphia sound at that point; The O'Jays, Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes.  All this stuff that Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff] produced, and Thom Bell wrote and produced.  I was very much into those, Stylistics [The Stylistics], Delfonics [The Delfonics], Blue Magic was probably my favorite group.  And, so, the songs I wrote were very much like that.  And, I remember saying to Michael, I said, "Hey," I said, "man, it'll be cool if we could get some people to sing these songs."  And, he said, "Hey, I know some guys that sing."  And, he went and got these guys.  And, I remember they, they showed up, I think we, we ended up rehearsing at one of the guys' house.  Or, maybe, we, we rehearsed at my house, I don't remember.   But, these guys walked in and I gave them parts and I said, "Okay, you, you do the falsetto, the high part, and you do the baritone, and you do that whatever, whatever, and here's the way the chorus goes," and I gave them the chorus.  And, all of a sudden I played and this beautiful harmony came out.  And, I was like, "Oh, my god, this is, this is it.  This is exactly what I want."  So, all the songs ended up sounding just like, you know, trying to Gamble and Huff basically.  But, that was so, you know, once again, just a--you know, who, what, who's it going to be that I, I walk in an office and there's a piano in there and my counselor's, happens to be, a singer, and you know, bam.  So, I was doing all of those things.  I was playing in the rock band, doing rock music.  I was playing in this Paradise band doing R and B music.  And, then I was writing these, you know, beautiful Philadelphia ballads [Philadelphia International Records] basically with my counselor, you know.  And, that was really like my, like my tenth grade in, in high school.
Story_ID: 648031
Speaker 1: Did any of the--those songs survive into your, your career, your song writing career?
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly enough, those songs from that era have all been resurrected actually on a, on a box set that just recently got released.  Where some guys had went in and basically like, you know, like archeologists and basically dug up old tapes of those recordings of a little record we made, so on and so forth.  And, they've basically put it out.  And, they put this group, ended up being called Mind and Matter.  And, they actually put a Mind and Matter album out with nine songs that we recorded in the basement of one of the singers' houses ['1514 Oliver Avenue (Basement)'].  You know, we set up a little makeshift recording studio and did that.  And, then they did another set, a box set that was called 'Purple Snow' ['Purple Snow: Forecasting the Minneapolis Sound'].  And, it was, and it has not only the couple of Mind and Matter's songs on it, but it also has, I produced a record on Michael Dixon, because Michael Dixon who was my counselor [at Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota] actually got saved and decided he didn't want to do, he wanted to do gospel music.  So, I wrote a couple of gospel songs with him and produced them, and what I--and, they told me I played all the instruments on them, which I didn't remember.  But, I did.  I played all the instruments on the record.  And, so, those recordings actually do exist, interestingly enough.  They didn't in my mind up until maybe a year ago when they kind of unearthed, you know, these things.  But, but, yeah, they did live on.  But, they didn't, they didn't have anything to do--I think if you're asking did those songs live on into like my career with Terry [Terry Lewis], no, they didn't.  No, they, it was, those songs were gone and, gone and forgotten.  Terry remembers them.  Terry sings me some of those songs, you know, he used to sing me.  He'd go, "Man, remember that song you had, man?"  We had his song called 'Virgin Lady.'  He said, "Remember 'Virgin Lady,' man.  Remember how the girls all went crazy on that song?"  And, I said, "Yeah, I remember that song.  I remember that song."  And, he said, "You need to write a new one like that."  And, you know, sometimes he'll, he'll say that to me, so.  It's interesting how, how things go.
Speaker 1: How were you recording these?  Did you have a, like a big tape recorder or something or what?  Did you have the studio that you got access to?
Speaker 2: We, okay.  So, the basement tapes that we did, and they were literally--you know, it's funny 'cause you hear the term basement tapes and it's sometimes they're, it's in a studio but somebody calls them that 'cause it sounds cool to be from the basement.  These are literally in basement, in a basement.  The singer's name was Sabu [Lawrence "Sabu" Brown], and it was actually his mother's house, if I'm not mistaken.  And, we put up like padding everywhere, like pillows, like he had pillars and stuff.  We tied pillows around pillars to try to, you know, deaden the sound, and, pardon me, isolate the drums, and all of that kind of stuff.  And, there was a gentleman name Marlin Possehl who worked for Big Brothers [Big Brothers Big Sisters of the Greater Twin Cities, St. Paul, Minnesota].  And, he had a nice recording--a recorder.  It was a four track, reel to reel tape recorder.  And, he had gotten involved in Paradise, in the group Paradise, that I was, that I was with.  And, said, "Hey, if you guys want to record, I have a recorder.  I'll bring my record over and some microphones and you guys can record."  So, he was the one that actually recorded the basement tapes that Mind and Matter did.  So, and I don't remember how I, it's funny, I don't remember how I met Marlin either, you know.  But, he was just this guy in my life, white dude, real cool, you know.  And, basically, had, I wasn't, you know, he--I wasn't like a, he wasn't a big brother to me, but he had kids that he, you know, mentored and stuff who, he was actually in the program.  But, we just kind of hit it off just kind of as friends.  I just--I don't remember how the heck we met though.  But, good dude, really good dude.  I mean, once again, you know, it's funny because when I think about it and I reminisce about this stuff, there's so many people that were pivotal to making it happen, you know.  It's like if this one person wasn't there, then it's a different turn that you make, you know what I'm saying, and all of that.
Story_ID: 648032
Speaker 1: The other pivotal thing that happened in my life, 'cause now we're talking like I'm sixteen or so now.  So, I'm, you know, getting into my, my junior year of high school [Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  The other pivotal thing that happened was my dad [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.] and mom [Bertha Harris] split.  And, my dad just one day went to work and never came back.  And, it was, it was interesting.  I, you know, I'm not emotional about it now, and I don't really think I was that emotional about it then 'cause I understood that he was, he was really torn.  He was a musician when him and my mom met, and a fairly successful one, you know, had played on a couple kind of local hit records and that kind of thing.  But, he decided that he wanted to settle down, get married, and have kids and all of that.  And, he had made a promise to my mom that he would kind of just do the music thing just as a weekend hobby and not really get serious about it.  Well, I remember when I was maybe eight years old that he ended up playing on a record that actually started making some noise.  And, I remember that he wanted to go on tour.  It was like a six week tour.  And, he had built up a bunch of time off at work, and he said, "You know, I'd like to take time off of work and go do this gig."  And, I remember my mom said, "You promised that you weren't going to do the music things," and you know, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And, I remember the, that had a huge impact on me.  Because in my mind, it's like "Go," (laughter) "go," 'cause I understood what music was and what it meant.  And, it's like, "You got to let him go."  I mean, if he wants to go do that, why not?  Anyway, he didn't do it.  And, I think when he finally left, I think some of it was because, not because there was a musical opportunity out there for him, but because he really felt that it--something was missing from his life.  And, I think that while he wasn't resentful of being tied down with a kid and responsibilities, that it, it just weighed on him.  And, and him and my mom did not get along the last--very well, like the last, probably two or three years.  And, I, I think I was probably more relieved when he didn't come back because I didn't have to hear the arguing and the--and all that stuff, you know.  So, so, you know, I, so, I think that affected my life going forward.  And, I--we're not to that part yet, but, but I think it really affected a lot of the decisions I made knowing that I--'cause I always put music first in my life.  And, and, I think part of the reason was because I watched my dad not do that, or decide to not do that at a point in his life.  And, I think he totally regretted it.  And, but, I will say that it brought my mom and me very close together 'cause it was just the two of us.  And, a lot of the decisions that she made on my behalf when I would come with some crazy music idea, like, like I quit school at--in my senior year (laughter) because I wanted to do music.  I just, I said, "School doesn't have anything for me."  And, I know I--and I knew I was breaking her heart when I said that 'cause she wanted to see, you know, everybody wants to see their son graduate and all that.  I don't talk about it really, 'cause I don't want to send a message that it's okay to do that.  But, that was my choice.  And, my mom, I remember saying, "I don't like this.  This would not be my first choice for you.  But, as long as I see you really working toward your goal of, you know, writing and, and being in a band or whatever you want to do, I will accept it.  But, you can't just sit around, and, you know, whatever."  And, I said, "Okay.  You're going to see it.  It's going to be cool."
Story_ID: 648033
Speaker 1: So this is 1967--'77 [1977], '77 [1977] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's like '77 [1977], '77 [1977], yeah, '77 [1977] probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're a senior in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're a good student.
Speaker 2: I'm a good student.  And, actually, what happened, now, my junior, my junior, junior year, I wasn't such a good student because I was totally bored with school.  And, I remember having arguments where I wouldn't show up to class.  I'd just show up on the day of the test.  And, then I'd ace the test.  And, I remember the teachers would get so mad.  They'd go, "Well, you're--we're going to fail you for attendance."  And, I said, "How do you fail me for attendance?  Isn't--aren't I supposed to be graded on the work that I'm going?"  But, they're, I guess, it was an insult to their egos because they didn't--they weren't teaching me, you know.  They didn't feel like they were actually teaching me anything 'cause I already--whatever they were teaching I knew, right.  And, if I didn't know it, I knew enough to get notes from somebody, study it up the night before and just do it.  I ju- I was bright.  I could get away with it.  So, my senior year they came up with a concept called free school.  And, what free school was, when you had your courses, like English, and social studies, and you know, math, and whatever, they not only--what they would do is they would say, "Here's your English assignment.  You have six weeks to get this done.  You need to--it has to involve writing.  It has to involve speaking.  It has to involve," whatever.  They would just give you the parameters.  Then you had to figure out what you were going to do to fulfill each of these points, right.  So, I remember in English, I remember vividly, the school was about two blocks from the, at the time, I think it was the NBC affiliate, I think it's the ABC affiliate now up in Minneapolis [KSTP-TV, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, I remember walking over there, it was two blocks away from the school [Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, I remember walking over there.  I walked into the office, I say, "Hey, I'm a student at the free school up the block."  And, I say, "And, I want to do a documentary on our school for a project for an English, my English grade.  And, I wanted to know whether there was any equipment that I could borrow?"  Or, whatever, whatever, whatever.  And, I remember the lady looked at me and then she called somebody and they said, "Well, yeah, as a matter of fact, yeah, we do loan out equipment for, you know, whatever, whatever.  We just need to get a note from your teacher," whatever, whatever.  So, I went to my teacher.  I got a note, outlined everything I was going to do.  You know, wrote my scripts, wrote my outlines, did my on camera stuff, interviewed people, did everything.  At the end of the six weeks, I got an A because I fulfilled everything that I needed to do.  And, I remember thinking to myself, man, if school was like this the whole time, I would never would leave--I never would've left school.  Because this, for me, it was the perfect fit.  It wasn't people telling me like I have to move at this pace.  It's like, let me move fas- I, I can do this easy.  Let's move on to something that really going to be relevant in my life, right.  Some of this stuff is not going to be relevant.  Now, interestingly enough, I wish I would've paid a little more attention when they were teaching like Robert's Rules of Order and all of that stuff.  'Cause one--I didn't know one day I was going to be the chairman of the Grammys [Grammy Awards] and be sitting at a, at a table with forty people looking at me, you know, chairing a room where I needed to know those rules.  I was kind of like going, "Aw man, I should've studied that a little better."  'Cause you sometimes, you never know what, you know, what life is going to lead you to.  But, that was that last year, that was when the free school was great.  But, that was also the year that I thought, this isn't for me.  School is just, this is a waste of time.  And, this, when I'm sitting in class, I could be, I don't know, working at a record store.  All the stuff that I ended up doing.  I ended up working at a record store.  I got a gig at the local radio station.  I got, I, I worked at a record pool which was where the deejays would get all their records from.  I used to work at a record pool.  I started working at different clubs, spinning records, all while writing songs.  I mean, I just did everything.  I poured myself into it big time 'cause I, that was my passion and I knew that's what I, I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 648034
Speaker 1: All right.  So, now, during this period of time, you, so you drop out of school [Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You got lots of things to do, you're not bored.  Now, did you make, were you still in contact with Terry Lewis during all this period of time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Terry and me had kind of, had parallel paths.  He had stuck with a band called Flyte Tyme.  And, interestingly enough, Flyte Tyme became sort of the major rival of my group, Mind and Matter.  And, we used to play at a lot of battle of the band type situations.  And, I remember telling my mom [Bertha Harris], it was really funny, I remember there was one we did, I think it was in like a supper club or something.  So, it was a really nice setting and stuff and, and very kind of elegant.  And, that really lent itself to what my group did.  'Cause it was, you know, we were a singing group with, you know, choreography and the whole kind of deal.  And, it just kind of lent itself to what we were doing.  And, I remember telling my mom--I think we decided we would go first, I don't know that we flipped a coin over who was going to go first.  But, I just remember we went first.  And, I remember it was one of our best shows.  I mean, we just, we just were killing it.  And, we--all our songs were original.  I wrote all our songs.  We never did cover songs of anybody else's, which was a challenge.  But, our group was so good that people really enjoyed it.  And, we had all our fans, you know, and all our friends and family and everybody was there, right.  So, Terry (laughter), ask Terry about it when you talk to him.  The funny thing was, when we finished, like half the audience left.  They were just there to see us.  (Laughter) So they left.  So, Terry was already mad and then it was a situation that always happens in band where you get guys and they're not committed or whatever, they don't show up.  So, Flyte Tyme at their peak had a, you know, big horn section and they were just really a big group, but really talented, right.  So, they were missing--their horn section had quit or something.  I think they had one of their sax players was still there.  They had, their guitar player was missing, whatever.  They just, it just wasn't their night.  And, I remember I told my mom, I said, "Stick around and watch these guys.  These guys are so good."  And, I was telling her about Terry.  I said, "Listen to Terry on the bass, oh, he's so good," right.  And, they went out and laid an egg.  And, I remember my mom looking at me going, "You think they're good?"  And, I'm like, "No, no, they really are.  They're just--it's just a bad night for them," you know, that kind of thing.  So, you fast forward, you know, a couple of months later, we're at this big outdoor festival at this community center call the Phyllis Wheatley Community Center [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  We go to this thing, we're a little bit, we--I think we're breaking in a new bass player or something at that point in time.  So, our show was good, but it wasn't quite what it should've been.  And, then here comes Flyte Tyme with the crazy outfits like Parliament-Funkadelic, just these wild crazy outfits.  They got a big horn section with them.  And, they come out and they just are so funky and the whole crowd going crazy.  And, I remember I looked at Terry and Terry looked at me, and I just looked at Terry and I just nodded my head, and he nodded his head back at me.  And, it's like, okay, I got you.  I got you this time.   And, it's like, yeah, but, I'm going to get you the next time.  So, we were very friendly.  It was a friendly rivalry, but a rivalry nonetheless.
Story_ID: 648035
Speaker 1: How we finally came together again, because we had remained friends and actually tried to write songs together which never quite worked in the early days 'cause of our difference in influences, right.  So, there was a--I was deejaying and one of the things I did as a deejay, I had a keyboard.  And, I'd play the keyboard along with the records and stuff.  So, that--I was very popular for that reason.  And, actually, that's the point in time I got--I was--there was a club called the Fox Trap [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and that's where I got my name Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III].  Because there was a deejay there, not a deejay, but there was a, there was a bartender who was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he said, "What's your name, man?  You're really good."  And, I said, "Yeah, Jimmy Harris."  And, he said, "Jimmy Harris.  No, man, what's your deejay name?"  And, I said, "I don't have a deejay name."  He said, "Man, you got to get a deejay name, man, so people remember who you are."  It said, "I'm, I'm telling everybody your name is Jimmy Jam, deejay Jimmy Jam."  And, I said, "Okay, cool."  So, whenever somebody would ask him, "Man, who's the deejay?"  He go, "Jimmy Jam."  So, people started calling me that and the name just ended up sticking.  So, one night, this club was three levels.  It was a huge club.  One the first level they had live music, and then the second and third level was disco.  But, the second level was, that was the happening level, that's where I was at, right.  So, anyway, one night I'm in there spinning records, and Terry [Terry Lewis] walks up, comes in the booth.  And, he said, "Jam, you got to hear this new singer we got, or this new keyboard player, we got this new keyboard players."  And, I said, "Oh."  I said, "Great."  'Cause Terry had been bugging me to come play keyboards for him for the longest time.  And, I'm like, "Naw, Terry, I'm, I'm cool.  I'm going to just do my deejay thing."  And, kept going, "You're a musician.  But, you're a musician."  I was like, "No, no, I'm cool doing the deejay thing," you know.  So, anyway, he (laughter), anyway, so I put on, I remember putting, putting on '(Not Just) Knee Deep' by Funkadelic 'cause it was like an eighteen minute record.  And, I figured, I can put this record on and I have time to go downstairs, listen to this keyboard player and come back up.  I'm going to be cool, right.  So, I put the record on, I go downstairs, and the band is playing, 'What You Won't Do for Love,' Bobby Caldwell, right.  And, I'm hearing (singing), "What you won't do, do for love, you tried everything, da da da."  And, I'm like, and I'm saying, "Who's singing?"  And, I don't see anybody singing and I'm like, "Man, whoever's that has got a good voice."  And, then I look and there's this kind of stack of keyboards, right.  And, there's this little white dude [Monte Moir] behind the keyboards.  And, I'm like looking at him, and he's the one singing.  And, I said, "Well, look at this."  So, I said, "Man, he can sing," said, "Oh, cool," right.  So, I went upstairs.  So, after the night was over, I came downstairs.  Terry and them were packing their stuff up and he said, "What you think?"  And, I said, "Oh, he's amazing."  I said, "He's amazing."  I said, "He can play and sing."  He says, "Oh, yeah, he's really cool."  And, I said, "Well, good."  I said, "Okay, well, Terry," I said, "well, then you don't have to worry about me now, you got a keyboard player."  And, he said, "No, no, no, we need two keyboard players.  We need you and him together," whatever, whatever, whatever.  And, I was like, "Aww, man." So I thought, anyway, I thought I was done.  But, Terry's persistence was what actually got me to join Flyte Tyme as it was, and basically quit my club gigging.  And, he just kind of twisted my arm, you know, he--'cause every excuse I came up with, like I'd just broken up with this girl.  And, I said, "Naw, I just broke up with this girl, Terry."  He said, "Well, it'll make you feel better if you join the band."  I said, I said, "Man, Terry I sold all my keyboards, man.  I don't have any keyboards."  "Well, what kind of keyboard you want?  I'll get you keyboards.  What do you need?"  And, I was like, "Aww, Terry, you know what," I mean, it literally.  So, finally I went to a rehearsal.  No, finally, I really did break up with a girl, right.  So, I'm walking home.  I walk past this club.  I hear a band playing in there.  I open the door of the club, and it's Terry's band.  And, they're in there rehearsing.  And, he says, "What's up, Jam?"  I said, "Aww, man."  I said, "Y'all sound great."  He says, "Yeah, yeah."  He says, "We're getting ready to open for--." I think it was The Bar-Kays or Cameo or somebody, "We're getting ready to open for them."  And, I said, "Aww, that's cool.  That's cool."  He said, "You can come join the band now, right?"  I said, "Naw, naw, I just got broke up with this girl, man."  He say, "No, no, come on up."  He's calling my house now.  He's bugging me, whatever, whatever.  Anyway, I joined the band, and literally, the day I joined the band or maybe a couple of days after that, we get a call from, Terry gets a call from Prince.  Saying that he's going to put a band together--or, he told Morris Day to put a band together.  And, Morris says, "I don't need to put a band together.  I'm just going to use the guys in Flyte Tyme, they're the best band in the city.  I don't need to put a band together.  There--I'll just get them."  And, you know, the rest is history from that point.  So, you know, once again, just a few little pivotal things.  But, thank you Terry Lewis for convincing me it was time to join the band, which became The Time.
Story_ID: 648036
Speaker 1: Now, did you know Morris Day, he--before?
Speaker 2: I knew Morris because Morris played with a band called the Enterprise Band of Pleasure.  And, he was actually the drummer in the band.  Mor- people don't know what a great drummer Morris is.  I mean, he's a tremendous drummer.  Anyway, he was a drummer in the band and they were one of the kind of rival bands.  There was--during that time period, this was right around, right, you know, right as Prince was kind of coming on the scene.  There was a really competitive--Prince had a band called Grand Central.  And, Morris actually used to play drums for Prince's band back in that--and, that's where Morris and Prince got to be friends.  And, of course, Flyte Tyme our band.  There was another band called The Family that was real popular.  There was, you know, there was a, a whole lot of just serious groups up there.  Just real talent in Minneapolis [Minnesota].
Speaker 1: There aren't that many black people in Minneapolis.  But, you got--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --got a--this big band culture going on.
Speaker 2: There wasn't a lot of black people in Minneapolis, and I think it was, I think at one time they said it was like maybe 3 percent or 5 percent of the population.  It was really small.  But, it was a very close knit community, where we were competitors with each other.  But, everybody knew each other.  And, whether you went to, you know, Central, you know, Minneapolis Central [Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], Washburn [Washburn High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which I went to, or Minneapolis North [North Community High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], where most of guys came out of.  You know, Morris and Terry [Terry Lewis], Jellybean Johnson, most of those guys came out of North.  And, then there was another school called St. Paul Central [Central High School, St. Paul, Minnesota].  Actually, was it St. Paul Central?  I think it was St. Paul Central 'cause I just remember they had the finest girls.  Like, everybody use to hang out at that school and act like they went there and even if they didn't (laughter), just 'cause the girls were so fine.  I remember that; senior year, oh man.  And, it was great because my preschool campus was like right next door to theirs.  We were--they were like sort of the main school to the preschool which was pretty cool.  But, yeah, it was a very close knit community.  Everybody knew each other so, I--we were totally aware of Morris.  We didn't know, but, we didn't know Morris Day as Morris Day.  We just knew him as a talented drummer, you know, cool dude, you know, whole deal.  But, not as Yes, and all that.  We didn't know all that, you know.  That persona was really a lot of grooming by Prince.  Prince had taken him on the road to film his shows to--so he could watch them back and stuff.  And, he just, Morris--I remember Morris went on tour with Prince.  He left and he was Morris Day, and he came back and he was, Yes, he was Morris Day.  Like he was a whole different dude when he came back.
Story_ID: 648037
Speaker 1: So, Morris Day, yeah, he, he left on tour, Morris Day, and he came back from tour Yes, Morris Day (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: You know, he came back like a whole different dude.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay, we're ready.  Okay, so, so, Prince is touring and, you have all these musicians in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  I mean, I'm still amazed at that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At the number, and what were the, were the patrons, I suppose the patrons were, you know, the whole, I mean, everybody in Minneapolis I guess, not just the black community.
Speaker 1: Right.  What happened was, really, okay, 'Purple Rain,' if you see the movie 'Purple Rain' it's sort of a fictionalized version of kind of a true experience in Minneapolis.  Which was, there was one or two really great clubs to play at, but there was more bands than could play at the clubs.  So, that made it very cutthroat and very, you know, your band had to be the best band.  You could not slack off and whatever.  You had to be--get new costumes.  You had to learn new songs.  You had to get new steps.  I mean, you had to be the best band or else you were out.  There was no place to play.  But, these clubs were basically black clubs.  Now there was a ton of white clubs that were all playing R and B music, but it was white bands playing R and B music.  And, they would never hire our band, Flyte Tyme or The Family or Mind and Matter or Grand Central or any of these bands that were really good bands.  They wouldn't hire them.  And, you know, when we talk about kind of, you know, points that were, that, that were relevant later on in life, that we carried through later on in life, one of them was the fact of not being able to play these clubs.  We made a decision then, we couldn't sit around locally and make it.  We had to turn our attention to national, right.  I went in and made a little record with my band in Mind and Matter.  I went in and helped Terry's group Flyte Tyme before I was actually a member of the group.  I think, we went into the studio and I played keyboards for them on a demo they were doing.  So, everybody was trying to get out of town.  And, while we were in town what we did was, we would throw our own shows.  So, we'd go down, there was hotel downtown called the Dyckman hotel [Hotel Dyckman, Minneapolis, Minnesota], which was basically about that far (snaps fingers) from being condemned, right, really had no patrons whatsoever.  And, we would go make the deal with the ballroom and we'd say, "Hey, man, you know, we'll take the door, you take the liquor.  We'll fill this place up, you know, just give us a place to play."  And, then we'd go to, at the time, this place called Insty-Prints, and we'd make a bunch of flyers.  This is pre-Twitter and all that stuff, you had to spread the word.  And, you'd go, you know, pass out flyer everywhere, "Come see us play."  And, then what would happen is on the night of the show, which would normally be like a Saturday night, we would get with the little local black radio station [KMOJ Radio, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And, they'd do promotions and, you know, Kyle Ray, who was the, really the best deejay up in Minneapolis at the time.  He, he would come and emcee the show.  So, you know, it was like, okay, Kyle Ray is going to emcee the show and, you know, Flyte Tyme is going to play, or Mind and Matter is going to play, and it's going to be this great thing.  And, we'd get like a thousand or fifteen hundred people to show up and absolute pack this ballroom, right.  Meanwhile, all, now all the white clubs with the white bands playing R and B are empty.  And, they're all looking at each other going, "Where is everybody at?"  And, everybody's like, "I don't know.  There's something happening down at the Dyckman tonight.  I don't know what it is."  "Oh, that's that band Flyte Tyme."  Oh, yeah, that band you wouldn't let play in your club, they're packing the band--they're packing it down there.  Oh, yeah, Mind and Matter, you wouldn't hire them.  Oh, yeah, they're packing the Dyckman hotel, you know.  And, it became--so, we realized then it wasn't just about having the talent 'cause we had the most talent.  I mean, obviously, if you look at the people that came out of, you know, from myself and Terry [Terry Lewis] to Prince to Morris Day and whatever.  I mean, we obviously had the talent in those bands but we weren't getting anywhere, right.  So, we figured out that you got to be an entrepreneur.  You got to make your own business.  And, that lesson carried over into our careers 'cause it wasn't about just making the best records.  It was also building a good business behind it, you know, and having strategies, and marketing, and all of those things.  So, that, that was really, once again, something that kind of grew out of the environment of growing up in Minneapolis.  Which we turned into an advantage for us, I think, later on in life because we realized that nobody is going to sit back and give it to us.  We got to go out and figure it out ourselves.
Speaker 2: Kind of out of a crucible, you know, situation.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: (Background noise) So, all right, what do the, so you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Refrigerator.
Speaker 2: --on the verge of touring now with Prince, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, Morris Day takes Flyte Tyme, and, you know, or engages Flyte Tyme, and then--?
Speaker 1: He basically, he basically, just joins the group that we already had, you know.  Morris basically joins the group we already had; and, and it became Flyte Tyme at that point.
Story_ID: 648038
Speaker 1: So, who changed the name of the group from Flyte Tyme to The Time?
Speaker 2: To The Time?  People in Minneapolis [Minnesota] always called Flyte Tyme, The Time, anyway.  It was just kind of the slang.  You know, "You going to see The Time tonight?  You going to see The Time tonight?"  But, Prince was the one that actually, I think said, "You should just call it The Time."  And, because of the catch phrases and stuff that Morris [Morris Day] and him came up with, "What time is it," and all that kind of stuff.  It just kind of made sense.  So, that was really the transition.  And, and then interestingly enough many years later, you know, Terry [Terry Lewis] and I have kept the Flyte Tyme name alive through our production company and our publishing company [Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.]  and that, so.  You know, Flyte Tyme still lives on.  But, you know, The Time was the best name to go with for the group for sure.
Speaker 1: I know when I heard, first heard the name Flyte Tyme I thought about the Donald Byrd album ['Black Byrd'], you know.
Speaker 2: That--the Donald Byrd album is where the name came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were, we were huge Donald Byrd fans, played a lot his music, and that's where it came from, Flyte Tyme.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, so, did you start to tour with Prince at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The first tour we went on as The Time with Prince was 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I'll never forget, November, and we started in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and (laughter), what an experience, man.  It was just, it was amazing 'cause, like, I was shocked how many people knew our record, you know, and knew our songs.  And, we realized, we thought what we had was something pretty special just the way we attacked the music and our personas and, you know, the suits and the hats, and just the whole vibe of what we did we thought was different.  But, to watch people's reaction to it was amazing.  And, the best part was, first of all, Prince loved it.  Like, he, you know, he was like a proud papa in a sense 'cause he felt like he brought this to life, which he did, you know.  So, that was great.  But, then it was turned into like, you know, the Frankenstein monster.  It's like, "Oh, no, what did I create?"  'Cause we started kicking his butt, you know.  And, the newspaper clippings, we'd always get them after the show, like the next day, the manager would get us the clipping from the paper.  And, it would always be, you know, "Hey, the Prince show was really good.  Prince was good; played all his hits.  But, you got to see The Time.  The Time was amazing.  I haven't seen musicianship like that, showmanship," blah, blah, blah.  And, that was crazy to, to get that kind of recognition.  But, we--for us, that was really easy because if you think about the way we grew up, we were playing in local bands, you know.  I was in a band that wrote--we wrote our own music and nobody knew what the heck we were playing.  That's a tough audience.  Or, when I got into Flyte Tyme we would play at proms.  We would play at bar mitzvahs.  We would play anywhere and people would go, "Hey, do you know any Hank Williams?"  It's like, "Yeah, we'll get to that next set."  And, in between sets we'd be going, "Man, you know some Hank Williams, man?"  "Well, naw, I think we could just go," you know.  I mean, those were challenges.  Playing five songs for a half hour (laughter) on a big stage with nice equipment, that was easy.  And, our kind of life before that growing up with the competition of the other bands and all of those things made it easy.  And, so, when we got on stage everybody was so impressed with how good we could play and dance and laugh and all that, but it was easy at that point.  That was so simple.  We loved it.
Story_ID: 648039
Speaker 1: So, were tho- were the, were the songs that you were playing or the tunes you were playing in those days, I mean, were they, had you been playing them for years at that point?  Or, were--?
Speaker 2: No.  The Time, The Time songs?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: No, The Time songs were brand new.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had, we rehearsed a lot.  We rehearsed a lot.  It used to amaze me, Prince's stamina because we used to rehearse--he'd come and rehearse us for four or five hours.  Like, just over and over and over, just drill us.  And, then he'd go rehearse his own band [The Revolution] for four or five hours.  Then, he'd go to the studio and he'd create songs.  And, he'd walk into rehearsal the next day and put a cassette in and go, "I did this last night," and '1999' will come on.  It's like, like done.  It's like, "When do you sleep?"  It's like, crazy.  But, Prince was the one that taught us about work ethic.  And, the story I always tell about that for me was when we were rehearsing for '777-9311' which was on the next tour now.  And, he walked into rehearsal, we're doing the song, we're practicing, it sounds great.  He say, "Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III]," I'm only playing with one hand, 'cause all I was doing was doubling a bass part, right.  He says, "What are you doing with your right hand?"  And, I said, "I'm not doing anything with it."  I said, "All the parts are covered."  He said, "Well, you got to make it better than the record.  So, do the chords with your right hand while you do the bass with your left hand."  "Okay, cool."  So, now, so I'm now the (singing).  I'm like, "Great, cool."  So, then he goes, "Jimmy Jam, what note are you singing on the chorus of the song?"  And, I said, "No, Prince, I'm not singing a note 'cause it's like a four part harmony, and Monte [Monte Moir] and Jesse [Jesse Johnson], and Terry [Terry Lewis] and Morris [Morris Day], they got it.  I don't need to do a note."  "Harmony needs to be bigger than on the record.  So, come up with a note to sing."  So, I'm like, "Okay.  Cool."  So, now I'm, (singing) "Boom boom boom bing, 777-9311," and I'm like, "Okay, yeah, I can do that."  Okay, right, I--fine.  We rehearsed it a couple time.  Then he goes, "Jimmy Jam why are you not doing the choreography?"  And, I'm like, "Prince, I'm at a keyboard.  What am I supposed to do?"  He said, "The choreography is easy, you should be able to do it."  So, the choreography was just the four corners.  So, all it was was just like a little move, right.  So, now, I'm up there and I'm going (singing), "777-9" and I'm trying hit the, and I'm trying to do, and I can't do it.  And, I'm so frustrated and I'm like, "You're nuts.  This is imposs- I can't do it," crazy, couldn't do it.  We rehearsed, we rehearsed, we rehearsed, rehearse.  Come back the next day, we kicking the 7793--'777-9311' the next day (singing), "777-9311," and I'm doing it so easy, I'm tipping my hat, I'm taking my handkerchief off, I'm doing my face, I'm like, whatever.  That was the one lesson I needed in work ethic.  It's like a chord, you can do it.  And, the thing that was so convincing about Prince is that, Prince wouldn't ask you to do anything that he wouldn't do.  'Cause Prince can do all that stuff easy.  You know, he'd come over to your keyboard and embarrass you because he come and play all the parts and dance and sing, and be like, "Well, if I can do it--it's not even my song, if I can do it you should be able to do it."  So, that taught us a lot, you know.  And, I always, always think about that day when that happened.  But, then it got easy.  It got easy.  And, so, the work ethic was something we always had.  And, we were always motivated 'cause we always wanted to kick his butt too, that was the other thing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  But, why, why was it, was this a--?
Speaker 2: Why we wanted to kick his butt?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Well, wanting to kick the butt it kind of came, it wasn't in a, in a way of, of you know, trying to embarrass him or anything.  I mean, but I've already said, you know, when me and Terry were growing up, Terry's band [Flyte Tyme] would kick my band's [Mind and Matter] butt, and, was, respect though.  It was like, "Okay, Terry's bad, that's good."  And, then we would go rehearse harder, and then we'd go kick Terry's band butt.  And, that, that was just the way it was.  I mean, that was the way we knew.  It's like, you get out there and you get a shot, you do it.  The other thing that would happen is that Prince as the headliner would always do like little stuff where he'd, the stage would be a little smaller.  We wouldn't have quite as much room on stage.  And, then, we would have our sound checks that we were supposed to have, somehow wouldn't happen.  So, we wouldn't have a sound check.  Then, our lights where we used to have like a couple of tiers of light, would just go down to maybe one tier of lights.  And, then a keyboard would mysteriously switch from a really good keyboard to kind of an okay keyboard that didn't sound as good.  All of those things were happening.  And, it was like, that--those kinds of things just made us fight harder.  I mean, it just made us more like, "Okay, he's giving us less of a stage and we're just going to dance harder in the same place."  It was great training.  It was the, it was the best training we could have for, you know, just our careers, what we decided to do in our careers.
Story_ID: 648040
Speaker 1: Describe The Time in those days for us.  I know people can watch it on YouTube or whatever but, but describe the, what was going on.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The Time was probably the funnest, one of the funnest periods of my life.  I mean, the camaraderie with the guys, I mean, we all got along really good.  And, we were, and we were all bonded because we were, even when we didn't get along, our common goal was still to kick butt and really give a great show.  And, so, even if we, we could argue all the way up to show time, but when show time hit, we were good.  But, we hung out all the time together.  We actually roommate, room mated together.  Actually, Terry's brother, Jerome [Jerome Benton], was my roommate.  Terry [Terry Lewis] roommated with Jesse [Jesse Johnson], which nobody would do 'cause Jesse was--every group has sort of the wildcard.  Jesse was definitely the wildcard of our group.  But, Terry had like the most tolerance and patience as he still does, and so he ended up rooming with Jesse.  But, we all, you know, Morris [Morris Day] got his own room.  He was the star, and we understood that.  But, then when it came time of lobby for everyone having our own rooms after we had a couple gold albums, Terry was the one that led the charge on that, you know.  So, basically, saying, "I'm going home if I don't get my own room," you know.  And, he stuck his self out there for the good of everybody.  We got our own rooms after that, so.  It was great times though.  We had great times.  We were on, you know, we always were, always felt like we were a little bit of second class citizens.  Like, Prince would always have the nice new tour bus.  We'd always have the bus that smelled like gas.  The driver, every time we pull into the truck stop, would be in the back trying to fix stuff.  And, you know, it--we just, we loved that though.  We, we relished that, you know.  I remember we would, we would pull into a town and, you know, there would always be a few fans.  They always would find out where you're staying.  We were always very interactive with our fans.  We loved our fans.  So, we'd get off the bus and they go, "Hey, Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III]," you know, "Hey, hey Terry, hey," you know.  So, we were always real cool.  So, we'd go, "Hey.  Now, what's there to do in this town?"  You know, whatever, whatever.  And, they go, "Oh, yeah, so, so the mall's over here."  'Cause it would always be the mall.  You have to hit the mall.  And, could always get a feel of how, you know, the people were expecting to show.  Like, if, if you walk to the mall and everybody was in there getting nice clothes and all that, and you'd be like, "Well, what's going on?"  "Oh, The Time, Prince, Prince show tonight.  You know, I got to get my clothes together for the Prince show."  So, you would get the feel of the town just from going to a couple of malls, you could get the feel of it.  And, then there would always be club, right.  So, what would happen is, we--people would go, "Well, yeah, you should go, you should hit the club tonight."  "Well, what's the club to go to?"  "Well, you could go to this club, or you could go to this club, but whatever you do, don't go to this club."  Well, whatever the one they said don't go to that one, that's the one we'd show up at.  And, they'd be our biggest fans at that club.  But, that would be like the club that they go, "Well, the stars don't want to go to that club," right, 'cause that's like the hood club or whatever.  But, that's what we wanted.  We wanted to soak up whatever that city was, you know, Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Memphis [Tennessee], wherever.  That's the club we wanted to be at 'cause that's the club where the real people were at.  And, that was really what we always gravitated to and, and I think that was a lot of our appeal.  Prince's show was very much like he was, you know, for lack of a better word, he was like God and everybody was like the disciples.  We, we were, our show was, "We y'all, you know, we just got some suits on.  But, we, you know, we jamming with y'all."  And, people would come to the show dressed up like us, you know, 'cause they could go to the thrift stores.  It's funny, Macklemore's [Macklemore and Ryan Lewis] got the song 'Thrift Shop,' that was The Time.  We literally shopped in thrift shop.  We get ten dollar suits, fifteen dollar suits, get them hemmed up.  And, Detroit [Michigan] was one of the best towns for that.  And, always when you went to any college campus there was always like a great secondhand store on a college campus, right.  That's where all our suits came from.  You look at our album covers and stuff, those are real thrift shop suits.  We loved that.   So, it was great.  It was just a great time.  And, we, we didn't have nothing to do but just play the shows, get on the bus.  It was great, great time.
Story_ID: 648041
Speaker 1: So, you're touring with Prince, 1981, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And, now, are you, you're writing songs for The Time, right?  You're in the--?
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --we wrote none of The Time songs.  Terry [Terry Lewis] and I were not involved in the writing.  Those songs were all written by Prince with a little help from Morris [Morris Day].  But, that was all Prince's writing.  I mean, that was, The Time was really, as Prince envisioned it.  It was really like his alter ego.  You know, it was a chance for him to do songs that he wouldn't do.  And, and they were great songs.  But, you needed someone to populate those songs, so to speak, you know what I'm saying.  You--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you needed someone to, say you couldn't do cool because cool didn't work unless there was the persona of a character that was cool.  And, so, in the Morris Day persona and in the band persona, it made those songs relevant and, and get carried off.  Which is why the live element was so important to what The Time was.  'Cause the records were great.  But, the live was a whole--I mean, when Prince said, "You got to take it to another level than what's on the record," we took that really seriously, you know.  We took that like, "Okay, we're going to do that.  We're going to really make everything--we're going to enhance everything.  We're going to make everything better that we do in concert than, than the record."  And, I think we, we achieved that.
Story_ID: 648042
Speaker 1: So, in '81 [1981] you're, you're more of a performer than a songwriter, I guess, huh?
Speaker 2: I'm a songwriter, but I'm, I'm just kind of writing the songs for myself, basically.  Yeah, I, I mean, we still, Terry [Terry Lewis] and I still would sit around and write songs.  And, we actually plotted, well, plotted isn't the word, because it wasn't like we were trying to sneak and--well, you know what, actually plotted probably is the word.  Plan, I'll say planned.  But, it turned into plotted because at the end of that tour, which finished up in Houston [Texas], I think was our last stop, if I remember correctly in 1982.  I remember Terry said, he said, "I'm going to go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Who wants to come with me?"  And, I remember we were all sitting in a hotel room and everybody said, "What you going to L.A. for?"  And, he said, "'Cause they need us out there."  And, everybody was like, "What are you talking about, Terry?"  He said, "Man," he said, "I don't know, man."  He says, "I just feel like, you know, I want to go to L.A. and, and try to get some stuff going."  'Cause Terry by, by nature is a hustler.  I mean, he has a hustler mentality.  He did as, as in the band days, I mean, he was the guy scheming to, you know, get gigs and to, you know, figure out how to get equipment, and you know, he, he just was always like that.  So, his wheels were always turning.  So, the idea of every night playing these five songs for thirty minutes, that was not feeding his, kind of his, his creativity and what he needed to do.  So, he said, "I'm going to L.A."  So, everybody at the time, and I remember this vividly.  This was, to kind of mark this period of time, this was when VCRs [videocassette recorder] came out, right.  And, VCR, that was the biggest thing, that you could record something off of TV.  That was like, huge.  So, everybody at that point in time had kind of saved their littler per diem money and stuff, 'cause we really weren't making any money.  And, everybody would save their per diem and, and everybody was like, "Man, I'm going home and buying a, I'm buying a VCR."  That's what everybody was going to do; save their money and buy a VCR.  So, I kind of looked around at everybody, and I looked at Terry and I said, "I'll go."  And, he said, "Okay, cool.  Anybody else want to come?"  "Naw, man, you crazy."  "Okay, fine."  So, I said, "So, Terry," I said, "I'll go."  I said, "Where are we going to stay?"  "I don't know, we'll figure it out."  I said, "So, what you want to do out there, man?"  He said, "I don't know, man, let's make some demos or something, you know, do some demos."  "What are we going to do the demos on, Terry?  We don't have any equipment."  "We'll find some equipment."  "Okay, fine."  So, with Terry and me it was always, I, I went back to my experience of when I first, when Terry twisted my arm to get to join the band [Flyte Tyme] in the first place.  And, I just felt like, there was something about him, man, it was just that, I don't know, I just trusted him.  I didn't question him really.  I--he just believed.  He just said, "We're going to be fine."  So, okay, cool.
Story_ID: 648043
Speaker 1: So, we get on a plane after Houston [Texas].  Terry [Terry Lewis] has his bass.  I have this little Casio keyboard that's about this big that has a little drum machine inside of it, and we fly to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]  And, we end up staying at some people we knew in Minneapolis [Minnesota] had a house, and they have one bedroom in the house that was not being used.  And, Terry, I guess, talked to one of them and said, "Hey, can we, you know, we use--bunk out in your bedroom."  So, it was cool.  So, the bedroom became our place and when they would go to work--we bought a, I remember Terry had a car.  He like sold his car, and we bought like a little four track cassette recorder to record out of the want ads in the paper, out of the classifieds.  And, I remember we bought a microphone.  So, we had this little keyboard, Terry's bass, a microphone, and when they would leave we'd go in the bathroom.  And, that would give us, like when we did our vocals, demoed our vocals, that would give us our sound, like our reverb sound and stuff from the bathroom.  You know how you sound good singing in the shower?  So, it's the same thing, right.  So, we had that.  And, we would sit--our day was pretty much the same every day.  We'd wake up in the morning, we'd work on a song.  At lunchtime, we'd walk about five blocks away was a place called Golden Bird chicken, right on La Cienega [Boulevard].  And, they had a four piece special that was $2.99 'cause we didn't have any money.  So, we'd go every day and get the $2.99 four piece with a lemonade or something.  That would be our lunch.  And, we'd walk back to the house.  We'd work on some more demos and stuff.  We both had girls that would, that had cars that would get us around to places and stuff.  So, we'd go out, you know, to a club or we go hang out, you know, do a little of that kind of stuff.  And, then we'd always have a milkshake at night.  And, that was basically the routine.  Now, the thing that would happen while we were doing this, being in L.A., the clothes that we had were all of The Time clothes.  Like we had all of our wool suits and stuff.  Now, we're now in the, getting ready to be the summer in L.A., we're like June, right, in L.A.  It's like ninety degrees.  We got these big old suit on with hats and stuff, walking, right.  So, we're, this a no-no.  We got the wrong clothes.  We're walking.  Nobody walks in L.A.  Police used to pull over all the time and they'd, they'd, they'd stop us.  And, I don't know how you stop a pedestrian but they would do it, right.  And, they'd say, "Where you guys going?"  "We're going to Golden Bird to get something to eat."  And, they'd look us up and down and they go, "You guys aren't from here, are you?"  And, we're like, "No."  "Where you from?"  "Minneapolis."  "Can we see some ID?"  "Sure."  We'd throw them the ID, "Where do you live?"  And, we said, "In the house over there with our friends."  "Okay.  You guys have a good day."  "Okay.  Thanks."  And, that would happen once a week at least, right.  Just because we didn't look the part, right.  But, that was our existence.  Now, the funny thing was back in Minneapolis everybody was, you know, watching their VCRs [videocassette recorder] that they bought.  And, the story was that we were out in L.A. starving to death.  And, we were somehow out on the street and starving to death and then whatever.  And, Jellybean [Jellybean Johnson] who was a good friend of Terry's and went to school with him back in the day, the drummer, he would call Terry and Terry was like, "Bean we're fine."  He knew that, 'cause Bean knew the people we were staying with, and he was like, "We're fine."  He said, "What are you guys doing?"  "We're just writing songs and trying to get some stuff going."  So, that was kind of our existence and we met, or it was a lady named Dina Andrews [HistoryMaker Dina Ruth Andrews] who worked at SOLAR Records [Sound of Los Angeles Records].  She was, I think, I don't know if she was A and R [artists and repertoire].  I'm not sure what her position was there.  But, she told us if we put a demo tape together, she could get it to Dick Griffey, who was the head of SOLAR Records.  So, we said, "Okay, cool."  So, we put a demo tape together and we managed to get it, one to Dick through her.  We were able to get one of them to Leon Sylvers [Leon Sylvers III], who was probably the hottest producer working right at that point in time.  He did a lot of stuff for SOLAR Records.  He did Shalamar and The Whispers and, in the heyday of those groups.  So, we got a demo tape to him actually we were at a charity basketball game or something, playing together and we just slipped him a tape.  And, we were able to get a tape to, to [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant.  So, interestingly enough, everybody liked different songs on the tape.  So, Leon ended up taking a couple of the songs and using them for Gladys Knight and the Pips, and The S.O.S. Band.  Dick Griffey liked the song we wrote called 'Wild Girls' and he wanted us to do it on Klymaxx, which was his all-girl group.  And, then Clarence really never got back to us.  He did- he didn't really ever say anything.  So, we just kind of figured well, Clarence didn't really like what we were doing.  Okay.  Fine.
Story_ID: 648044
Speaker 1: So we had, you know, the, the 'Wild Girls' thing went kind of okay; and, and at that point, I remember we--Prince had asked where we were at.  Because it was like, he was ready to get back to rehearsing and all that, for the next tour.  And, they told him, "Well, those guys are in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]," and, he said, "Well, what are they doing in L.A?"  And, he says, and they said, "Well, I don't know.  They're out there trying to write and produce some songs."  And, that didn't sit very well with Prince.  So, he summoned us back to Minneapolis [Minnesota] and actually, to his house and he said, "What have you guys been doing out there?"  And, we said, "Well, we were working on this group Klymaxx, you know, it's a female group."  He said, "Let me hear what you did."  We said, "Okay."  So, we, probably a cassette at that point in time, still we're back in the cassette days.  Give him the cassette, he puts it in.  So, the minute the song comes on, he just starts laughing, right.  He laughs, "Ha ha ha ha," and he listens, and he puts his head down.  And, then he looks up at us and he goes, "This could be a hit."  And, he puts his head back down.  And, so, when it's over, he hands us back the cassette and he say, he said, "You know what," he said, "this could be really good."  He says, "But, what you need to do is you need to add a bunch of horns and a Clavinet," and whatever, right.  So, we were like, "Oh, okay cool, Prince, yeah, great, you know."  So, as we're driving away from Prince's house, it was like all of a sudden we snapped out of our spell that we were under.  And, we were like, "Wait a minute.  Horns and a Clavinet."  I said, "We ain't used a Clavinet in about five, six years and Prince hate horns.  He wants to do everything on synthesizers."  I said, "He's given us, he's trying to get us to sabotage the record."  We like figured out that he didn't want that record to come out, sabotage that record.  And, basically, the message was, don't do any outside things from The Time.  That was his message to us.  It--but not in so many words.  He didn't outright say that.  But, that was his message.  So, now, we got in, started, started working for the next tour.  And, we go out on the next tour.  We have a four day break over, actually, right before the tour started, right before the tour started, because it started in November.
Story_ID: 648045
Speaker 1: We were out in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Terry [Terry Lewis] and I; and Dina [HistoryMaker Dina Ruth Andrews] had set up a meeting with [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant.  And, we walked into Clarence's office and Clarence looked at us and said, "Who are these two thugs?"  'Cause, of course, we got our hats and our, you know, suits on and the whole deal.  And, he laughed.  He got a kick out of it.  He called us the two thugs.  He said, "Okay, you two thugs," he said, "listen."  He said, "I know you guys wrote that record 'High Hopes' for S.O.S. Band."  And, he said--and, it was, what they call in that day, a turntable hit.  Meaning that the radio played it, the people didn't really buy it.  So, he said, "So, what would have you guys done differently, if you would've produced the song?"  'Cause we didn't produce 'High Hopes,' Leon Sylvers [Leon Sylvers III] did.  We just wrote it.  And, we said to Clarence, "Hey, Clarence, we'd put the chili sauce on it."  And, he said, "Chili sauce, what's that mean?"  And, we said, "Oh, well, we'll play the demo of the song."  We played the demo of the song, and the demo of the song was much funkier and, you know, it just had the feel--had the feel on it 'cause Terry was playing the bass, and it just was a funkier song.  So, anyway, he loved it.  And, he said, "Okay."  He said, "Here's what I'm going to tell you."  He said, "I'm trying to get a contract with this other producer, if I don't get it," he said, "you guys are going to do two songs on The S.O.S. Band record.  Is that cool?"  We said, "Great," right.  So, Dina had been in before us, right, and said, I guess, gave, you know, Clarence our price or what our asking price would be to do the project.  So, Clarence says to us, "Now, who's that girl you guys got representing you?"  You know, "We were trying to talk about you guys' fee and--," you know whatever.  And, we were like, "Oh, well, Clarence, yeah, she's Dina.  She's just a friend and, you know, whatever you think, you know, for, for a, you know, fee," whatever, whatever.  He said, "She didn't ask for enough money.  You guys deserve more money than what she asked for.  She doesn't know what she's doing."  He said, "I'm going to pay you," I can't remember what, what he--I think he paid us twenty-five hundred dollars a record.  He said, "Twenty" he said, "I'm going to give you twenty-five hundred."  She asked for one thousand or something.  He said, "Twenty-five hundred," he said, "I'm going to give you twenty-five hundred that's the going rate."  He said, "And, that's the deal we're going to do," and blah, blah, blah.  So, that taught us, first of all, how fair Clarence was, and we were lucky enough that he took enough of a liking to us to not let us make the wrong deal at that point in time.  And, he kind of said, "I'm going to teach you guys how to do your business and how to, you know, run your company and do whatever it is that you want to do."  So, we left, started The Time tour.  So, now the winter of '82 [1982] as we're kind of going into '83 [1983], right, I think, I think it's right around, it's either December of, of '82 [1982] or January of '83 [1983].  I can't remember precisely.  So, on our tour we ended up with four days in New York [New York] with no shows and nothing to do.  So, we decided, "You know what, let's go down to Atlanta [Georgia] and do The S.O.S. Band."  We got these four days off before we have to be in San Antonio, Texas for the next show.  So, we go down, we come up with 'Just Be Good to Me,' which was a huge record.  And, we did a song, another, another song that was just an album cut, but it, but it came out okay.  And, we sent them to Clarence and Clarence said, "Oh, I love this.  I love this.  Good job," you know, whatever.  And, we said, "Okay."  And, he said, "Can you do more?"  And, we said, "Well, we have to come back 'cause we got to get back out with our group."
Story_ID: 648046
Speaker 1: So, that morning that we were supposed to fly to San Antonio [Texas], there's a snow storm.  Now, this is Atlanta [Georgia].  I'm from Minneapolis [Minnesota].  A snow storm to me is a snow storm.  This, we're talking about that much snow.  Like I could've went out and swept the runway myself.  I mean, shut the airport down, totally.  So, now, me and Terry [Terry Lewis] are in the Atlanta airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] trying to book ourselves on any flight just to get out of town.  We're like, "If we can just get out of Atlanta to any other airport, we can connect and get to San Antonio."  Everything was delayed, and we've had reservations on probably about ten different flights.  It was back in the day before the security was so tight.  We were giving them different names and different spellings to try to get different, you know, reservations everywhere.  It was crazy.  And, the Atlanta airport is huge 'cause it has all the different terminals and stuff.  And, we were literally from one end to the other, and it was probably like the worst day of our life, because we had never missed a gig in our life, ever.  I mean, you know, for a musician to miss a gig, I mean, that, that just doesn't happen, right.  So, we really had the, why is this happening to us, feeling, about it, you know.  It, it was just like, it didn't make sense.  We eventually got on a flight, but it was too late, and we missed the gig.  So, I remember seeing Prince that night.  They went on and did the gig, gig without us because couple guys from Prince's band filled in and it was fine.  People didn't even know the difference.  A matter of fact, I went to a club afterwards and everybody was saying, "Man, y'all killed it.  Man it was great."  (Laughter) I was like, "Yeah, okay."  It's like, "I wasn't there but, okay."  So, it's a pretty funny gig.  Next day Prince sits us down and he goes, "Where were you guys at?"  We said, "Atlanta."  He said, "Um-hm."  He said, "I'm fining you guys three thousand dollars apiece," and whatever, whatever, whatever.  And, we just said, "Okay."  And, as he walks out he says to one of the managers, he says, "That's what they get for going down there chasing after those girls."  So, we realized, oh, he doesn't know why we were Atlanta.  He thinks we in Atlanta chasing girls.  So, he doesn't know about The S.O.S. Band thing.  And, that's good because we knew he didn't want us to do any productions outside of The Time.  Even though he wasn't letting us do anything in The Time, right.  So, about a week later, this was like something out of a, out of a movie.  Billboard magazine comes out and right on, I don't remember what page, right, right next to the R and B charts, here's a picture of me and Terry in studio with The S.O.S. Band.  So, me and Terry see the picture and we're like, trying to the hide the Billboard, right.  And, not only are we trying to hide that Billboard, we're trying to hide every Billboard in the whole country because Prince is looking for the Billboard.  "Where's the Billboard."  Nobody could find the Billboard.  So, the management's like, "Oh, we'll go out and get you one.  We'll find one."  They'd find one, we'd steal it, right.  And, eventually, you know, he found it, saw the picture.  Didn't say a word about it.  We finished the tour.  We finished the tour, I think the tour ended up right around the same time, like May or June, of, of '83 [1983].  So, we and Terry go back out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], 'cause we're like, "Let's continue to do our, our production work."  We get a call from Prince probably two days after that.  He says, "Meet me at Sunset Sound [Sunset Sound Recorders] at six o'clock."  So, we figure, "Okay.  Well, we must be getting ready to start the next record."  So, we had booked time at Larrabee studios [Larrabee Sound Studios, North Hollywood, California] to mix The S.O.S. Band record.  But, it was like, well, we got to do, I mean, if it was a choice it was like, what, we're going to do with Prince asks us to do, I mean, we're, you know, the, the production thing is something on the side that we're just trying but, we, we're loyal to the band.  So, we show up to the studio.
Story_ID: 648047
Speaker 1: As we, as we show up to the studio we see Fred Moultrie who is the accountant.  He's there.  Me and Terry [Terry Lewis] look at each other and we're both thinking the same thing: Fred's here to give us our last check.  We're fired, we're done, right.  So, we said, "Hey, Fred, what's going on?"  And, Fred just goes, "Hey, guys.  You guys have a good session, all right, talk to you later," and he walks out.  So, now we're really confused.  We're like, "Okay.  Well, we're not getting fired, I guess.  Okay, cool."  So, we walk into this little room, and it's Prince, Jesse [Jesse Johnson] our guitar player, Morris [Morris Day], Terry and myself.  And, we sit down in the room and Prince goes, "I told you guys not to produce other records.  But, you did.  So, you're fired."  And, Terry said, "What?"  And, he said, "I told you not to produce other records, but you did and you're fired."  And, I looked at Prince, and I got up and left.  I'm like, "Okay, cool, nothing to talk about."  I walked out the door.  So, Terry stayed in there for another ten, fifteen minutes, babbling as Terry does.  I mean, that's Terry's nature, trying to talk some sense into him, like, "Dude, what are we doing to hurt you?  How was this hurting anything?"  You know, we're not, first of all, the music we're doing sounds nothing like The Time.  "And, how does us getting better at what we do hurt the band if we're bring our knowledge and expertise back to the band?  We're not trying to leave the band."  Anyway, Prince wasn't hearing it.  So, we both walk out the studio and we're kind of standing there looking at each other.  He says, "Well, what do you want to do?"  And, I said, "Let's go over to Larrabee and mix this S.O.S. Band [The S.O.S. Band] record."  So, we walk into Larrabee studio [Larrabee Sound Studios, North Hollywood, California].  The engineer is a guy named Steve Hodge.  And, Steve Hodge is a guy that we had never met but we knew his name because he mixed all the Leon Sylvers [Leon Sylvers III] records.  He mixed The Whispers, and Shalamar, and Lakeside, all those great SOLAR records [SOLAR Records; Sound of Los Angeles Records].  We knew that was the guy we wanted.  So, we hired him to mix the record.  So, we walked in and we said, "Hey, Steve."  He said, "Hey."  He said, "What's wrong with you guys?"  We said, "Well," said, "we just got fired from The Time."  He said, "Really?"  We said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well," said, "I don't think you have anything to worry about."  He said, "'Cause this record you guys got here, this is a smash."  And, coming from him, who had mixed tons of smashes, that was like a real vote of confidence.  And, as it turned out, he was right and it ended up being our first really huge record.  Now, the story should end there but there's a little bit of a, a epilogue I guess you would say.  And, that was that every week we would go into the accountant's office and get paid, right.  We would go and they'd give us a little check and, right.  So, went into the accountant's office just like we always did every week.  We figured somebody would say, "Okay, hey, here's your last check."  We walked in, they said, "Hey, you guys, how's, how's it going?  Okay, yeah, here's your checks right here.  We'll see you next week."  And, we were like, "Okay, yeah.  See you next week.  Okay, great."  So, this went on for about two or three weeks.  Nobody's saying anything.  We ain't saying nothing.  We're like, we're going to keep getting paid.  Okay.  Great, fine.
Story_ID: 648048
Speaker 1: So, Prince is still paying you, that's?
Speaker 2: Prince is still paying us, right.  We, we're fired but I don't know miscommunica- we didn't know, but we're taking the money, so, right.  So, now there's a concert, big concert at the Greek Theatre [Los Angeles, California].  And, it's Whispers [The Whispers], Shalamar, all our favorite groups, right.  So, we go.  And, backstage at this show there's this little guy, right; little black guy.  He's got a microphone, and he walks up to me and he says, "Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III], [HistoryMaker] Lee Bailey, RadioScope.  What's the bottom line on you guys getting fired from The Time?"  And, he puts the mic in my face and I said, "Wait, who are you?"  "Lee Bailey, RadioScope.  What's the bottom line on you guys being fired from The Time?"  And, I'm like going, "Dude, I don't know, I don't know what you're talking about, man.  We're just, we're here watching the show.  We're here to watch the show."  "But, I understand you've been fired from The Time, what's the bottom line?"  And, we're like going, "Man, get out of here."  We don't, we don't, we don't know this dude from--we're like, "You--get out of here," right.  So, concert's great.  The next day, we go to the accountant's office to get our checks.  We walk in, they go, "Hey, guys."  We said, "Hey."  And, they said, "Well, we don't have checks for you this week."  "How come?"  "Well, we heard you guys got fired."  And, we laughed and we said, "You know what, we got fired like three or four weeks ago.  So, who told you we got fired?"  "Oh, it was just on the radio.  Lee Bailey said, you guys just got fired," right.  So, as it turns out, Prince didn't really fire us.  What Prince was hoping was, it was, it was a bluff.  He wanted us to go out, fall flat on our face, and then come beg for our jobs back.  So, he hadn't even told the accountants or anybody about us being fired.  'Cause it, this was just game that he was playing; like a psychological game, right.  So, I remember going back to our place and we, we had, actually shared with Dina [HistoryMaker Dina Ruth Andrews], the lady who was helping to manage us, we had like a little, like a triplex, basically.  And, I remember going back there.  And, then I remember Prince, or not Prince, Jellybean Johnson--now, you have to remember Jellybean Johnson besides being the drummer in The Time.  Jellybean Johnson goes back further with Terry [Terry Lewis] than even I do.  I mean, he, he was friends with Terry even before me.  So, Jellybean calls Terry, and Terry, Terry answers the phone, he says, "Hey, what's up Bean?"  So, Jellybean says, "Hey, man, we're doing this movie."  He said, "Prince wrote this movie and we're going to start shooting, and you know, he wants you back, man.  And, you know, we're going to shoot this movie.  It's going to be huge," and whatever, whatever, whatever.  So, Terry says, "Oh, he wants me back, huh?"  He said, "Oh, that's interesting."  He said, "Okay."  He said, "Okay, well that's cool, that's cool."  He said, "What about Jam?"  He said, "Oh, no.  He doesn't want Jam."  And, Terry goes, "What?"  And, I can't even use the language that Terry yelled into the phone at Jellybean.  "You tell that little mother--you tell that (unclear)."  And, I'm, I'm saying to Terry, I said, "Terry it's cool."  I said, "Go do the movie.  That sounds cool, man.  Go do the movie.  I'm here and I'm not going anywhere."  I said, "Go do the movie."  He said, "Fuck that we're in the--," and he slams the phone down.  He's like, "No, man.  We're in this together."  He says, he said, you know, "That's it."  And, that was, that was it.  That was literally it.  That was--Monte [Monte Moir] quit the band right after that.  And, so, to this day, people think we're in 'Purple Rain' but we're not.  I mean, the band's in 'Purple Rain.'  But, Terry and I started producing and luckily 'Just Be Good to Me' became a huge record which then led to Cherrelle and Cheryl Lynn, and a bunch of huge records.  And, you know, but, but, you know, it was all a bluff at the end of the day, and you know, thank you Prince for (laughter), for doing that.  Because, you know, it set us on our--I mean, it got us serious about becoming writers and producers because it made us take it really seriously.  'Cause before it was just fun.  It was like, "Well, no, we in The Time.  This is just something we're just kind of doing on the side."  But, it made it--it was like no, we got to, now we got to make a living doing this.  So, it got, it got serious real quick.  But, me and Terry were bonded forever over that experience.
Story_ID: 648049
Speaker 1: So, you're, you're now on your own.  And, you--had you, had it not been for the fact that Prince fired you, do you think you'd still be with The Time today, or something?
Speaker 2: Well, it's always, it's hard to speculate.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We had no, we had no want to leave The Time.  We loved the group.  And, we loved Prince too.  I mean, we, we loved just being in his atmosphere because he was such an incredible talent and taught us so much particularly work ethic.  Maybe more of that even than musical, taught us, you know.  But, just everything about that situation was great.  We weren't getting paid nothing.  But, but we really didn't care.  I mean, I, I still have probably somewhere I have my check stub.  We made $150 a week.  The first week.  Which after taxes for me was $117.  That was on the first album.  The second album we got a raise to $250 a week, which my take home was $184 a week.  This was after two gold albums.  And, the only ways we were, we were able to make, like I was able to make ends meet because I was still living with my mom [Bertha Harris].  But, Terry [Terry Lewis], who had a young son [Tremain Lewis] at the time, and a house note, like his credit got shot to hell because Terry was always used to making money 'cause like I say, he was a hustler.  I mean, he--back, back in the day when we were in the bands, he was driving a school bus, he was, you know, he was doing everything.  He, he, Terry knew how to make money.  So, for him to really put that aside and do it, I mean, he really, yeah, he messed his credit up and the whole thing.  But, you know, listen, it was for the love of music.  And, he was like, "Listen, I'll, I'll figure it out.  I mean, it's not a big deal."  But, yeah, there, there really wasn't any money, but we didn't care.  I mean, we loved what we were doing.  And, I remember Morris, and I have a lot of respect for Morris Day.  And, one of the reason I do is because Morris was very candid.  And, he told us right before we went on the second tour and we were rehearsing and stuff.  And, he said, "Everybody needs to think about what they're going to do after The Time because this band is not going to last forever."  And, he said, "I'm taking acting lessons."  He said, "I'm going to try to do some acting."  He said, "Jimmy [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry, I know they got their production thing going.  That's great.  But, I suggest everybody else figure out what you want to do 'cause this is not going to last forever."  So, he saw the writing on the wall and he warned us.  He gave everybody a warn- not, it wasn't so much a warning.  But, it was good advice.  And, Terry and I followed the advice.  We were like, "Great.  We're going to figure it out.  We're going to try to write and produce and do what we think we can do."  Never with the idea of leaving The Time.  We always thought if we get stronger as individuals and bring this back to the group.  This just enhances the group.  It just makes the group stronger.  So, that was always our, our thought.
Story_ID: 648050
Speaker 1: But, it's interesting to think about that group staying together, still going off and doing the individual projects that everybody did.  I mean, everybody, if you think about it, everybody from the group has had like a number one record outside of the group.  I mean Monte Moir did 'Pleasure Principle' ['The Pleasure Principle'].  And, 'If You Were Here Tonight,' Alexander O'Neal and Janet [Janet Jackson], right.  And, Jellybean Johnson did 'Black Cat.'  He produced that.  Jesse Johnson had a bunch of solo records that were big, you know, number one records.  Who am I leaving out?  And, Morris [Morris Day], of course, on his own with 'Fishnet,' and 'Oak Tree,' which were his on his own.  And, so course, the things that me and Terry [Terry Lewis] have done.  So, everybody individually has had success at a really high level.  Imagine if all that happened under the Prince umbrella.  Because, you know, you never can have Motown [Motown Records] again.  That, that'll never happen.  There's certain things that just won't happen again ever.  But, if you think about it, and imagine that all under one umbrella, how powerful that would've been.  And, Prince still would've went on and had, you know, Vanity 6, and Sheila E., and all the things that, you know, spun off from that.  But, we were all under one umbrella.  Imagine if Janet was part of the Prince umbrella.  And, Jesse's solo career was part of that umbrella, and I mean, yeah.  It's mind boggling to think what it would be.  But, the think I know, or the think I learned is it's tough to criticize the boss if you haven't been a boss, okay.  When Prince made the decisions he made, he made the decisions because he was the boss and he for his own reasons felt like, don't do anything outside of The Time.  Okay, that was his decision.  When Terry and I became basically our bosses and started signing acts and signing writers and doing the things that we did businesswise, you know, you learn, and, you either go, I'm going to do this exactly like what he did, or I'm going to go in the total opposite direction of what he did.  But, once we became bosses we understood why some of the decision were made.  Now, we didn't make the same decisions, but it gave us a clearer picture of why he made the decisions.  And, that's why to this day, we don't harbor any animosity or bitterness or anything about that.  I mean, first of all, how could we.  Because really kicking us out was almost like, you know, pushing the, pushing the robin out of the nest and going, "You got to go fly now," you know.  He allowed us to do that, right.  So, that was, that was great.  But, we really don't look back with any animosity about anything that happened.  It's like he, he made the decisions, we adapted, and did what we needed to do.  And, I think, you know, listen, we're all still around, and we're all still making significant music; and so that's really the blessing of it.
Story_ID: 648051
Speaker 1: One person you didn't mention was Jerome [Jerome Benton].
Speaker 2: Jerome.  Well, see now Jerome--(laughter) it's funny enough.  Jerome isn't really an artist.  He's really not a musical artist.  And, Jerome, how Jerome got into the group was Jerome was always--first of all Jerome is Terry's brother, Terry Lewis' brother.  Jerome was always like the roadie for us back in the Flyte Tyme days when we were just a local band.  He was the guy that would, you know, get the truck and pick up the equipment and do all that.  He was basically the roadie.  When Prince signed us and did The Time, basically, Jerome took on that same role.  He was basically a roadie.  And, I remember we did our first little, I don't know if you call it a Chitlin' Circuit tour, if you want to call it that.  We went to South Carolina, North Carolina, a bunch of little towns down there.  And, we did these little shows in clubs that was about as big as me talking to you right now, you know, just tiny little rooms, right.  But, it was just to get our chops, you know, get, get, get together.  It was, it was funny, and I remember 'Rome would have to ride in the truck with this other roadie guy all the time, right.  And, he absolutely hated it.  And, he was like, "Man, I can't do this man."  He says, "I can't do this.  This ain't working.  This ain't working."  And, Terry said, "We'll figure something out for you, man.  We'll figure out something for you."  So, when we got off of that little tour, we started rehearsing at this place called the YAASM.  And, it was Y-A-A-S-M, and it stood for like, the Young African American Society of Men [ph.], I think it's what it stood for, right.  And, it was just basically--it used to be a bar.  This guy bought it, named Weaver [ph.].  This old black guy, he bought it.  And, so, and interestingly enough, this was the same place earlier when I mentioned that I saw Flyte Tyme rehearsing when I walked by this place; same place, right.  So, because I remember Terry even said, "Hey, I got a place we can rehearse if we can't find a place to rehearse."  So, this guy Weaver said, "I'm going to give you the keys," he's this old guy.  "I'm going to give you the keys to my place."  He said, "But just two things, okay.  Stay out of my juice machine, and don't touch my titty lamps."  Now, what he meant by that was, he had these juice machines, you've seen them everywhere now, where it's like the big clear plastic stuff and then the, the juice is spraying out, right.  And, he had two flavors.  He had pink lemonade and fruit punch.  And, this was the best tasting stuff ever, right.  So, he was like, "Don't mess with my, my juice machine," right.  And, it was behind like a bar, right.  His titty lamps were, he had these lamps all over the whole place.  And, they were naked women, right, with, you know, titties, right.  So, don't mess with the titty lamps, don't mess with the juice machine--
Story_ID: 648052
Speaker 1: So, of course, we get in there and start rehearsing, and the first thing that happens is, "Man, I'm thirsty, man.  Can I get some of that juice, man?"  "Hey, man, don't mess with that juice machine."  It's like, "Naw, naw, Weaver [ph.] ain't going to know.  He ain't going to know."  Next thing you know, we've drank like all the juice like down to about that much.  So, now Jesse [Jesse Johnson] is taking water and trying to pour water in to fill it up so it looks like it's all filled up again.  So, as we're rehearing and during, during the rehearsal and stuff, Prince comes to, Prince comes to one of the rehearsals.  And, in a couple of the songs Morris [Morris Day] says, "Somebody bring me a mirror," right.  So, Prince is watching.  Morris says, "Somebody bring me a mirror."  Out of nowhere, Jerome [Jerome Benton] grabs this big mirror.  And, I'm talking about a big, like a wall mirror, off the wall, right.  Yanks it off the wall, knocks over a titty lamp, brings it in front of Morris, Morris turns around and looks at him a goes, and starts primping.  Prince falls out of his chair on the floor.  He say, "Oh, my god!  That's it, we got to add that to the act.  We got to add that to the act."  So, Jerome was a roadie no more.  He was Morris' valet, at that moment, right.  So, anyway (laughter), Jerome now goes, after--now the rehearsal's over.  Jerome's coming now, he's trying to tape the titty lamp back together, right.  So, he puts it and he kind of hides it, and you can see like a little crack.  But, he kind of tilts it just a little bit so, you know, you can't see it, right?  In walks Weaver.  Weaver walks in.  He goes, "How's it going guys?"  We're like, "Hey, good Weaver.  Great man, great."  He walks in. (Pause), "Man, who been in my juice machine?  Man, somebody been in my juice machine."  We started cracking up.  We said, "What are you talking about, man?"  "I told you not to go in my, in my juice machine."  And, then he looks around and goes, "My titty lamp!  Somebody broke my titty lamp."  We were kicked out of there.  We, we didn't rehearse, we had no more rehearsals at the YAASM, man.  It was, it was over, you know, 'cause did the--you broke the sacred trust, man.  The juice machine and the titty lamp, you can't break it.  So, that was it.  We started rehearsing in a warehouse [in Minneapolis, Minnesota] after that.  But, anyway, I tell that story because that, first of all, I tell that story 'cause that was, that was just kind of summed up the group [The Time], right.  But, also, 'cause that's how Jerome became Jerome the valet.  Because he was Jerome the roadie, you know.  But, in that instance when he pulled that mirror off the wall, and I don't know whether, I haven't asked him to this day, had he thought about that before or was it just because he had watched us run the show so many times.  He just one day say, "I'm just going to take that mirror off the wall."  And, the mirror was so huge (laughter).  It was a joke.  We said, "We got to get you a proper size mirror, man."  It was so crazy.
Story_ID: 648053
Speaker 1: But, that, I mean, that was, and I also say that for the reasons that, you know, when you say, when you ask, did we ever, you know, when we think about what could've been, we loved each other.  We loved the camaraderie with each other.  Like I say, we didn't always get along with each other.  But, we were like family.  And, we really felt, and we had a, we all had a chip on our shoulder because we all felt like the, you know, the second cousins or whatever, of Prince.  You know, Prince always got the, you know, the better stage, the better bus, the better lights, the better sound, you know.  We, we had to fight our way to do it.  But, in, you know, the ultimate, the ultimate triumph for us, which was also one of the ultimate frustrations for us, was in '83 [1983] on that last tour.  Prince did two really big shows.  Now, back in the day, you remember, you have to remember there wasn't Twitter [Twitter Inc.], and there wasn't these ways where everybody could find out.  So, really you had to read a newspaper to find out.  And, the critics were very important, you know, you had a music critic that was very important.  They could make or break you.  If they liked what you did, great, if they didn't--it was very important.  Two biggest cities in the United States, obviously, New York [New York], and Los Angeles [California].  Prince does a show in Los Angeles [sic. Inglewood, California] at the Forum.  At the time the Forum was, that was the place.  Didn't let us play on that show.  Now, we were there because we were the backup band for Vanity 6.  So, we played the show as the backup band for Vanity 6, but didn't play our own show.  And, we asked the management, "Why aren't we playing?"  And, they just said, "You know why you're not playing."  Well, it was simply because, it's okay to get upstaged in North Carolina.  It's different to get upstaged in L.A.  You can't have, I think Robert Hilburn probably was the, was the columnist back then for the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times].  You couldn't have the L.A. Times going, "Yeah, Prince had put on a really nice show.  But, oh, my god, The Time."  That couldn't be in the L.A. Times.  Also, couldn't be in The New York Times.  So, when Prince played Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], we didn't.  We played Nassau Coliseum [Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum, Uniondale, New York].  And, in L.A. we played Long Beach [California].  Those are the two shows we played.  Now, in another kind of connect the dots thing, Long Beach was where we met Janet [Janet Jackson].  Because Janet was sitting in the front row of that show; her and her mom [Katherine Jackson].  Turns out, she was a huge fan of The Time.  And, we did something at the end of the show that was probably a little embarrassing for her, where we kind of did what we call the dick move, where we would kind of grab our dicks all in, but choreographed, right.  And, I remember we did that, and she's sitting next to her mom, and her mom's mouth goes like this (gesture), and Janet's like (gesture), (laughter).  We met her after the show and she was so sweet and all of that.  But, that, that was where we met her for the first time.  She just was a huge fan of The Time.  And, I don't know, if she would've came to the Forum.  Maybe she would've.  But, I just remember it was Long Beach where we, you know, ended up meeting her.  So, there were all kind of little situations like that where we were kind of the underdogs and we had to figure it out somehow, you know.  We didn't get the opportunities, but we figured it out.  We made our way, and we did the best we could.
Story_ID: 648054
Speaker 1: So, you all are on your own here.  It's 1983, and you're--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --producing for S.O.S. Band [The S.O.S. Band], and a number of different singers.  What--what was your first gold record?
Speaker 2: Well, actually our first gold record was probably Gladys Knight and the Pips.  We did an album called 'Imagination.'  We just did one song on it.  And, I remember we got, at least the Leon Sylvers [Leon Sylvers III] education of what a producer is.  Because, we basically did the track.  He went in and did the vocals.  When the album came out, we expected to have a producer credit.  When we looked at the album, we got a rhythm arranger credit.  And, we said, "Well, Leon, we produced the track."  And, Leon had a way of talking where it was always a whisper, and he always was scratching his beard.  And, Leon said, "You're not a producer until you can produce the vocal too."  And, we were like, "Okay.  So, we just do the track, we're not a producer.  That's means we need to learn how to do vocals," you know.  Which is different than it is today by the way.  Somebody'll send a track in and go, "Oh, I'm a producer."  And, then they're get a vocal producer to go produce it.  But, different day back then.  So, we really set out to try to become really good vocal producers.  And, S.O.S. Band, by the time we got around to doing the S.O.S. Band record, 'Just Be Good to Me,' and 'Tell Me If You Still Care,' which were the two big songs off that album, we produced those vocals and track, and did, you know, we did everything.  So, we at that point were producers.  And, even though we got a gold record for Gladys Knight, I don't really feel like that was our gold record.  But, S.O.S. Band, I felt that was our gold record.  That was really our first gold record and the first of, of a lot of them, you know.
Speaker 1: So, is this like 1984 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I mean, and by the way, The Time albums were gold.  So, I mean, once again, I felt responsible, 'cause we didn't really play on The Time albums.  That was Prince playing on The Time albums.  But, I felt like, you know, our stage show and the fact that there had to be a band to back up the record obviously helped.  I mean, 'cause you, in those days, you went on tour.  And, you went on tour to sell to records.  Nobody was, you weren't on tour just to be sponsored by somebody and all that.  You wanted people to go like you and then go, "Oh, man, I got to get that record," you know.  That was, that was sort of the evolution.  So, the Time records, I shouldn't dismiss them.  I mean, they were gold records, and I'm proud of 'em.  And, matter of fact, they're the gold records I have like in my closet at my house because they're the first ones.  So, you know, those really mean something.  But, as producers, Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis producers, S.O.S. Band, was the first one.
Speaker 1: That's interesting how you can be part of a gold record and only be making $250 a week, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That is very interesting.  Two gold records at 250 (laughter).  We thought it was interesting too.
Story_ID: 648055
Speaker 1: Let- let's follow up on the Janet Jackson story.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, Janet Jackson is in a crisis, I guess, when you--?
Speaker 2: Well, she was at, at an interesting point in her life.  And, what happened with Janet was, you know, after we met her that night at the concert [in Long Beach, California], she was working on an album actually with Leon Sylvers [Leon Sylvers III].  And, I remember Leon invited us down to the studio to watch her sing but also to watch them put together some tracks.  Because Leon was definitely, you know, one of our mentors and one of the people we, we watched, you know, how he did things, and he put together incredible tracks.  And, once again, she was so nice and, and the whole deal.  I never thought we'd work with her at that point.  I really didn't think, think so.  But, in between that time and the con- what ended up being the 'Control' album, we had done, you know, we had had successful record with Cherrelle, "I Didn't Mean to Turn You On" was a big record.  We had Alexander O'Neal and Cherrelle, "Saturday Love" ended up being a huge record for us.  A group call Change that we did.  We had a song called "Change of Heart."  It was a top five record.  Cheryl Lynn's "Encore," went number one, and that was a huge record for us.  And, then we did a song with Patti Austin called "The Heat of Heat," which was actually very special because Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] actually enlisted us to do that record.  And, and [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant was actually instrumental in that because Clarence was the one that said to Quincy, "You got to give these two thugs a chance. They could probably make a really good record with your artist."  And, and it was a great record for us because we, it was the first time we had really used like live strings, and like really tried to, we tried to make a Quincy record.  Basically, we were trying to make Quincy proud.  And, ended up being a huge record for her.  So, Janet happened because of a gentlemen named John McClain.  John McClain was an A and R [artists and repertoire] person at A, at A&M Records.  And, John was actually there the very first time we met Leon Sylvers.  He was actually at the studio.  And, I remember him just standing on the wall, didn't really say anything.  Leon said to him, "Man, these guys from The Time are, man, they're amazing.  Man, you got to hear 'em, you know, they're, you know, they're the next thing."  And, John really didn't say anything.  So, you know, we fast forward to a couple years later, three years later, and John calls us.  And, he said, "I got this artist Howard Johnson."  He says, "You know Howard Johnson?"  And, I said, "Oh, yeah.  (Singing) So fine.  So fine, blowing my mind ["So Fine"]."  He says, "Yeah.  We need a new record.  You guys interested in doing something?"  Said, "Absolutely."  So, we needed up doing a couple records on Howard Johnson.  Didn't--the records really didn't do anything.  But, what it did is it started a relationship with John McClain.  So, then there was an artist named Sharon Bryant.  And, Sharon Bryant was the lead singer of Atlantic Starr.  Atlantic Starr was one of our favorite groups.  I mean, we absolutely loved Atlantic Starr.  So, he called us and he said, "Hey, you know, Sharon is going to do a solo album.  Would you guys be interested in doing something on the solo album?"  And, we said, "Oh, we'd love to.  We'd love to."  And, he said, "Well, what would you like to do?"  And, we said, "We'd love to do the whole album if, if you know, that's what you want to do."  I said, "We, we love her."  And, he said, "Okay, cool."  He said, "Well, let's make that happen," whatever, whatever, whatever.  A couple weeks later he calls us back, he said, "Hey, man, I'm really embarrassed here but, we talked to Sharon and she doesn't want you guys to do the project.  She wants to work on the record with the Lewis brothers," who were Wayne Lewis, and I can't remember the other gentlemen's name [Jonathan Lewis], but who were the leaders of Atlantic Starr.  And, I believe she was seeing one of the guy, one of the two of them.  And, she wanted to do the record with them.  And, we said, "That's cool, John.  It's, you know, no big deal, man, you know, whatever."  And, he said, "Well, man," he said, "I feel terrible, man."  He said, he said, "I want to do a project with you guys."  He says, "Is there anything else on our roster that, you know, that you'd like to do."  We said, "Well, send us the roster."
Story_ID: 648056
Speaker 1: So, he sends us the roster.  Me and Terry [Terry Lewis] look at the roster.  And, A&M [A&M Records] had really nice collection of great artists, Jeffrey Osborne was, L.T.D.  I mean, they had a nice cross section of good R and B.  Now, we went down and our fingers both stopped at Janet [Janet Jackson].  And, we said, "Oh, Janet's on A&M.  Let's do that."  So, we called John [John McClain] back.  He said, "What do you think?"  And said, "We want to do Janet."  He said, "Really?"  We said, "Yeah."  He said, "Okay."  He said, "How many songs?"  Said, "We want to do the whole album."  He was like, "What?  Really?"  Because at the time, Janet had put out two albums and they both didn't do anything.  And, the perception was she was just Michael's [Michael Jackson] little sister and the only reason that she really had a deal, and this was actually true, the reason she had a deal was 'cause the dad really pushed her into having a deal 'cause she could sing.  But, she, her heart was not in singing at all.  Her heart was in acting.  She wanted to act.  She was doing 'Fame' at the time.  That's what she was really into.  So, we ended up having a meeting.  It was Joe, it was--Janet was there, Joe Jackson, me and Terry, John, a few other A&M people.  And, what they had done, which I didn't know at the time, was they had played, she asked to hear some stuff that we--she'd loved us, but she wanted to hear some of the records we had done.  And, they played her the Patti Austin record ['The Heat of Heat'] which had nothing to do with what we would make with Janet, obviously, right.  So, she was kind of like, "Well, I'm not really sure whether I want a record that sounds like that."  And, we had to say to her, "Well, Janet, no, no, no, no.  We're--our thing is, we give everybody a different sound.  So, your sound is going to be totally different than anything we'd ever done any record before.  We will create whatever your sound is, and that's what it'll be."  So, then Joe Jackson says, "You guys are from Minneapolis [Minnesota]."  And, we said, "Yes, sir."  He said, "Prince is from Minneapolis."  We said, "Yes, sir."  He said, "Don't have my daughter sounding like Prince."  We said, "You got it.  No problem."  (Laughter), "We, we understand you."  So, that was the meeting.  And, so, when John said, "Where do you want to record?"  We said, "We'd like to record in Minneapolis," because we had our own studio.  We had built our own studio.  This was '85 [1985].  And, we had built our own studio.  We thought, the whole idea was, we thought having our own place everybody would be at ease.  Because in the old days, studios, there was a lot of pressure because you were always watching the clock, you're paying the engineer, you're paying, you're paying the studio by the hour.  And, it was, it was all, you know, if somebody wasn't getting a note right, or someone--it was lot of pressure.  And, we had learned that with Cherrelle whose album we had done right before.  That Cherrelle didn't, didn't record well L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  But, when she came to Minneapolis [Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.], she knocked it out the park.  So, we thought, let's bring Janet to Minneapolis.  So, I remember we told her, "Don't bring security.  Don't bring--you're not going to really need bodyguards or anything.  If you have a friend, bring a friend with you, and it'll just be fun."  So, she brought a friend.  We rented her like a Chevrolet Blazer which is level four wheel drive truck.  And, you know, we gave her a map.  It was no GPS [global positioning system] at that point.  But, we gave her map.  We said, "Here's the studio.  Here's the hotel.  Here's how you get back and forth."  And, we just kind of let her be independent.  And, we for the first four or five days, we went to movies, we hung out at the lake.  That was a big hangout in the summer, was hang out at the lake.  We went to a couple clubs, just chilled.  And, we had all these great conversations as we got to know each other.  And, she felt very comfortable around us, and really confided a lot in what was going on in her life at that point in time.
Story_ID: 648057
Speaker 1: And, so, finally, on like the fifth day she says, "When are we going to get to work?"  And, we said, "Oh, we're working.  We're working."  And, we whipped out the lyrics to "Control."  And, she said, "Wow."  She said, "This is what we've been talking about."  And, I said, "Yeah."  And, she said, "So, wait a minute.  So, the album's ['Control'] going to be just whatever we talk about, that's what the album going to be?"  And, we said, "Yeah."  Well, it was like a lightbulb went off in her head.  Because if--on her two albums before, she just went in and sang.  Somebody gave her lyrics.  Somebody gave her a song.  Nobody asked her her opinion.  The albums weren't personal, right.  All of a sudden she realized that, wait, we can make a personal record here?  It's like, "Yeah."  So, then there was a thing at the club, we went to one of the clubs.  There was these guys talking to her.  They were bothering her.  She kept looking over at us like, come rescue me.  And, you know, some of our friends were like, "Hey, go help Janet [Janet Jackson]."  We're like, "She's fine.  We're standing right here. Ain't nobody going to do nothing.  This is Minneapolis [Minnesota].  Nobody's going to do nothing to her," right.  So, afterwards she comes over, and she said, "Did you see those guys talking to me?"  And, we said, "Yeah."  She said, "Those guys were nasty."  We said, "Really?"  "Yeah.  Why didn't you come help me?"  And, we said, "Well, you're standing here now, so obviously you were fine, handled yourself just fine."  She said, "Oh, yeah, I guess I did, didn't I."  So, it got her out of her shell, you know, out of her kind of insulated shell that she had grown up in.  And, we, you know, we were ourselves around her too.  We'd like, cussed.  She'd charge us twenty-five cents every time we cussed, you know.  We'd say, "Hey, Janet, oh yeah, oh fuck that Janet."  She'd go, "Oh, twenty-five cents, twenty-five cents," like she was the police.  It was like okay, cool.  But, we had a great relationship.  And, so, the thing that happened at the club with the guys turned into "Nasty," into the song "Nasty."  And, that was sort of the way the recording of the record happened.  She was engaged.  She was excited about it.  And, it was a different Janet than--we were fortunate because the Janet we got was a Janet who was now excited about singing and about creating as opposed to, "I'm just doing this 'cause my dad [Joe Jackson] wants me to do this."  This was the first time she was doing it 'cause she was passionate about it.  So, we, we were good to be a part of that.  I mean, we, we were fortunate.  So, at the end of the project, we figured that we're done with the project, right.  And, I always have a saying about A and R [artists and repertoire] people.  A and R people, at record companies, basically the only thing they ever do, is they come in and they always say, "I just need one more," right.  That's--so, John McClain, so we're riding around--no, we're not riding around with John McClain.  John McClain comes to the studio [of Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.], we play him the whole record 'cause we've recorded in Minneapolis so nobody's interfered with us.  We play John the whole record, and he says, "Man, I really love the record.  I just need one more."  And, we said, "Oh, here we go.  What do you need, John?"  "Man, I don't know man, I just, it's really great.  I just need one more."  So, we said, "Okay, cool, John.  Okay, fine.  All right.  Well, we'll figure out what that is."  So, I remember we were riding around in the car, and we said, "John, hey, you know, me and Terry [Terry Lewis] are working on our own album."  And, he said, "Oh, that's cool.  Can you play some stuff?"  Said, "Yeah, yeah."  So, we started playing him tracks from what's going to be me and Terry's album.  And, one of the tracks comes on and it comes on (singing).  And, John goes, "Wait a minute.  What is that?"  And, we said, "Oh, just a song.  We don't know what it's going to be yet."  He said, "That's the song I need."  We said, "No, no, no, no, no, no.  That song is for our album."  He said, "No, no, no.  That's the song.  I swear to God.  That's the song I need.  That's the song I need."  So, after we argued about it a little while, we said, "Okay, here's, here's what we're going to do, John.  When Janet comes to the studio tomorrow, we're going to just play the record.  If she likes it, she can have it.  If she doesn't say anything about it, we're going to keep it."  And, so, she's sitting on a couch out in the room, we put the record on, she walks in the room, she goes, "Who's that for?"  And, we said, "You, if you want it."  And, she said, "I want it," "What Have You Done for Me Lately," first single.
Story_ID: 648058
Speaker 1: So this album, I mean, Janet Jackson is in sort of a, from what I've read here, was in sort of a contest with her father [Joe Jackson] about, about the control of her career, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, this album is 'Control.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, she, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the album, the album thematically really ended up being a lot of it about taking control of her own life.  She had lived a lot of life at that point.  She had been in a marriage [to James DeBarge] that was annulled.  It was her first time kind of being out on her own.  And, that independence really fueled lyrically and also I think the attitude of the album.  Because if you think about the tracks, if you think about "What Have You Done for Me Lately," this was a track that we were not creating for a girl singer.  We were creating this for me and Terry's [Terry Lewis] album.  It was a very aggressive, hard, you know, just a real aggressive record.  And, it wasn't the kind of record, if you think about the top of the album charts with females, it was, you know, Anita Baker.  It was Patti LaBelle.  It was, you know, those types of females.  So, Janet really ended up setting really a new sort of trend and a new sort of attitude towards what a female singer could, could be and sing about.  I mean, we could put, you know, rock guitars on a record.  We could do anything.  We could tell her to sing really low, like on "Nasty."  She's singing in such a low register but it's all about the attitude that carries that record.  You know, and, those are big tracks, and for, you know, it's easy to get lost in those kinds of tracks, you know.  I hear singers today try to, try to do it and emulate it and the singer just gets lost because they don't have the attitude and the rhythm to keep up with the track, but she did.  And, we recognized it early on and we just started throwing stuff at her, you know, just, you know, "Here try this.  Hey let's try this.  Let's do this," you know.  And, she was open for everything 'cause she was so excited and, and she trusted us, she trusted us.  She knew that we had no agenda with her other than to try to make really a great record.  And, and we loved her.  I mean, we really, you know, we just loved her as a person.  We loved her talent after we got to know her.  But, she had been, like I said, so nice to us when we met her initially.  We just kind of felt like, man, you know, there's certain people you just want to do stuff for, you know.  They just kind of bring that out of you, and she was definitely that spirit for us.
Story_ID: 648059
Speaker 1: Now, what was your, what was your song writing routine like with Terry [Terry Lewis]?  What did that--how did you all approach it and who did what?
Speaker 2: My songwriting routine with Terry is everywhere from I do it all myself, to Terry does it all himself, to everywhere in between.  There is a few common things.  One is that normally I end up doing the tracks more so than Terry.  Probably because I'm a keyboard player and, and a former drummer which kind of just lends itself to creating rhythm tracks.  Terry is much more of the lyricist.  Terry is a really great lyricist, and the reason he's great to me is it takes a lot of words for me to express a thought.  I remember when we were working on the 'Rhythm Nation' ['Rhythm Nation 1814'] album, Janet's [Janet Jackson] next album, and we had come up with an idea for this song where there--a school shooting had happened.  I think it was in Colorado [sic. Stockton, California], I can't quite remember.  But, it was obviously a tragedy, and we wanted to write a song that really talked about how it's not the kids' fault.  It's really the world that we made that has caused this to happen.  And, the kids are basically the victims of what we've done.  And, I remember normally I came up with the kind of the melo- a little bit of the melody and the kind of piano part and the whole thing for the song.  And, Terry was actually not at the studio that day because he was at our, what was going to be our next studio overseeing the construction of that.  So, Terry walks in the door, we're at our old Flyte Tyme studio [of Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.], he walks in the door with like carpet samples and stuff and he says, you know, "Hey, what carpet should we use, and whatever?"  We're like, "No, no, no, no, Terry, we got this song idea."  And, he said, and I said, "We need lyrics though, and--," 'cause Janet couldn't write it.  She just said, "I can't get my arms around what this is.  I can't say it right."  So, we proceed to give Terry this five minute dissertation of what this song is supposed to be about.  "And, the kids and it's not their fault and it's blah, blah, and whatever, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah," and when we get done talking Terry goes, "Living in a world they didn't make."  And, we said, "Yeah, that's, that's exactly it, living in a world."  So, anyway, he was able to take, you know, six words and do it.  And, then proceeded to write the lyrics [for "Livin' in a World (They Didn't Make)"] in about twenty-five minutes and handed it to us and said, "Here you go.  Now, which wallpaper, wallpaper do you think," (gesture)?  It's like, "No, Terry."  He says, "No, it's done."  He said, "Just go record it."  And, we did.  So, that to me was the brilliance of, you know, any lyricist, is being about to take, you know--thoughts are common.  Love is common.  Heartbreak is common.  I mean, they're--these are all common things.  Figuring out a different way to say something, a different spin to put on it, a different, you know, whether it's a, you know, a metaphor or it's, you know, Terry just has a way of doing that, that, that's brilliant.  So, I always--he tends to do more of the lyric.  I think we split the melodies pretty evenly.  I maybe tend to do a little more melody than him.  But, it really, there's really no set way that, that we work.
Story_ID: 648060
Speaker 1: It just, it all, it's funny nowadays because if you talk to, according who you talk to.  So, now, if you talk to Janet [Janet Jackson], Janet will tell you that, "Jimmy [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] does everything," okay.  If you talk to Usher, Usher would say, "Oh, Terry does everything," okay.  Because Terry has a bond with Usher where, you know, at one point Usher needed a really important vocal done on a record and he said, "Terry Lewis is the only person I'm going to do this vocal with."  And, he did.  And, it was a number one record.  And, they had that relationship.  And he gives him fatherly advice, you know, uncle advice, whatever you want to be.  He is--and Usher respects him.  And, he respects me as, you know, "Hey, that's a nice song."  But, his relationship with Usher is probably like mine is with Janet.  So, I say that to say that as I said at the very beginning, he could do it all himself, I could do it all myself, in varying ways we all get in the middle.  And, it go- and then that takes it back to something we did back in 1982.  Which is we shook hands once we figured out that we were going to write and produce songs together, that that's what we wanted to do.  We shook hands and we just said, "50/50 [percent].  No matter how much anybody does on a song, 50/50."  Because we figure over the long, long run it's just going to even itself out.  And, it pretty much has.  I've gone through periods where I have a dry spell, I can't figure out nothing.  And, he's on top of it, he's got it.  The vice versa has happened.  It's very rare where we both, if we both don't have a good idea than we're working with the wrong person.  Because the artist always inspires the, the idea.  So, when somebody says, when somebody calls and goes, "Hey, do you want to work with Mary J. Blige?"  "Yes.  I love Mary J., oh, my god.  I get to write a song for her?  Are you kidding me?  Oh, I got this, I got this.  I know what this is," right.  When you get that feeling than that's to me when, when the great stuff happens, you know.  If somebody says, "Hey, New Edition.  Johnny Gill's joined the group now.  They're grown up now.  What kind of record do we need to make?"  Another great Terry Lewis example.  Terry Lewis wrote 'Boys to Men,' the song 'Boys to Men,' which, it's explained what New--where New Edition was in their careers.  And, became the name of Boyz II Men the group.  It was taken from the song that Terry, you know, came up with.  So, you know, you never, you never know how, but it's always, it's always just an inspiration that inspires it and we always tried to pick people that really inspire us to try to write great songs.  It doesn't always work, you know.  But, at least you have a shot.  And, at the end of the day, even if the record doesn't sell, we kind of always like to say that, if it's successful in the studio, like when it leaves the studio, like if we know we did a great job, that is the success of it right there.  Not whether it goes number one or number ten or whatever.  The success of it is really that we felt that we did a great job, and it's successful right here.  'Cause the rest of it, we can't control.  We can't control whether the public likes it.  We can't control whether somebody's mad at the radio station at us for some reason and ain't going to play.  We can't control any of that stuff.  But, we can control while we have it, we can make it the best it can be and that's what we try to do.
Story_ID: 648061
Speaker 1: Okay.  From what I understand, I think it was Steve Holden [Stephen Holden] of The New York Times wrote after the Janet Jackson album, that this is--that you all made history by, by your relationship with modern technology as songwriters.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I (laughter), I, if it's the article I think you're talking about, it was, it was interesting because we've always used technology but never tried to let technology use us.  We've gone to speak to kids and stuff and a lot of people talk about, "Well, the old days it was better, because of this and that and that and that."  And, I've had people say to me things like, "Well, you know, back in Beethoven's [Ludwig van Beethoven] day there was just a piano," and whatever.  And, I was like, "You don't think that somebody as brilliant as Beethoven wouldn't love Pro Tools, and wouldn't love Logic [Logic Pro] and wouldn't love MPC drum machine [Akai Music Production Controller]?"  I mean, creative people are creative people and they're going to use whatever is available for them to use.  Back when we did 'Rhythm Nation' ['Rhythm Nation 1814'] and we took Sly and the Family Stone, "Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf)" ["Thank you (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)"] and we took the guitar part to that and sampled it and looped it and made a song out of it.  People were like, "Wow, you guys are sampling.  Why, why would you do that?  That's not like true to music."  Well, it's like, "Why isn't it true to music?  If there's a sampler here and great song to be sampled, why isn't that part of the tool box of creativity?"  So, we've always embraced the technology.  To me there's still nothing that sounds like a good old Fender Rhodes, you know, piano, and, you know, I have my, my likes and my comfort things that I like.  But, at the end of the day, I appreciate everything that's new.  I appreciate what a new producer does with the technology because it makes me go, "Okay.  I got to stay up on my, on my game."  Or, I don't have to stay up on my game and I can just go, "Hey, you, new young great producer, come and let's collaborate.  Because I have something I can add to what you do and you have something to add to what I do."  That's the art of collaboration.  That's the best thing about collaboration, is that you--everybody brings these great ideas.
Story_ID: 648062
Speaker 1: But, you know, the idea that we've, yeah, we, we always did try to be innovative with the technology but never let the technology, you know, replace the art of songwriting and of good lyrics and good melodies.  So, you know, we were involved with, it's interesting, if you thing about The Time, even though we weren't sonically involved in a big way in the studio on those records, that was a whole musical movement, that whole Minneapolis [Minnesota] sound that came out of that.  The S.O.S. Band with the 808 drum machine [Roland TR-808 Rhythm Composer], that's the first time, you know, you hear 808 drum sounds now where the bass always goes, "Boom, boom, boom, boom," like that's--every hip hop record has that sound.  I--maybe there were other people that were doing it.  But, we took it and used it on a ballad.  We used it on "Tell Me If You Still Care."  And, we took it and went, boom with the bass drum.  And, everybody said, "What's that?"  Said, "Oh, it's an 808 bass drum."  "Really?"  You know.  So, that's an innovation to some people, okay, great, I'm with that.  And, the sound was very influential particularly in London [England].  If you listen to Loose Ends records [Loose End Productions], Loose Ends records are, you know, S.O.S. Band records.  808 drum machines are used 'til this day.  We used them very prominently to make records.  So, there's some influence that happened there, the way Janet's record sounds--sounded, very much influential.  So, we've been involved with a lot of different things; "That's the Way Love Goes."  It's interesting, "That's the Way Love Goes," the biggest compliment I got, and, Mary J. Blige made a record called 'My Life,' which was probably one of my favorite top ten records of all time.  And, the way the record was constructed; now, Puffy [Sean Combs] got, or P. Diddy as he's now known, got basically the credit for producing the record.  But, he actually had a guy named Chucky Thompson did really, I think, did the record and conceptualized everything.  And, he basically took all these old samples, made loops out of them, Mary sang over the top of it, and it was really what was called hip hop soul.  It was really like when they called her the queen of hip hop soul.  She is, right.  When we did "That's the Way Love Goes" and I took a James Brown sample and made a loop out of it.  But, then put a melody on it and some chords over the top of it.  I was just influenced so much by Mary, what Mary J. did that that made me want to do that for Janet [Janet Jackson].  Jan- Mary came out with a record right after 'That's the Way Love Goes' using the exact same sample.  And, I remember talking to Mary one day, and I said, "Mary," I said, I said, "that record you got out with the, with the sample."  And she said, "Yeah," (gesture).  She said, "Yeah."  And, I said, "Did you have--was that out before?"  And, she said, "No."  She said, "I was copying y'all's record."  (Laughter) I said, "Really?"  So, basically, that was such a compliment to me that she liked something we did which is in her genre enough to really go and copy it, and really copy it.  And, then actually for her, it didn't work.  But, it was a huge record for Janet.  So, I kind of give, there's a bunch of examples, I just kind of give those to say that we, we loved the technology, we embraced it but we never try to let it get in the way of actually making good quality songs.  So, if, as I think the author of the article [Stephen Holden] basically that, his argument is that we're the best producers ever just because of doing that.  It's an interesting conversation starter, if, you know, it's a great conversation to have.  I--it's nice to be part of the conversation, I'll just say that.  I mean, I don't think we're the best ever.  I mean, I look at Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff].  I look at [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.  I mean, for me, they're the best.  I look at Norman Whitfield.  I look at--I mean, there's too many, way too many to even name.  I look at the current crop of guys now.  I look at 40 [Noah Shebib], Drake's producer; sonic genius to me.  I look at somebody like J Dilla who, probably the best sample guy, him and DJ Premier probably, you know, out of New York [New York].  Probably the best sample guys ever, like taking samples and turning them around.  I mean, there's so, it's, what I love is that music just continues to evolve.  And, if we were, at some point, you know, in that wheel of evolution, that's fantastic.  That, that means a lot to me.
Story_ID: 648063
Speaker 1: In '86 [1986] was this when you worked on the movie 'Krush Groove,' was that 'Krush Groove'?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was '86 [sic. 1985].  And, it was interesting because back in '86 [1986], you know, the 'Control' record had jumped off really big.  "Saturday Love" had just been a huge hit.  What I liked about it is that the two records sounded nothing alike.  You would not know, unless you saw the credits, that the same people that did "Saturday Love," did "What Have You Done for Me Lately," you know, 'cause they were two totally sonically different sounding records.  And, we always purposely try to do that.  We did--never wanted to be one thing.  We always wanted to be different types of things, different sounds for different people.  So, it was interesting, "Tender Love" was interesting because when the producers of 'Krush Groove' came to us and they said, "We need a ballad."  And, we were a little shocked.  We were like, "Really?  'Cause we got all this up tempo stuff that's cracking but okay, we're, we're up to that.  We'd love to try that."  So, when we wrote the song, we didn't know who was going to sing the song.  They said, "We're going to figure out an artist to do it.  But, we need it.  There's a love scene in the movie."  And, I don't know whether we'd ever be able to find it but the way we wrote the song was exactly to the way the scene in the movie worked.  Like, literally when the lyrics says, "Candles that light the dark," there were candles lighting.  I mean literally we did it, like that literal.  Which I don't know whether you're supposed to do it like--we were new doing, you know, movie scores, so we didn't know.  But, anyway, it was really beautiful.  So they said, "Oh, we love this, we love this."  So, they said, "We're going to get The Force MDs to sing it."  And, we're going, "The Force MDs?"  We, we, I think we had heard maybe one record.  They had a--they were from Staten Island [New York], whatever.  They had this one record.  We were like, "Really?"  They said, "Yeah."  So, they sent them up to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  They were only there a day.  We taught them the song.  They absolutely killed it.  I mean, they, they were so good.  So nice, so good, sang the heck out of it.  We were, I remember me and Terry [Terry Lewis] were really disappointed when we saw the movie 'cause they made the love scene like really short 'cause I guess they thought, "Well nobody's going to sit through a whole love scene in a movie.  It's a hip hop movie, let's get back to LL Cool J," or whatever.  But, interestingly enough, it ended up being the, really the hit song of that movie.  And, was Terry and my first top ten pop hit, if I'm not mistaken.  So, that was pretty sig- 'cause that was, actually, yeah, because actually that was actually before Janet [Janet Jackson].  That was actually before Janet hit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, 'cause when Janet hit, yeah, because we obviously had, you know, "Lately" ["What Have You Done for Me Lately"], and "Nasty," and all those went pop.  But, "Tender Love" was actually the first, it was actually a little before Janet, a little before Janet.
Story_ID: 648064
Speaker 1: I, I really can't think of, 'cause I don't know, I'm not a music expert necessarily, but, but you, I think you are accomplishing your role of making your music sound different for different artists.  I mean, I would never guess that "Tender Love" was the same producer and songwriters as 'Control,' or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I would never guess that.
Speaker 2: Well, that's good because (laughter) that's good because that was really important to us.  I mean, that's what we set out to do.  Now, there's going to be, Terry [Terry Lewis] and I always use the analogy of tailors, you know, when you get a suit.  You can buy a suit off the rack and you can, you know, take the waist in and hem the pants, and do that.  And, now the suit fit really well.  But, it's the same suit anybody else can go buy, right.  If you go to a tailor and you pick your fabric and you pick the cut of your suit, single breasted, double breasted, three button, four button, baggie pants, you want cuffs or no cuffs.  At the end of the day, as tailors, we're still going to sew the same way.  So, our thread is still going to be the same thread that we used across every suit.  But, at the end of the day, that suit is going to only fit that person, right.  So, the "Tender Love" suite was for Force MDs [The Force MDs].  The 'Control' suit was for Janet [Janet Jackson].  The "Saturday Love" suit was for Alexander O'Neal and Cherrelle.  All comes from the same tailor shop but they all got to come in and pick their own material and get their own suits.  And, that's the way we always looked at, like, just like tailor, like fine tailoring.  We never wanted anything to be like an assembly line stuff.  We have so many songs that we've never used that we wrote for a specific artist.  And, either that specific artist didn't, didn't want to do it, the record company didn't like it, for whatever reason, and those songs just sit on the shelf.  Because they were made just for that artist.  I'll give you a quick Mary J. Blige story.  So, Mary J. Blige when we did and I'm sorry I'm skipping ahead, so you can put in the order you want to put it.  But, when we did "No More Drama" with Mary J. Blige, I remember we played it for her.  We wrote the lyrics and did the whole thing.  We played it for her.  She said, which is the ultimate compliment that an artist can give to songwriter, she said, "Oh, my god."  She said, "This sounds like, did you guys have like spies following me around for the last year?  Because this, what it says in this song is exactly my life.  It's exactly it."  And, we said, "Oh, good.  Well, you know, feel free to change whatever you want to change."  She said, "I'm not changing a word on this song.  This is exactly what I would say.  This is exactly what I want to say."  But, then she said, "It doesn't work for this album.  But, for my next album, it's my title track."  So, we kind of go, "Oh, okay.  Yeah, okay fine.  Okay, so, we cool, all right."  So, we had kind of, we had been told that before about other songs.  "Well, you know, it doesn't fit this, but we'll, we'll use it."  And, of course, they never get used, right.  So, I remember Mary about six months down the line, her album's out, and we had a couple songs on the album that she had out anyway.  I think it was the 'Mary' album.  And, she said, she said, "Hey, that, that "No More Drama," you didn't give that to anybody, did you?"  And, we said, "No.  That song's for you.  That's your song, Mary."  She said, "Okay, okay, 'cause I'm going to use.  I'm going to use."  And, sure enough about four or five months after that, she called us up and said, "Okay.  I'm ready to--you still got my song?"  I said, "Yeah, we got it."  She said, "I'm ready, I'm ready to do it."  And, she, of course, sang it and absolutely killed the vocal.  Just murdered it.  And, the song to me was just, ended up being just a really important career record for her because it was statement record.  Kind of like 'Control' in a way for Janet.  It ended up being a statement record about her turning a corner in her life.  And, you know, it ended up being a very successful record.  And, also a record that, in performance of the record, she killed.  I mean, she wrecked the Grammys [Grammy Awards] with that performance.  And, of "No More Drama."  And, so, it's, it's great as a songwriter to have a piece of, of that, you know, history or that outcome happening like that.  But, it doesn't happen without the inspiration of the artist.
Story_ID: 648065
Speaker 1: So, into, so in the, at the end of the '80s [1980s], what are you working on?
Speaker 2: End of the '80s [1980] we're working on the follow up to 'Control,' which is 'Rhythm Nation' ['Rhythm Nation 1814'], and, there had been a lot that had kind of gone on after 'Control.'  Mainly behind the scenes a lot of kind of crazy business things were going on because, you know, remember now we made 'Control' in a vacuum.  We basically went to Minneapolis [Minnesota] and we just made the record and then we handed to the record company.  This time around everybody's got their hand in the cookie jar, right.  Everybody's trying to be a chef in the kitchen.  "Well, you need to do this, you need to do that.  It needs to be called 'Control 2.'  It needs to this and that, and blah, blah, blah."  In the meantime, Janet [Janet Jackson] and us hadn't really spoken a whole lot because she was living in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  We were living in Minneapolis, and we were just making records.  And, we had, I guess, she had, she had gone in the studio at one point, when John McClain had her go in the studio with this other producer.  And, basically, tried to make the record without us, which I thought was interesting, but, what they ended up coming up with was basically a repeat of what we had already done.  Because they didn't know what our next thought was.  They had no clue, right.  And, we didn't really have a clue either but we knew we were going to move forward from what we had already done.  But, all anybody else from the outside could do was take that and go, "Let's copy that."  So, it wasn't successful.  So, after--and we knew about it and we, you know, it was fine.  So, I got a call one day from Janet.  And, Janet said, "Hey," she said, "do you guys want to do this record?"  And, we said, "Yeah.  Do you want us to do the record?"  And, she said, "Yeah."  And, she says, "So, what do we do?"  And, I said, "Let's just--we'll get it done."  I said--she said, "Well, I heard you're talking stuff about me," blah, blah, blah.  I said, "Janet," I said, "we're in Minneapolis in the frozen tundra up here," (laughter), "just making records every day."  I said, "We're not saying nothing about you."  I said, "That's crazy."  And, she said, "Okay."  So, I hung up the phone.  My next call was [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant.  And, Clarence Avant as he had done a long time ago in telling us that our price was too low, basically went to Jerry Moss at A&M Records and said, "Do you want Jimmy [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Terry Lewis] to do this record?   'Cause I know you can't make the record without them.  Do you want, do you want them to do the record?"  Jerry Moss said, "Yes."  Clarence said, "It's going to cost you a million dollars."  And, he says, "And, that's a bargain."  And, a week later we were started on the record.  So, Clarence, you know, Clarence made that happen.  And, we started on the record.  And, we did the record, and we were also in the mist of opening up a new studio [of Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.].  And, I remember when the record was finished we had a big grand opening at our, at our studio.  Which was also kind of coincided with the album launch and the whole thing which was, which was kind of cool.  And, the album was really made up of kind of two thoughts.  One was that obviously Janet was a great dancer and a great personality but, and watching MTV [Music Television; MTV], I mean, really the TV was really on two channels.  It was either on T- either on MTV or CNN, and this is before we had, you know, six hundred channels or whatever.  So, I mean, you had, you know, maybe twenty, thirty channels that you would watch.  In between the two you'd see the music videos on MTV and then you'd hear the news on CNN.  And, I think those two, those two things were kind of the factor of, of making 'Rhythm Nation.'  We didn't really know what the album was going to be but we knew that we wanted to comment on kind of the state of the world and things that were going on.  And, when we wrote "Rhythm Nation," when we wrote "State of the World," when we wrote "The Knowledge," when we wrote "Living in a World (They Didn't Make)" ["Livin' in a World (They Didn't Make)"], those four songs really spoke to those issues, kind of, and were important for her to say.  I think that we, you know, when we finished the record, and it was really funny because this record took six months.  I mean, 'Control' took six weeks.  This record took six months.  It took a long time.  Not because we were doubting ourselves or overcutting or, you know, like cutting too many songs or anything like that.  But, just because, it just took that long to do.  I mean, it just, it's just how it works sometimes.
Story_ID: 648066
Speaker 1: I remember when we were done with the record, Janet had this idea, where she wanted to do like a short film.  And, it was, I think the budget was going to be like, you know, $1.2 million or something.  And, I remember she called me and she said, "Okay, I want to do this short film," and we hadn't played the record label any music, right, 'cause we wanted them to stay out of our business.  And we said--and she said, "I got to play them something."  And, I said, "Well, who," I said, "who do you have to, who do you have to play it for?"  And, she said, "I got to play it for--," not Jerry Moss at the time, I think it was Gil Friesen, who was probably the, I think president at the time of the company.  And, I said, "Okay, Janet."  I said, "So," I said, "I got a suggestion for you."  I said--she had just got a brand new Range Rover.  That when Range Rovers were just, you know, coming out and were cool, right.  And, I said, "Here's what you do."  I said--and she had a house on PCH [Pacific Coast Highway], right.  I said, "Take Gil on a ride in your Range Rover."  And, I said, "And, then as you're driving up PCH, play him whatever you want to play him; "Miss You Much," "Escapade," whatever you think you, you want to play him."  I said, "Just play him two or three songs."  And, she said, "Really?"  And, I said, "Yeah."  I said, "Because who is going to be sitting in a brand new Range Rover with Janet Jackson driving up PCH and not like those songs."  And, she said, "Okay, that's true."  Couple hours later she called me back, she said, "We got our budget."  And, I said, "Okay, good."  Because I knew.  You can't go to his office and play it for him.  Put him in an environment where he's loving the moment.  And, that album ended up, which is a tough thing to follow because really for, for Janet, really the 'Control' album were like her first album.  'Cause the first two we don't really, we don't count so this was the sophomore album, and we all know about soph- the sophomore slump.  The thing that A&M [A&M Records] let us do, and I think John McClain was instrumental in doing this, was he let us front load the album.  Meaning in the sequence of the album, put the meaningful songs first.  So, the album started off with "Rhythm Nation," went into "State of the World," and then went into "The Knowledge."  And, after "The Knowledge," after those three songs, she says, "Get the point?  Now, let's dance," and it goes into "Miss You Much," which ended up being the first single.  Now, "Miss You Much" was huge, number one, the whole deal.  And, when I look back on the record, you know, making the songs was, was cool, right.  I mean, it was a, it was a good experience.  It spoke to the, it spoke to what was happening in the world at that given time.  You know, it was a great snapshot of what was happening in the world at that given time.  However, what was even more daring was putting those songs first.  Because I said to somebody, "You know we could call the album 'Escapade,' and we could put "Miss You Much," and "Escapade," and "Love Will Never Do Without You," we could put all those songs first.  All these song that we know, or as least as much as we could know, we think are hit records.  And, then we could put all the heavy songs at the very tail end of the album.  Do a nice color photo on the cover, 'Escapade,' great, that would be great."  She said, "No."  She said, "Black and white photo.  I'm going to do my, you know, we're going to--it's 'Rhythm Nation' ['Rhythm Nation 1814'], and, we're going to go with 'Rhythm Nation'," and A&M went along with that.  And, that was a risky thing for the record company.  And, the payoff was that it ended up selling more than 'Control.'  It was a bigger album than 'Control.'  At the time, I think it was the first album with seven top ten records on it or something.  Which actually broke Michael's [Michael Jackson] record at the time.  So, it was a daring record.  But, it was one that, you know, people to this day, I think, you know, really revere, you know, hold it in high reverence.  And, and it deserves to be.  It was a, it was a, it was a great experience making the record; and, you know, I think it stands the test of time, for sure.
Story_ID: 648067
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I, I read that you and Terry Lewis wanted to produce the, I guess, the best black album of all time, or something, the all-time black album.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what--?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, that, we said, yeah, we did say that.  We said we wanted to produce the best black album of all time.  And, that was, that was really the 'Control' record.  That was our, that was our attempt to do that.  And, our barometer was that, in the neighborhood we lived in in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], when we had our little, our little triplex there, we, you would always walk down the street, or ride down the street, and you would always hear music blasting out of everybody's house, and out of everybody's car.  And, our thought was, we want to be that music.  Whatever that soundtrack is in this part of L.A., we want to be the soundtrack for that.  And, that's what we set out to do.  And, I remember going back there after we had done the album and we pretty much achieved it.  We were pretty much--there was, I mean, 'cause the 'Control' record was, you know the "Control," song "Control," "Nasty," "What Have You Done for Me Lately," like those three songs in particular were blasting out of any, everybody's house, everybody's car.  We walked in the 7-Eleven, it's blasting at the 7-Eleven.  And, that's really what we set out to do.  The fact that it, you know, crossed over and really set pop music in a different direction.  And, you know, really changed the perception of what pop music could be from particularly from a, from a black artist, we had no idea.  But, yeah, I mean, that's, that's an accurate quote.  I mean, that's, that's what we really tried to do.  We figured, if, in our neighborhood, which is a black neighborhood, if we can make the songs that everybody was going to play, then that's really what we set out to do, and we were able to do that.
Story_ID: 648068
Speaker 1: And, I think, I know I knew about Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenny Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff] back in the day.  I know--I knew about Holland, Dozier and Holland [Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but, you never saw them, you know, really.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: And, Gamble and Huff you did, and Thom Bell--
Speaker 2: A little bit, yeah.  A little bit.
Speaker 1: On some level.  But, I think, I think, when you all hit it big, it came at a time when millions of people were watching the Grammys [Grammy Awards] and, and you know.  So, you're name became like, big, real big, and people actually knew who you were.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If they saw you, they said, "That's Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, was this--had you ever been a celebrity before (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well--
Speaker 1: I mean, in that sense, you know.
Speaker 2: In that sense?  Well, I think the celebrity part of our history, you know, dates back to obviously, you know, first of all being a local celebrity in our band.  First of all, me as a deejay certainly I was--in my little hometown in Minneapolis [Minnesota] I was definitely a celebrity.  Everybody knew who I was.  But, that was really never important to me.  I never wanted to be famous.  Like the famous part of it, I never, I'm not against it, I just never set out to be.  That's wasn't what I wanted to do.  I just wanted to make great music.  And, the choices that Terry and I made, after being in a band that was pretty visible.  I mean, anytime you're opening for Prince on a tour, you're paying--you're playing for, you know, fifteen, sixteen thousand people every night.  You know, that's pretty visible also.  But, the choice me and Terry made to be producers was because we thought that behind the scenes was really where we were most strong.  And, to have us behind the scene and then to have someone like Janet [Janet Jackson] in front, 'cause I wouldn't pay to see me do nothing, but I would pay to see Janet, you know.  So, that was a realistic view.  I think appearing in Janet's video for "Control" was probably the first time that people even recognized that we were the producers and all of that.  And, that just was a kind of an organic thing because she wanted to make a video for "Control."  She wanted it to be, you know, kind of a concert style video because she wasn't touring.  And, "Control" was the fourth, I believe it was the fourth single off the album.  So, she wasn't going to tour.  She had decided, "I'm not going to tour off 'Control' because I don't feel like I have enough songs.  I want to put--get another album under by belt first before I tour," which I thought was a very smart thing.  So, she said, "But, let's do a concert style video."  And, she always like the way, once again, going back to her love of The Time, she loved our little steps and our little dances and stuff.  And, she was working with Paula Abdul at the time as a choreographer.  And, Paula was like, "Man, let's do their steps.  Let's incorporate some of their stuff into what we do."  And, the "Control" video ended up begin pretty phenomenal.  Sonically, we redid, rather than just to take the existing track, we created a whole new track basically as we imagine the live version of the song would be, if she recorded it live.  And, we did it.  And, she came back, re-sang the whole thing.  And, so it had a real live feel to it.
Story_ID: 648069
Speaker 1: When we got the Grammy nominations for Album of the Year [Grammy Award for Album of the Year], Producer of the Year [Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical], and I can't remember, there was a third one we were nominated for too [Grammy Award for Best R and B Song].  And, we were asked to appear on the show, I remember Janet [Janet Jackson] saying, she wanted to do, she thought she wanted to do 'Control.'  But, the song we were nominated for in one of the categories was, 'What Have You Done for Me Lately.'  So, the producers of the show, actually, Ken Ehrlich [Kenneth Ehrlich] who nowadays I work with all the time.  But, Ken was like, "The rules were very strict."  They were like, "No.  The song you're nominated for is the song you're going to perform," you know.  So, we were like, 'What Have You Done for Me Lately,' that's the one.  So, we kind of took the same approach.  We totally, redid the song, did a live arrangement of the song to make it really feel different and special.  And, then it's the difference of performing it on the Grammy stage which was basically kind of what we had done in the 'Control' video, same type of thing.  The difference was is that you have, you know, twenty-five thousand, twenty-five thousand--25 million people or whatever the numbers were at that time, viewing the show all at the same time.  And, yeah, it definitely put us on the map as far as people knowing who we were.  But, you know, our faces and that.  But, it was interesting because before that even happened, we had publicist, Norman Winter, who just passed away recently.  And, Norman, did something that was pretty genius.  Back at that point in time when they did the Grammy announcements, they announced them at about five in the morning, six in the morning L.A. [Los Angeles, California] time, right; so that it would go out live to the shows on the East Coast.  To 'The Today Show' ['Today'], and I don't know that 'Good Morning America' was even around at that point, they might've been, but anyway, it was really early in the morning.  So, Norman said, "I think there's a good chance you guys are going to get a producer of the year nomination.  You guys, it'd be great if you guys showed up to the press conference."  And, we're like, "What time, man?"  He says, "Five in the morning."  I said, "Where we going to be at five in the morning, are you crazy?"  He said, "No."  He said, "Listen.  Hear me out."  He said, "So, let's say you get the nomination, okay?  The new--all the media is going to be there."  And, oh, by the way, all the media that day was, I think CNN, maybe CBS.  You know, maybe, I don't know that E! was even around that point in time, but it was only a few media.  It wasn't like today, right.  But, he said, "If you're there, they're going to interview you live, and everybody would know that you got a nomination."  We said, "Okay."  So, sure enough we show up.  We show up groggy, it's like five in the morning, whatever, we're sitting there.  And, they make the announcements and they go, "Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis," and every camera in the room goes (gesture) (makes sound) over to where me and Terry are sitting, right.  When the things wraps up, everybody comes over to us, "Can we get an interview?  Can we get an interview?  Can we get an interview?  Can we get an interview?"  So, Norman's theory, which he explained later, he said, "Here's my theory."  He said, "The other guys in the category are all either L.A. or New York [New York] guys.  They're well known."  I think it was David Foster and Russ Titelman, and I mean, it was just like really a who's who of producers, right.  Said, "These guys are known.  They've been producing records for years, everybody in the industry knows who they are," you know, so on and so forth.  "Nobody knows you guys.  You guys are a couple guys from Minneapolis [Minnesota] that used to play with Prince, and let's get you on an even playing field with these other guys who are already known."  And, he did that.  So, I remember the night of the actual Grammys.  And, I took my mom [Bertha Harris] as my date.  And, I remember seeing Jam Master Jay, from Run-DMC, when I was on my way in.  And, Jam Master Jay pulls me aside and he goes something to the effect of, "Man, if you all don't win this mother fucking chip, man, we going to turn this shit out, man."
Story_ID: 648070
Speaker 1: And, I was like, "Cool, man.  We good man.  We're good.  Don't worry about it.  Ain't no thing," right.  So, when they get on stage, I remember it was, I think it was, was it Brian Wilson of The Beach Boys and Michael McDonald I think were the two presenters.  They said our names; Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis.  And, I remember standing up, hugging my mom [Bertha Harris].  I got ready to walk to the stage, 'cause this was when producers still got awarded on the show, which it doesn't, doesn't happen anymore.  They changed it a while back.  But, that doesn't happ- but, this is when they still awarded producer of the year on the show.  I remember standing up, I got ready to go to the stage, and then I remembered Jam Master Jay, and I turned around and he was standing up with a big smile on his face, clapping his hands.  And, I went back and I think I gave him a high five, or I did something to acknowledge, "We ain't got to burn nothing down tonight, we're cool man.  It's all good, we won, right."  Just, just kind of do that.  If you watch the videotape of it, you'll see me turn around and do that, and that's why I did it.  When I got on stage, I got to thank my mom.  And, that was the best thing of, to this day, that was the best part of the whole thing.  Because my mom didn't get a chance to see me walk in a graduation 'cause I quit school.  Winning the Grammy [Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical] that night with her there, that was my graduation.  That was me in all of our hard work and her letting me chase my dream.  That was the culmination of it and that was amazing.  And, then (laughter), and then I remember Terry when he spoke he thanked all the women in his life that raised him.  I think was--he said something like that, which was very appropriate because he had, you know, a little bit of a broken family and there were a lot of people in his life that helped raised him and I thought it was, it was very nice.  He just thanked his mom [Vernetta Benton] and, you know, all that, right.  And, as we're walking off stage, and you can see this on the camera if you look real close, Terry's walking and all of a sudden his head goes like this.  And, I remember him saying to me, "I forgot to thank my wife."  And, so for Terry, 'cause what happens is after you win the Grammy, then they take through press and stuff, right.  So, you go to, you know, each of their press rooms, the still photographers, the radio people, the TV people, so on and so forth, right.  And, I remember each interview all Terry kept saying was, "Yeah, I just want to thank my wife, you know, I just, I really, I, you know, I got out there and I forgot to thank her, and I just want to thank her."  And, I, like, I don't know if it ruined his night.  I mean, only he can tell you that.  But, it was like foremost on his mind that he forgot to thank this wife.  And, I just, I always thought, "Damn, that's messed up."  'Cause this was at the, at that point, it's the biggest night of our career, at that point.  I mean, it was huge.  And, I don't know, they got divorced a few years later so I, I don't know if that had anything to do with it or not.  But, yeah, I know he was really regretful about that.  But, for me it was, it was such a special night and the bonus was getting to perform on the show.  'Cause--so, not only did we win the Grammy, we also got to perform 'What Have You Done for Me Lately' on the show.  And, then we snuck a little bit of 'Nasty' in the middle of it.  And, I--it's been talked about as one of the all-time, you know, performances on the show and, and it was great.  But, you know, we, if you think about that, if the idea would've been to stay famous and to stay in videos, we really didn't following that path.  We never were in another Janet [Janet Jackson] video after that.  I think we did, we might've, you can count on one hand the amount of videos that we even did in our career that we appeared in.  Because that was never our goal.  And, the goal was not to be in front of the public.  It made sense in Janet's case 'cause there was a nice, you know, organic thing that happened that was great.  But, after that, we really stepped back and moved back to the, to--behind the scenes which is what we really were comfortable with and really thought we were, we were better at.  But, it was nice to have that recognition for sure.
Story_ID: 648071
Speaker 1: Now you, you made some, a partnership with A&M Records in '91 [1991]?  Was that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Terry [Terry Lewis] and I in, around, right around the end of '89 [1989] after we, after the 'Rhythm Nation' ['Rhythm Nation 1814'] record came up and into 1990, we thought about having our own record label.  Because we really thought we were at the point where there were--we had basically always done work that had been offered to us.  And, we wanted to go out and really discover our own acts and, and produce them, and we thought a label would be a way to do that.  And, we negotiated with all the labels and we actually came to an agreement with CBS Records, which was Epic and Columbia [Columbia/Epic Label Group], they were under the CBS Records banner at the time.  And, we came to an agreement with them.  It made sense because all of the, The S.O.S. Band, Alexander O'Neal, Cherrelle, all those records were Epic [Epic Records].  Clarence [HistoryMaker Clarence Avant] had an association there.  We had a really good relationship with Walter Yetnikoff, who was the president and a guy name Tony Martell over there.  We just had really good relationships and we just thought that's the place to do what we want to do.  The one hitch in the, in the, in the plan was, we wanted to do a Time album because we had always felt like we had been fired and we didn't get a chance to leave on our own terms.  So, we thought, "Let's do a Time album on our own terms.  Let's make our own Time record.  And, then when that's over, we'll put our, you know, we'll take our, our, our performing hats off and we'll put our record company hats on and we'll do that."  Well, CBS didn't really feel too good about that.  Because their attitude was, "Wait a minute, we're going to give you all this money to start a label and then you're going to go make a record for," at the time I think Steve Ross [Steven Ross] was the head of Warner Brothers [Warner Communications, Inc.], it was kind of an ego thing.  It was like, "You're going to go make a record for Steve Ross after we gave you all this money?"  And, we're like, "Well, we're going to make a Time record.  I mean, that's where we come from.  I mean, we can't ignore our roots and we think that in the big picture we want to do this before we, we're happy to do the record company thing.  We, we are willing to do that.  We want to get this record out of us.  We have a Time record in us, we want to get it out."  And, they basically pulled the deal.  They said, "You know what? No.  If you're going to do that, you know, we're going to pull the deal."  And, we said, "Fine, pull the deal."  We didn't care.  We knew what, what we wanted to do.  So, we made an album that ended up being called 'Pandemonium.'  We ended up with our first actually number one record, which was "Jerk Out."  And, it was the first time that actually Terry and I actually wrote a Time song on a record.  And, it ended up being the biggest charting record we ever had.  The group basically had the same problems that they've always had, where people didn't get along for certain reasons.  And, I think everybody was in it for different reasons.  I mean, to me and Terry we're there for more of a spiritual thing.  We just felt like there wasn't closure, and let's close, close it the right way.  Or, let's go out on our own terms.  Some of the members I don't think were there for that.  I think some of them were there for a money grab.  That's fine.  But, we basically financed everything ourselves.  We, you know, we did everything ourselves.  At the end of the day, there was a couple of conversation that I thought were very greedy.  Terry--Jesse [Jesse Johnson] got kicked out the gr- or, we kicked Jesse out the group.  We basically fired Jesse.  And, then we were supposed to do a tour of Japan and it was for a lot of money.  And, we were on a call and I brought up that I think we should give Jesse a share of what we're going to make in Japan.  And, everybody said, "Well, what you--how much you talking about?"  And, I said, "I don't know."  I said, "I think we can all cough up like, I don't know, three grand, five grand apiece, you know, whatever.  Give him twenty-five thousand or something, you know, whatever."  We were going over there making millions of dollars.  And, a couple of the members were like, "Man, three thousand may not be a lot to you man, but that's a lot to me," and you know blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And, I was like, I was like, "Well, you know what, I quit, so, you can have my share," and I hung up.  And, Terry pretty much right after me, after trying to reason with them for a little while (laughter), he hung up.  So, Terry and I quit.  Jesse was fired.  The remaining members of The Time went over there and, of course, it was a whole different deal because the promoter in Japan said--what they didn't realize was that, Terry and myself were really the draws, even more so than Morris [Morris Day].  The Time in Japan was always looked at like, "Oh, it's--yeah, it's Morris' group, but that's Jimmy [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry's group, is The Time."  'Cause we were very, very well known in Japan for whatever reason.  Our records always did very well there.  So, of course, you know, that, that deal kind of got pulled off the table and they went over and made a little money and that--good for them.  But, me and Terry moved on to concentrating back on the record side.
Story_ID: 648072
Speaker 1: We, so, I say all that to say, when we were talking with A&M [A&M Records] before, A&M was--kind of creatively, A&M was our first choice.  We obviously had the two huge Janet [Janet Jackson] records there.  We had The Human League record there, which was huge.  And, we really liked Herb and Jerry; Herb Alpert and Jerry Moss, the A&M of A&M.  We loved those guys.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We, we--they were partners.  We really felt like they were mentors to Terry [Terry Lewis] and myself and, and they were great people.  They couldn't really afford the deal that we had structured.  But, it was kind of the advent of where the merger started happening with all the labels.  So, PolyGram [PolyGram Records] ended up buying out A&M for like three hundred and--I can't remember what it was, three hundred and some million dollars or something like that.  It was a lot of money at that time.  And, I remember getting a call from either Herb or Jerry.  And, they called and they said, "Hey, we got good news.  We can afford you guys now.  We just got bought."  And, we said, "Yeah, but we don't want to be with PolyGram."  And, they said, "No, no, no, we're going to stick around.  We're, we're going to be here.  So, it'll basically be just as it was, but we just got the cash to finance what you guys want to do."  We said, "Great."  And, first project we brought them was Sounds of Blackness.  And, by the time we did the Sounds of Blackness record, Herb and Jerry had been basically ousted, you know, they retired them.  And, we had a couple of guys looking at us now that are running the label going, "What is that?"  We're like, "The Sounds of Blackness."  And, they said, "Wait a minute.  We paid you all this money and you're bringing us a gospel record?"  And, we said, "Well, you don't understand what we're trying to do here."  I said, "We're trying to build a skyscraper a hundred stories high, right?  But in order to do that, first we got to dig a foundation about twenty stories deep."  I said, "So, this is our foundation and we're going to build everything from this."  And, I never forget all the--we ended up financing 'Sounds of Blackness' by ourselves because they wouldn't do it.  They wouldn't pay for the video.  They wouldn't pay for promotion.  They wouldn't pay for nothing.  So, much for being our partners.  Okay, so, that is what it is.  I remember, you know, I remember Grammy [Grammy Awards] night, we won, they won best gospel record [Grammy Award for Best Gospel Choir or Chorus Album].  They were the only--A&M was up for twelve Grammys that year.  That was the only one they won; was for that record.  And, I felt, we felt very vindicated by that.  But, it wasn't a good rela- it ended up not being a good relationship.  I mean, it was the right thing to do.  'Cause, I mean, the next record we did was Mint Condition.  And, they told us, "There's not a single on the Mint Condition record."  And, when 'Breakin' My Heart' ['Breakin' My Heart (Pretty Brown Eyes)'] went top five, pop, it's like, "Okay, there's not a single on the record?"  It's like, "Come on guys."  At some point we just kept thinking, you're going to trust us, you know. We've given you two huge Janet [Janet Jackson] records and a Human League record.  Haven't we at least gained the benefit of the doubt on this stuff at this point in time?"
Story_ID: 648073
Speaker 1: Now, Human League, I guess, that, you have to talk about that briefly.  That's a--
Speaker 2: Well, Human League--
Speaker 1: --big crossover, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Human League was the brilliance of John McClain.  John called us up, actually, actually, before we did Human League we did Herb Alpert.  No, no, I'm sorry, no, I, I take that back.  Let me start again.  Human League was the genius of John McClain.  And, John said to us, "You know, The Human League, the record they're trying to make is like basically what y'all do.  Like, they're trying to make synth records with like some soul in it.  That's what you guys do."  So, I remember we met with the guys.  They were all from Sheffield, England, so it was obviously a little bit of a culture clash, and culture shock.  But, we had them come to Minneapolis [Minnesota], and actually the song 'Human' was one of the few times that we actually had sort of an ultimatum in the studio.  Because when we recorded the song, Terry [Terry Lewis] had done the vocal with Phil Oakey [Philip Oakey], he was the lead singer.  And, Phil had always sang very robotically on songs, right.  That was kind of his style.  And, Terry kind of got this very warm vocal out of him.  And, said, "You can't sing this song like that.  It's got to be more, you know, like that."  And, he did a great job on the vocal.  So, when we put the background vocals on it, the girls in the group, their voices didn't fit what we were trying to do.  So, we had this girl name Lisa Keith who was like our all-star background singer.  I mean, she just was tremendous.  Her and Terry went in, layered these beautiful harmonies in the background.  So, I remember we get to the--we play it for them, right.  And, I remember there was this kind of weird, you know, buzz in the air, right.  So, the very next day, Phil who is, happens to be singing, excuse me, Phil Oakey was the lead singer happens to be seeing one of the girls in the group, Joanne [Joanne Catherall].  And, he walks in the studio and he says to me and Terry, "I just have to say that, I have to object to that girl, that other girl being on the song."  And, we're like going, "Huh?"  And, he said, "I just have to say that I object to that other girl being on the song."  Me and Terry look at each other and we go, "Oh, you just have to say that you object to the girl being on the song."  And, he goes, "Yes.  I have to say, that I object to the girl being on the song."  We said, "We got you, dude.  We got you, cool.  All right."  So, we call the label and we said, "Listen, let's do it like this, their songs they can mix whatever way they want to mix them.  Our songs, we're going to mix them the way we want to mix them or we're pulling our record."  And, they heard 'Human' and they said, "Okay, no, no, no, you mix them your way, whatever you want to do."  And, of course, it ended up being, you know, worldwide number one record.  So, that was--normally, our sessions never ever got to that point.  That was one of probably two or three ultimatums we've ever had like that.  But, it's tough when you're in the group with somebody who you're going home and sleeping with; that's tough.  But, we understood that position with him because, you know, Terry was going out with Karrie--Karyn White.  So, we understood the whole dynamic of that kind of thing.  So, he said what he needed to say.  We understood him.  So, you know, he can say, "Well, I told them that," you know, whatever.  It's like okay, great.  So, anyway, but Human League was great and, and John McClain is, you know, once again, great, a great call on that one.
Speaker 1: Did--I have to ask you this, did you ever see the parody of the song in 'Fear of a Black Hat' the movie?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Fear of a Black Hat'?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Was it good?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll look it up, I'll look it up on YouTube.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Check it out.
Speaker 2: I will.  Absolutely.
Story_ID: 648074
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994], you tried to buy the Minnesota Timberwolves.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Terry and I were huge Timberwolves fans--we're huge basketball fans first of all.  But, the fact that Minnesota finally got a franchise, we were huge fans.  We actually did the theme song for the Timberwolves.  We--Tim Leiweke [Timothy Leiweke] who used to run AEG [Anschutz Entertainment Group] and now runs the Toronto Maple Leafs [Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment, Ltd.], he was like the marketing guy for the Timberwolves back in '94 [1994].  And, he said to us, "Hey, we'd love if you guys would do a song.  Now, we don't really have a budget though.  What would you guys like?"  And, we said, "Courtside seats."  And, he said, "Okay.  Okay, I can do that.  I can do courtside seats."  It's like, "Okay."  So, we ended up getting five courtside seats forever.  For as long as we lived up in Minnesota, we had our seats.  And, that was tremendous.  And, but, we had all-star game in Minnesota for, I think it was '94 [1994], I think that's when we all-star game.  And, the team was going through some troubles.  Not because they weren't drawing attendance, they were drawing good.  But, because Harv and Marv who were the--Harvey Ratner and Marv Wolfenson [Marvin Wolfenson] who were the two guys that owned the team, they were having trouble meeting their obligations.  They were in the real estate business, and there was a real estate crash that happened back then.  And, they were trying to get the city to buy the arena [Target Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and all of this kind of stuff was going on.  So, the rumor was that the team was going to move.  And, me and Terry would sit courtside at the games and we'd look around at everybody sitting courtside and we'd go, "Look at all these rich motherfuckers around here, man.  Why don't somebody buy the team, man?  That ain't right, man.  Why don't somebody do some--I can't believe somebody is not trying to buy the team," you know, around here, whatever, right.  So, we're sitting there doing it.  So, then, all-star week happens and they do a big newspaper article, right.  And, it's all abou- and Magic Johnson's coming to town and Magic, they interview Magic.  And, they ask Magic, they say, "Hey, now, the Timberwolves are having trouble finding an owner," and you know, "Who do you think would make some great owners?"  And, Magic goes, "I think Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis would make great owners.  They love basketball, but they understand entertainment.  And, they understand that it has to go together.  And, they're already promoting concerts at the arena anyway.  I'm sure they could probably get a hockey team up here."  And--'cause we had lost our hockey team [Minnesota North Stars].  "And, then they, so, they'd have the arena sold out a bunch of nights," and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So, the owners of the Timberwolves read that article.  And, our phone rang the very next day.  And, said, "Hey, would you guys be interesting in buying the Timberwolves?"  And, we said, "Well, we weren't thinking about it.  But, let us make some phone calls and we'll get back to you."  So, we called Magic.  And, we said, "Magic, you interested if we go in to buy this team, would you be interested?"  And, he said, "Yeah."  He said, "I'll go in with you."  And, he said, "And, I--Denzel [Denzel Washington] will go in with you, and Janet [Janet Jackson] will go in with you."  And, he says, "I know the people."  He said, "We can buy it."  We got $50 million of financing from Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation].
Story_ID: 648075
Speaker 1: The gentleman that was, there was an African American group that was buying, or that had bought the Denver Nuggets at the time, they came in and offered to advise us, walk us through the process.  David Stern sent up his, well, he came to town and then he sent up his number two guy who might've been Adam Silver at the time.  I think, I think, I think it was Adam Silver.  And, we basically went through the deal, and all the scenarios of the deal and what it could be.  And, the thing, there was a couple things for us that didn't--because we didn't have like money to burn.  I mean, we had, we weren't billionaires, so it wasn't that kind of thing.  We were trying to make some sound business decisions.  But, we, we found a hockey owner that was willing to move the team.  There was a weird deal that they had done for the suites that was kind of weird.  The mayor at the time was a black woman named Sharon Sayles Belton.  We talked to her because we said, "You know, the, your constituents are pissed about the city having to bail the stadium [Target Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota] out," or the arena out.  I said, "What if we bought the arena along with the team?  But, you have to then give us some tax breaks on the parking and the concessions and those types of things.  But, then that way, you look like a hero to your taxpayers.  We get--." The valuable asset to us wasn't the team, it was the arena.  Because the team was selling for 80 million.  The arena was selling for 30 million.  So, for 110 million we were in.  There were two new franchises coming to--at the time.  And, I wish I could remember what they were.  Oh, Vancouver [Vancouver Grizzlies] and Toronto [Toronto Raptors], I think, at that point in time.  Each of those teams to come in the league were paying three hundred and some million; some crazy amount of money.  That money all got distributed amongst the owners of the team.  So, we said, "Well, if we get in, that's almost like getting a rebate," right.  Target [Target Corporation] had the naming rights for it.  But, they were only paying like a million dollars a year.  But, they had signed a contract that was a perpetual contract that they couldn't get out of.  I said, "How can we get them out of there?"  That million a year for naming right for an arena is, that's low, you know.  There's a bunch of companies, remember Minnesota had, you know, General Mills [General Mills Inc.], and 3M, and all these huge corpora- Honeywell [Honeywell International, Inc.], all these huge corporations.  It's like, how is Target getting this for a million a year.  So, anyway, there was, there was a whole lot of due diligence that went on.  And, then there was a report that, that they were going to move the team to New Orleans [Louisiana], and we heard it on 'SportsCenter.'  We heard it on ESPN.  So, we called Magic [Magic Johnson].  Magic was on the other side of the world and he said, "Stern isn't going to let the team to move to New Orleans.  That's not going to happen.  So, don't even sweat that."  Well, as soon as the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] found out that Magic was involved with another team, that's when they made him the ownership offer for the Lakers.  Well, once--and he had to do that.  I mean, that was, the Lakers are his heart and he--they promised him a lot and, you know, listen--you see what he's done.  So, once he was out, kind of around that same time a billionaire owner, a billionaire guy came in name Glen Taylor, and he just said, "I don't need to do any due diligence, I'm worth a billion dollars.  The team's what, 80 million or 70 million, whatever.  I'll just buy the team."  And, he wrote Harv [Harvey Ratner] and Marv [Marvin Wolfenson] and check, got him out, let them keep their courtside seats, and that was it.  And--but, what we were successful in doing was keeping the team from moving.  'Cause that team would've moved if we wouldn't had stepped in and, kind of made them think about, why are you moving the team?  Let's just find an owner here that wants to keep the team.  You know, and to this day, the owners, the Timberwolves [Minnesota Timberwolves] are still around.  And I, it's interesting, we would've made a hundred and ten million dollar investment; and I think the Timberwolves now are worth about $400 million.  So, it would've been, would've been a good investment.  Didn't work.  But, we, we dipped our toe into it.  It was, it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 648076
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I don't know if it's a good time to talk about Kirby Puckett.  But, maybe it is, I don't know--since we're talking about the Timberwolves [Minnesota Timberwolves].
Speaker 2: Sure, we can.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, you're good friends with Kirby Puckett, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, Kirby Puckett was a great friend, and we just, we loved watching him play.  We had a chance to be at both the '87 [1987] and the '91 [1991] World Series.  We became really good friends with Carl Pohlad who owned the Minnesota Twins at the time.  And, it was interesting because Carl Pohlad actually financed our first studio [of Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.] because we had a lot of trouble.  We would go to banks and stuff and they'd always say, "Well, what do you got for collateral?"  And, we'd show them the Billboard charts and go, "See all these records we got here on the charts?  These are all going to pay us a bunch of money," and they all kind of laughed at us.  And, I remember Carl Pohlad called us and he--one day and he said, "Hey, what are you guys trying to do?"  And, we said, "Oh, we want to build a studio."  And, he said, "Okay.  Well, why--what's the problem?"  And, I said, "Well, we don't have the proper collateral."  And, he said, "Well, you guys got hit records, right?"  And, I said, "Yeah."  He says, "You getting paid for them?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "That's all I need."  He said, "Let's, let's go into business together."  And, he was our banker.  Actually, I still have a little bit of money at the bank he used to own [Marquette National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  He doesn't own it anymore.  But, I still have a little bit of money over there.  But, he became our banker and the one who really put, put us into business.  So, we got to know Kirby Puckett really well going to the Twins games and stuff.  And, and it was a really unique experience.  We also were good friends with Dave Winfield who ended up playing with the Twins for quite a while; a couple of years.  Actually, got his three thousandth hit with the Twins.  And, it was pretty unique experience when they went into the hall of fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York], they went in the same year.  So, to actually to the hall of fame induction and watch both Kirby Puckett and Dave Winfield get inducted, it was just an amazing experience.  And, unfortunately, you know, Kirby had a very untimely death.  There still, to me, really hasn't been a player like him.  I mean, he's the most unlikely looking ball player that you would ever see.  But, man, he just was so much grit and so much hustle and heart.  And, he lived his life like that too.  I mean, he was, he was a tremendous human being.  So, it's funny 'cause I have, I have a statue that I actually bought that's him, it's actually Peanuts, the dog Snoopy in Kirby Puckett uniform that I love.  We bought for an auction.  It was a Charles Schulz [Charles M. Schulz] auction up in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and we bought that.  And, then, and my partner Terry [Terry Lewis] has, actually at our studio, he has a, a jersey and a, and a whole big plaque that's on the wall of our studio.  So, when you first walk in, Kirby Puckett is one of the first thing you see.  But, it's great, just a great human being and I'm glad we got a chance to, to get to know him and cross paths with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 648077
Speaker 1: So at, at the balance of the '90s [1990s], what kind of music were you producing?
Speaker 2: Well, we, luckily, had continued to have a lot of success with, with Janet [Janet Jackson].  'The Velvet Rope' album which actually go off to a pretty slow start.  It ended up being one of the most successful albums and one of the most successful tours that she did.  And, critically, probably was the best reviewed Janet album we had ever done.  So, that was cool.  We finally made a record with Mariah Carey which we had never worked with her and it turned out she was huge fan of ours.  And, but, for whatever reason, Tommy Mottola who was her husband but also ran Sony Music [Sony Music Entertainment] wasn't fans of us and never really let us work together.  So, when we finally did get a chance to work together which was, I think, as '99 [1999] went into 2000 on the 'Rainbow' album, we ended up with a number one record with her, and 98 Degrees were really hot at the time.  And, Joe who was just kind of starting off as an R and B singer.  We had a record called, "Thank God I Found You," which went number one and was a huge record for her.  So, that was a lot of fun.  We had actually at that point in time dissolved our relationship with A&M Records, and started into a relationship with Universal [Universal Music Publishing Group].  And, we did the 'How Stella Got Her Groove Back' soundtrack which was a lot of fun to do.  We met with the director I remember and we--he asked us did we like reggae music.  And, I said, "No, not really."  And, said, "Well, you know this takes place in Jamaica, right?"  I said, "Yeah."  I said, "But, Terry [Terry Lewis] loves reggae music and so if we can make reggae music that I like then we really are going to hit a home run."  And, I remember we did a record ["Luv Me, Luv Me"] with Shaggy and Janet together, which ended up being a huge record.  We, we couldn't get single rights on any of the songs which was kind of the record label's fault.  But, we got a lot of great songs.  We worked--we got, you know, Mary J. Blige.  We got to work with K-Ci and JoJo, which was kind of cool.  They were, they were really hot at the time.  And, we ended up with a double platinum record off of it.  So, we were, we were actually pretty happy with the result and the movie was quite successful too.  So, and you know, it got--it gave, your relationships man, it introduced us to Angela Bassett.  I remember when we did the video, and they said, "You'll never get all the actors to agree to appear in the video."  And, I said, "Well, why not?  We'll just ask."  And, sure enough, I remember I went to New York [New York], I got Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg] to do a part in the video.  I got Angela Bassett to come up and do her part.  I got Taye Diggs to do something.  And, so, the video was a lot of fun, and, you know, everybody was in the spirit of it and did it.  And, it was a lot of fun.  A lot of--a lot of success came off of that.
Story_ID: 648078
Speaker 1: Now, also in '99 [1999], you produced the hit, 'Open My Heart' with Yolanda Adams, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Absolutely.  Yolanda Adams' story was, we tried to sign Yolanda when we were at Perspective, when we still had Perspective Records.  And, I remember we went to A&M [A&M Records], our partners, and we said, "We want to sign Yolanda Adams."  And, they said, "Well, doesn't she still have two albums left at the label she's on?"  And, we said, "Yeah, but, that doesn't matter.  We--let's sign her because one of the albums will probably be, we can probably get the label to do a greatest hits album and a live album.  And, then she's out of the deal.  And, by the way, maybe we'll produce something on her album on the other label and get her--if we get her a hit there then it sets us up for what we're getting ready to do on our label."  You know, we always were trying to think of, you know, the big picture of stuff.  Not, this belongs to me and all that territorial stuff.  It's like, no, this is Yolanda Adams.  She's a great artist.  Let's give her hit over here and great but then, that--we then have her sign and great.  So, the label wouldn't go along with it.  And, she ended up signing with Elektra Records.  And, Sylvia Rhone who ran Elektra Records at the time called us.  And, she said, "Listen," she said, "I know you guys really made a run at Yolanda.  I ended up signing her.  Even though she wouldn't be on your label, would you be interested in working with her?"  And, we said, "Absolutely, we would."  So, we ended up doing 'Open My Heart.'  And, it was interesting because when we did the record, when Sylvia heard the record, she cried.  She just, she just loved it.  So, when the album came out as a lot of times happens when you do, you know, your, your research and all of your, you know, marketing stuff, there were two other singles that came out.  There were a little more up tempo and a little more contemporary, I guess, sounding, and neither one of them caught.  So, then we kept saying kind of, you know, you know, we don't run Elektra Records, but we kept saying, "If there's a song that made you cry, why wouldn't you go with that song?  I mean, it doe- and we know it doesn't fit, okay, it's a ballad, and it's--," you know, all of the things that radio hated at that time.  They always wanted up tempo and energy, and you know, but, you know, sometimes just go with your gut.  I mean, don't you think if you like it, somebody else is going to like it.  So, they ended up giving the record to Elroy [Elroy Smith] at GC- I think it was GCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  And, he played the record and he said the phone lit up like instantly.  "Who is that?  I love that.  Play that again."   And, by the end of the week, it was like one of their most played records, their most requested record.  And, Elektra finally gave it the green light to actually become a single.  And, it was one of those life changing, for me anyway, life changing songs.  Just in the sense of, I've always thought of music as being really this divine entity.  And, we really don't make the music it just flows through us.  You know, He gives us the gifts, and the music just kind of flows.  But, when you do it right, it really touches people.  You know, the other record we did like that, to me, was 'Optimistic' by Sounds of Blackness.  Just that record that, yeah, it was hit record but more than that, the way it touch people and made people and, you know, their days better and, you know, whatever.  That to me is the true gift of music, right.  And, that was--those, so that record and 'Open My Heart' was, that was everything to me of what music, of what the best in music is all about.  And, Yolanda was an incredible artist.  Sylvia Rhone really put a lot of backing and muscle behind the record once she saw it go.  And, you know, it was a--it was a huge record.  We got nominated for a Stellar Award for that, which I was very proud of, that the gospel community welcomed us, you know, into their home for that.  And, it was like a career record for her, and well deserved.  And, it was everything--you know, and I didn't even--and you know, it's funny, because one hand I could say, "Well, man that could've been on our label."  But, at the end of the day, you know, everything happens the way it's supposed to happen.  And, the fact that Yolanda got out there and did what she was supposed to do, that to me was more important.  And, once again, it's a career song.  It's the kind of song that she will be singing for the rest of her life, and audiences will love it.  And, that's--it's nice as a songwriter to have a part of something like that.
Story_ID: 648079
Speaker 1: Now, here's a question about something I didn't know anything about, and I guess I've heard it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's the theme for TNT's NBA [National Basketball Association]--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Basketball (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) basketball broadcast.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: How does it--can you hum it?  How does that go?
Speaker 2: That was the one that went, I got to get the right key, (makes musical sounds).  It was (makes musical sounds).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, that was cool.  I mean, listen, we, we, you know, we had great relationship with the NBA.  And they, TNT, came to us and said, "Would you do some--?"  We actually did, we not only did that; that was back in the day when TNT did basketball, but TBS also did basketball.
Speaker 1: Oh, right, right.
Speaker 2: And, we did 'Higher Ground.'  We did a version of 'Higher Ground.'
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Stevie Wonder's 'Higher Ground' for the TBS broadcast.  So, we actually had both broadcast for about three or four years.  And, then, and then they switched to the, I think the music that they're currently using now is still the music they switched to back then.  But, yeah.  That was very, it was, it was a lot of fun.  It was a lot of fun.  And, you know, once again it's just, you know the fact that you don't know that is, that's cool.  I mean, but it's, you know, we've, we've had a lot of nice little things, a nice varied pallete of, of things in our career.  And, that's, that's fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, it's really remarkable to me the diversity of your music and Human League [The Human League], you know, 'Tender Love,' NBA theme (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Janet Jackson.  I mean, it's just, I don't know--
Speaker 2: Well, we did in '96 [1996] we did some of the opening music for the Olympics in Atlanta [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which was significant 'cause the song was called 'Welcome to the World,' and the day after that song played at the Olympics my first son [Tyler Harris] was born.  So, it was truly welcome to the world.  So, yeah, I mean, we've had a chance to touch a whole lot of stuff; very, very fortunate, very blessed.
Story_ID: 648080
Speaker 1: Now, we didn't ask you when you got married and how you met your wife.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Sure.  Okay, so, I met Lisa [Lisa Padilla Harris] in '88 [1988].  And, Terry [Terry Lewis] and I, it was when Terry was going out with--maybe '87 [1987], 'cause it was when Terry was going out with, with, with Karyn White.  They weren't married, they were just going out.  No, no, no, no, no, I take that back.  Let me start, let me start over.  I met Lisa in--what year did 'Monkey' come out?  Do you have that on your list, George Michael?
Speaker 1: Oh, George Michael.  That, that was in the--
Speaker 2: Was that, was that, when was that?  That had to be like '89 [1989] probably, right?  I'm guessing--
Speaker 1: Possibly, yeah--
Speaker 2: --eighty-nine [1989], '90 [1990], something around there.  Okay, so, okay, so probably--or maybe '88 [1988].  Okay, so let's go, let's say '88 [1988], we'll try '88 [sic. 1987] (laughter).  We actually got asked to produce George Michael and he was, you know, at the time just superhot.  I mean, had all the hits with Wham! and now was doing his own solo album.  And, it turned out that George Michael was a really big fan of the remixes we had done, of a couple of remixes we had done for Janet [Janet Jackson].  One was for the song 'Nasty.'  We did a, what we call the 'Cool Summer Mix' ['Nasty (Cool Summer Mix)'].  And, one was for a song called 'Diamonds' that we did with Janet and her Herb Alpert together.  And, what he liked about them was that they were really funky tracks but they had chords in them.  And, he said to us, "That every time I try to put chords into something, it takes the funk out it.  Somehow you guys know how to put the chords in it and keep it funky.  And, that's what I want to do with this song 'Monkey.'  I want to keep it funky but I want the chords in there."  So, we said, "Okay, cool."  I said, "I think we can pull that off."  So, he decided he wanted, at this point in time we were recording everything in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  But, he said he wanted to work in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] 'cause he was just coming back from, you know, an island or something on vacation.  So, we said, "Okay, cool."  Didn't want him to catch a cold up there.  And, so, we went to L.A.  The sessions with George Michael pretty much went like, he'd come in for about thirty minutes and sing and leave.  And, we would be like, "Okay, what are we going to do tonight?  We going to go see a movie?"  We going to--I mean, 'cause there was really nothing to do.  Now, he came in and sang great.  But, he just wanted to hit it and quit it, and get out.  That was kind of his thing.  So, I remember whatever, I don't remember the studio we were recording at, but there was a young lady that Terry was seeing and he brought, so one night at the studio he brings--she brings a friend of hers, right.  And, the friend of hers is Lisa, right.  So, George does his usual thing.  Shows up for a couple minutes, thirty minutes, sings, leaves.  So, it happened to be, I think the club was Paradise 24 [Los Angeles, California] that night, it was like the big club that night.  So, we decided we'd all go to Paradise 24.  So, we all go and hang out and it's, you know, me and Terry, some other friends and this girl he was kind of seeing, and Lisa, and a few other people.  So, we all hang out.  We have a nice time.  After the club we decide to go have breakfast.  So, my, my line, like Lisa had a Suzuki Samurai, and I don't know whether anybody remembers Suzuki Samurais but, they were like a really cool truck when they first came out.  And, then about a year later they turned into like a fire trap or something, like they rolled over or some--like they were the most dangerous truck.  But, this was back when they were still cool, right.  And, as we were walking out, I said, to Lisa, I said, "Hey, you got a Suzuki Samurai?"  And, she said, "Yeah."  And, I said, "Oh, I've never ridden in one of those before."  And, said, "Well, come on a ride with me."  And, I said, "Yeah, okay."  That was my, my good little line, right.  So, anyway, we went to breakfast and the whole thing.  Now, at the time, we were both seeing other people.  So, there was nothing serious going on.  Terry decided on the weekend to go to Las Vegas [Nevada] and he said, "Why don't you invite Lisa to come along?"  And, I said, "Yeah, okay.  Why not."  So, I invited her.  And, we had a kind of an awkward time in Vegas 'cause like I say we were both seeing other people and we were attracted to each other, but didn't really act on it because, you know, we were loyal to who we were with.  We were both with knuckleheads at the time, you know.
Story_ID: 648081
Speaker 1: And, probably, so after that, I saw her at a New Edition, I think--no, it was either a Cherrelle birthday party or a New Edition party or something.  And, I remember meeting her parents.  And, I remember her dad like looked at me like death, like, don't you dare touch my daughter, like, he looked at me like that.  Her mom [Bernardette Padilla] was like real nice.  I realize later on it was because the knucklehead she'd been with before, he thought, here she's bringing another knucklehead around, right.  He might've been right actually.  But, anyway, then, then, I remember like September, October of, September of '89 [1989], she came to the 'Rhythm Nation' ['Rhythm Nation 1814'] party when we were launching 'Rhythm Nation.'  And, we did a big party at, I think we did it at Prince's club, at Glam Slam [Los Angeles, California], if I'm not mistaken.  And, it was one of those moments where, it was like in a movie, like where there's like a ton of people around you and it's all noisy and all crazy, but you're like the only two people in the room.  And, we were having this conversation back and forth, and it was just like, there was nobody else in the room.  I didn't want to talk to anybody else, she didn't want to talk to anybody else.  We were both at this point split from the people we were, we were with.  So, now fast forward to Christmas, right around Christmastime.  Now, my mom [Bertha Harris] was born on New Year's Day.  And, every year on New Year's Day, I spend it with my mom.  That was just our little routine that we did.  So, I remember my mom saying, "What are you going to do for New Year's?"  And, I said, "Well, I'm going to spend with you, right?"  And, she said, "Well, who's this Lisa [Lisa Padilla Harris] girl that, that I've been hearing you talk about?"  And, I said, "Oh, she's just girl in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]," you know, whatever, whatever.  She said, "I think you should go to L.A. and see Lisa."  And, I said, "Mom," I said, "you don't even know her."  And, she said, "No, but I see the way you talk about her, and I just, I think you should probably go with her--go see her."  And, I said, "But," I said, "so, we're not going to be together on your birthday?"  And, she said, "We don't need to be together on my birthday.  We're together all the time, you know.  Just go 'head and go.  I think it would be great."  I said, "Okay, cool."  So, I ended up going to L.A.  We went out that night, New Year's Eve night, we went out.  And, I like to say after that night, we've been together ever since.  And, we pretty much have been together ever since.  And, then we got married in '94 [1994], so, we, obviously had took about four years of arm twisting to actually get me to the, to the altar.  But, I really felt like Lisa was my soulmate in that she, there was always something that women did all the time.  And, women would always say to me at some point in time into the relationship they would always say, "You love music more than you love me."  And, that was like the kiss of death for me, if you said that because if you think that, then, first of all, it's two totally separate things so you can't compare them.  And, Lisa was probably the only person that never said that to me.  She always said, "I totally get it."  She was in the industry.  She was a stylist for, for movies and videos and stuff.  So, she got that side of it.  And, I was always really reluctant.  I always said, "I'm never getting married and I'm never having kids."  And, I think a lot of that stemmed from, you know, my relationship with my dad [James "Cornbread" Harris, Jr.] and watching the things that he gave up career wise to get married and have kids.  So, I just said, "I'm never getting married and I'm never going to have kids."  Lisa always said, "I want to get married and I want to have kids."  And, we almost agreed to disagree.  We almost said, "Well, other than the fact we disagree on that, we really get along great."  And, after like I say about four years of arm twisting she was like, "What are you waiting for?"  And, I thought, yeah, what am I waiting for?  You're obviously the girl, so, and we ended up getting married.  And, we actually, we actually secretly got married in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] because we wanted to just keep it amongst ourselves.  And, then six months later we had this big blowout wedding that like every girl wants to have.  Well, not every girl, but a lot of girls want to have a big blowout wedding.  And, it was great because we had the wedding without the pressure.  You know, like, 'cause we were already married.  And, I remember we told the preacher, he was like, "Where are the papers?"  And, where are the such and such and such, and I was like, "We're already married.  Just go through the thing like you would go through it."  He says, "What?"  And, I said, I said, "We're already married.  We got married in Vegas six month ago."  I said, "This is just for show."  And, he said, "Oh, okay, cool, cool."  He was fine.  It was O.C. Smith, actually.  The guy that sang 'Little Green Apples.'  He actually, did the, the service and stuff and it was, it was very cool.  It was very cool.  And, now, you know, we've been married, it'll be twenty years this New Year's.  And, we got three beautiful children [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris].  And, she made a promise to me knowing the situation with my dad.  And, she said, "I'm never going to let the kids get in the way of something that you really want to do, if you want to do it.  I'm never going to say, 'Well, you can't do that because of the kids.'"  And, interestingly enough, there's never been anything that I've wanted to do that gets in the way of the kids.  As a matter of fact, I do my whole schedule around my kids.  So, but that's my, that's my marriage story.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure.
Story_ID: 648082
Speaker 1: And, well, in two--at the turn of the century, 2000, you made another deal to, who was it, was it--?
Speaker 2: Was it with Arista [Arista Records]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was that the Arista deal?
Speaker 1: It was the Arista deal, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The Arista deal (laughter), the Arista deal didn't work.  And, you know, it's interesting, the Arista deal was done with L.A. Reid, and we had done, we had had success with L.A. Reid.  We had done Blu Cantrell for him.  We had done Usher with great success for him.  And, we grew up with L.A.  A matter fact, L.A.--not, grew, grew up with him, you know, physically, but grew up in the industry with him.  I mean, him and Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], came along at very much the same time myself and Terry did.  And, actually, I introduced him to [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant.  Because Clarence Avant had told us early on, "If you ever come across somebody who's really talented and maybe their business isn't right or they need something, would you just introduce them to me," and whatever.  And, L.A. came to me and asked me at a certain point of their career when they was just kind of taking off and they wanted to have their business end correct.  And, he said, "Would you introduce me to Clarence?"  And, I said, "Absolutely," and I called Clarence.  So, we had known each other for quite a long time.  Back in the day when everybody thought we were like bitter enemies we would be having lunch together and dinner together and people would walk up to the table and they'd go, "Wait a minute Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis, L.A. and Babyface, ain't y'all enemies?"  And, we're like, "No, we're not."  And, they go, "Oh, man, okay.  Shoot, I thought, I thought y'all didn't like each other."  I said, "Why?"  I say, "That's," you know I always looked at it like, if I'm worried about the records they're making--there's a hundred records on the chart, right.  They got four or five of them and we got four or five of them, I'm worried about the other ninety.  I'm not worried about the ones we have.  Our records are going to be fine.  I'm not worried about it.  So, that was always kind of the approach.  So, we always got along really well.  L.A. gave us very--what we liked about L.A., was going into it, he gave us very specific things.  He said, "I would love an artist that's young, fresh, sexy, vibrant, like Janet [Janet Jackson].  You know, when you first started working with her.  And, I would like a band.  I would like a band like when you guys did Mint Condition.  I want guys that can play instruments and actually write songs and," you know, that kind of thing.  And, we basically said, "Okay, you ordered it, that's what we're going to bring to you."  And, we brought him a girl named Nodesha who was just a fantastic dancer.  Sort of reminded me voice wise a little bit of Aaliyah, rest her soul.  But, just was a fireball dancer.  Just like one of the best dancers I've ever seen in my life and just attitude for days.  We brought him a group call Morris and Slick [ph.], which was three guys out of New York [New York].  The lead singer sounded very much like Marvin Gaye with the kind of grit on his voice.  But, they were the hip hop generation and they were great song writers, but, you know, their sampling, and, what they did was like one of the great--greatest albums we ever did that nobody's ever heard.  As it turned out Nodesha ended up, we, some of it is timing.  Because in, in music at that point in time, there was a divide between what was pop music and what was R and B music.  It wasn't like the way it is now where it's all kind of merged together.  And, so, everybody looked at Nodesha who was a black girl and said, "Well, your records are too pop sounding."  Whereas now days everybody would totally be like, "Oh, that's--we love that."  But, it's timing.  We decided to take it to Japan.  We once again had a really good foothold in Japan with, with different projects we had worked on.  And, we thought, let's go to Japan and do this.  And, we ended up having a great deal of success in Japan.  She just wowed the crowds, everywhere we went, the whole thing.  So, that was good.  Never got the record released in America really.  So, that one didn't work.  Morris and Slick, by the time their record was ready to come out, there really wasn't a relationship.  He had, he was in the process of changing.  Clive Davis was switching to a new situation and there was a whole lot of behind the scenes kind of upheaval they was happening in that system.  So, it never, it never came off.  I mean, we made great records.  But, that's what happens and that's--it goes back to what I said earlier, you can just made the records, make them as good as you could possibly make them 'cause once they come out, or don't come out, in this case, there's nothing you could do at that point.  But, I'll go back nowadays and I'll listen to the Morris and Slick record and it's one of the best records we ever worked on; absolutely, hands down.  And, it will see the light of day, I would guess.  I would guess next year we're going to be in a situation and release some songs from that record 'cause it's an absolutely incredible record.
Story_ID: 648083
Speaker 1: Okay, so.  So, let's see, let me ask you about the Essence Awards and Grammy Awards of 2002, I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The Grammy Award [Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording], I think came before the Essence Award that year.  I think the Grammy Award was--well, the Grammy was in February.  I know that because that, that was kind of when it always, you know, was.  And, I think we won for 'All for You,' which was kind of cool because it was a dance category and we always envisioned it as a dance song.  We actually, sampled a song called 'Glow of Love' ['The Glow of Love'] by a group called Change.  Which is actually a group we worked with back in early in our career.  And, Luther Vandross did the lead vocal on the song, originally on the Change version of the song.  And, at that point, I was always a big fan of, I was a huge fan of sampling because I always thought it was cool to take something that nobody had heard before, and it--I mean, it was, it was a song that some people had heard before like if you were a club goer back in that day you were familiar with 'Glow of Love.'  But, if you weren't, you never heard it.  And, it was interesting because with Janet [Janet Jackson] I would always play her samples and then she would either know it or not know it.  And, I remember when I played 'All for You.'  I played her the track and she was like, "Oh, I love this, I love this."  I said, "Yeah, remember this?"  And, she goes, "Remember what?"  Like she didn't have a clue.  But, one of her dancers, she had a dancer named Shawnette [Shawnette Heard], Shawnette walked in the room and said, "Oh, this is my jam.  Oh, I love this.  I totally remember this song."  So, we always kind of felt good when that happened because we always felt like, you know what, if we get a song that without people knowing the sample, if it feels it's really good, we know that people that know the sample are going to love the song 'cause they're going to reminisce about, you know, what they were--, "I used to roller skate to this," or whatever.  So, we felt really good about that particular record.  And, so, that record has a distinction as a matter of fact of being--at least the way that the pop and the R and B charts were set up in that day, when that song came out it was the only record ever to be added to 100 percent of pop stations and 100 percent of R and B stations.  Nobody said, "Oh, we'll wait a week."  Everybody put it on right away.  And, that, I don't think that's been done since then.  And, of course, the charts have changed and all of that.  But, that, that record I believe is, is still, that's the, that's the goal.  I mean, that's what everybody tries to do.  And, of course, the record went number one.  It was a huge record.  It was the spearhead for a huge tour for Janet.  Actually, her last really huge mega tour was off of the 'All for You' album.  So, it was great.  So, to get the Grammy recognition in the dance category was cool because we had gotten the Producer of the Year Grammy [Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical] as producers, which was great.  In '93 [1993], I believe it was, or '94 [1994] we won a Grammy for 'That's the Way Love Goes,' as songwriters, which I thought was significant because that's a songwriting award [Grammy Award for Best R and B Song].  We got a Grammy for 'All for You' which is the--obviously for a production thing.  We got a Grammy for 'Be Blessed,' Yolanda Adams, which was Best Gospel Song [Grammy Award for Best Gospel Song], which was once again significant 'cause it's a, it's a gospel song.  So, I don't know, I mean, we've, we've just been very fortunate.  And, I love the fact that the Grammys are in diverse categories, you know what I'm saying.  That it's not just one category.  It was like really for production, for song writing, for gospel songwriting, for dance music, you know, for so on and so forth.  I love the idea of that.  I just think that's so cool.
Story_ID: 648084
Speaker 1: Now, were you still living in Minnesota in 2002?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002], we were actually moving to Los Angeles [California] that year.  Actually, the--I believe it was the, I believe it was the summer of that year we moved out here to, to Los Angeles.  Terry [Terry Lewis] had, what had, really what happened was in two--when 9/11 [September 11, 2001] happened, the idea of having everybody fly to Minneapolis [Minnesota] was great.  Everybody was willing to hop on a plane at any point in time and go to where ever they needed to go.  After 9/11 happened, people--the idea of hopping on a plane, you couldn't hop on a plane anymore.  It was security.  Everything was on lockdown.  It was, you know, it really, the world totally changed that day in many ways.  And, that was one of them.  And, it began to get harder and harder for people to come to Minneapolis or to get them to Minneapolis.  Terry actually, we actually separated for, well not separated like we weren't getting along, but Terry actually went to L.A. for about six months.  And, he set up at a studio called the Village in L.A. [Village Recorder; Village Studios].  And, I was still back in Minneapolis and he said, "I think we need to go to L.A."  He said, "I think that's our next move."  Now, Terry being the visionary as he has always been throughout our career, I didn't really doubt him.  But, I said, "Let's, let's give it a little time and let's just see what happens."  So, meanwhile, I'm twiddling my thumbs in Minneapolis working on, you know, maybe one or two projects.  Terry's working I think with, you know, Usher and Mya and he's getting all these projects.  And, I remember we would go to a meeting and we ran into somebody in the elevator and they said, "Hey, India.Arie has this song for this movie called 'Radio.'  Can you guys produce that?"  "Sure.  Okay, yeah, we can do that."  So, we did, you know.  And, it was kind of like, well, wow, if we're actually in L.A. that kind of thing can happen.  It doesn't have to really be preplanned.  We can actually run into somebody and go, "Hey, come over to the studio and let's work."  Now, I think when we first came to L.A. in the '80s [1980s], we couldn't have handled L.A.  L.A. would've ate us up 'cause we were, we were young kids with a lot of testosterone.  We weren't drinkers or drug takers.  So, that part of it was never in question.  We'd never, that was never a problem for us.  But, I just think, I just think we did the right thing doing it from Minneapolis at that point.  But, I think when it was time to come to L.A. we were ready to come.  We were mature.  We had, you know, well, Terry already had a family.  I had started my family at that point.  And, the other thing was, you know, Terry met a girl from L.A. and wanted to live in Malibu [California].  So, great.  My wife is from L.A. originally.  I remember when I said to her, "Hey, Lisa [Lisa Padilla Harris], what would you think about moving back to L- ," and I couldn't even get L.A. out.  I just said, L (laughter), and she was already packing the bags.  She couldn't wait.  She has a bunch of family out here and she was like, "You know what, let's please move back to L.A."  So, I remember calling her from the golf course that we belong to, Sherwood golf club [Sherwood Country Club, Thousand Oaks, California].  And, I'm not a very good golfer, but, I remember one day in the middle of winter she was in Minneapolis and I'm on the, I don't know fifteenth fairway and it's like eighty-five degrees and sunny.  And, I just called her and I just said, "Okay, you need to get out of here." I mean, "You need to get out here."  I mean, "It's just too ridiculously beautiful out here right now," you know.  I've lived in snow my whole life, shoveled snow and, and all of that stuff, and man, I, I just was like, "You know what? I, I can, I can get into this L.A. thing.  This is okay with me."  And, we were--I think did a smart thing that we didn't move into L.A. L.A.  We didn't move into Beverly Hills [California].  We moved out to a place call Westlake Village [California] which reminded me of Minneapolis; clean air, trees, lakes, normal people, kind of what I was looking for as a place to raise kids.  We found a great school out here, Oaks Christian [Oaks Christian School, Westlake Village, California].  And, it was really about trying to get the kids [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris] situated and get them happy and get a good place to raise them.  'Cause I figure I could, I can make music anywhere, I don't care.  But, it was really about getting them settled, getting my wife settled and that, and that part has been really good for us in L.A.  It's been a really good experience for us.
Story_ID: 648085
Speaker 1: Now, you did another Janet Jackson album in 2003, 'Damita Jo'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Damita Jo' was a really, it was a disappointing experience.  Not from Janet's side.  But, from the record company's [Virgin Records] side mostly.  You know, there's an old saying, you know, "If it ain't broke don't fix it."  We're coming off the 'All for You' album, which was an album as, as I said the lead single got added on every station pop and R and B at the same time, 100 percent of radio in the first week.  I mean, that had never happened.  And, but, I felt like 'Damita Jo' suffered really for a couple of things.  One, is that Janet really wasn't feeling like making an album.  I think she was very kind of pressured into making the album from either her management or the record company.  But, there was a sense, I remember we went in the studio, and I remember her manager a couple of times said to me, "Well, just go in the studio and do something."  And it's like, that's not productive.  I said, "You need to find her a movie."  I said, "I think she'd really like to do a movie right now."  Because we had already had that experience before with when she did 'Nutty Professor' ['Nutty Professor II: The Klumps'] before we did the 'All for You' album.  And, then she did 'Poetic Justice' before we did the 'Janet' album.  And, I thought both times doing the movie really opened her up creatively to then make a great album.  And, she had always been of two minds.  She always enjoyed acting.  So, I was, I was a big proponent of, you know, she really wants to act.  She was up for a couple of movies, those movies didn't come through.  So, to me the process of making 'Damita Jo' was really kind of a rushed, well, not rushed as much as it was forced.  And, there were a lot of cooks in the kitchen on that one.  Many, many songs that didn't get used.  I remember at one point the record label said to me that, "You know, well we must be done with the album, we've cut like thirty-three songs."  And, I said, "Well, just 'cause you've cut a bunch of songs doesn't mean that the album's done.  And, I can tell you the album's not done 'cause I--what's you first single?"  And, they said, "Well, our first single is song called "Just"--"Just a Little While.""  And, I said, "That song is suicide.  Because that's a pop record and what she needs to come with is a more R and B record right now."  We just knew that.  And, they came out with this "Just a Little While" record and of course it did absolutely nothing.  And, remember this was coming after the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXXVIII].
Speaker 1: Oh, the wardrobe malfunction.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The wardrobe malfunction, right.  Those two words had never been used together.  But, wardrobe malfunction.  And, it was interesting because I remember when that happened somebody said to me, "Oh, that's really brilliant marketing. Everybody's talking about Janet."  And, I said, "Well, it would only be brilliant marketing if we had a record ready to go.  There's not an album ready to go."  If there was record coming out the next day, absolutely.  That'd be great marketing.  But, we didn't.  And, me and Terry's [Terry Lewis] instincts were to totally put the brakes on even making a record.  Because if you're not going to make the record that addresses the incident then just let the incident die and then just make whatever record you want to make.  And, the record company wanted to rush.  They had this release date.  "Well, we got to release it on this date," and we're going, "Just, just none of this makes sense.  You don't have a good single.  You're trying to release it in a hurry for whatever reason.  It really doesn't make any sense to me."  And, a lot of those people that were involved in that I blame for, I don't think anybody purposely undermined her career but I will say they watched and let stuff happen that shouldn't have happened.  And, you know, Janet and I have talked about it and kind of put the pieces back together in our minds and you know, the way things was going down.  And, she was get- being told different things than we were getting told.  And, she was surprise when I was telling her some of the things that we were being told and it was a mess.  It still was platinum album but it wasn't, everything she had done to that point to me had pushed her career forward, you know.  It wasn't even about, so much about record sales.  It was about, how do we advance your career?  How do we continue to, for you to grow and, and that was not that.  I mean, we salvaged the best we could do with that record.  But, it was, you know, it's a, it's a record that sounds--when I listen to it now I can hear almost the struggle and turmoil in making the record.  I can hear it.  And, her records had never sounded like that to me.  But, I can, I can, I can listen to each song and I remember an argument that happened or a bad decision that happened, or, I mean, everything was, it was just wrong, just was, just was not, they was not handled correctly.  It's not, it's not Janet's fault at all.
Story_ID: 648086
Speaker 1: Now, in 2005 you opened a new recording studio in Santa Monica [California], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah, at--we had worked at the Village [Village Recorder; Village Studios] for about five years when we kind of moved to, to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Terry [Terry Lewis] had started working there and when I came in, we actually ended up taking the whole third floor of the Village and kind of making it into our own little space.  So, we had three studios.  That was a lot of fun.  It was very productive, lot of fun records came out of that.  Particularly, Usher.  I remember we did a record with Usher called 'Truth Hurts.'  Then I remember we had these big PA speakers that we had some of the executives come down and listen on these speakers, and it just like blew them out of the room.  It sounded so good.  And, it totally was sonically wrong.  Like, you know, how you're supposed to build a room in a certain shape and it's supposed to be all that stuff.  We just set these speakers in there and just turned them on like in a, in a club.  And, man, this thing sounded so amazing.  So, we really enjoyed that.  But, we really wanted to have our own space.  I mean, that's what we had always been used to the whole time.  And, so, in 2005 we opened basically, Flyte Tyme Productions [Flyte Tyme Productions, Inc.] on the West Coast.  Some people call it Flyte Tyme West.  I think it might have been actually been, it might've actually been, been credited as that in a couple of spots.  But, for us it was just Flyte Tyme Production because we had sold our studio back in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  And, that now, that property in Minneapolis is now a recording school.  It's actually an institute for recording [Minneapolis Media Institute, Edina, Minnesota] which is very cool.  And, Terry and I actually do a scholarship for that, and go back from time to time.  And, that's, that's very cool.  I was glad to see that that building is still being used in a creative sense and really to nurture the future, you know, engineers and, and producers.  So, that was a good thing.  But, our studio in, in Santa Monica was wonderful because really what we did was, we put five rooms in.  And, the idea was that one room is Terry's, one room is mine, and the other three are open for songwriters, for people to come in and work if they want to; friends of ours.  Not really trying to be commercial studio.  But, if, you know, Jermaine Dupri was--recorded there, Dallas Austin, Rodney Jerkins, Hit-Boy, you know these guys were like, you know, they're like friends, they're like family.  And, we loved opening up our studio to them and, and allowing them to work.  It was a great space.  It was a great creative space.  And, it really fit, at that point in time exactly what we wanted to do.  And, it's interesting I've been--it's--since we've sold, we sold that studio and it's from what everybody tells me, it's like the hottest, one of the hottest spots now to record.  And, what everybody likes about it is the fact that it's the studio that Jimmy [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry built.  That's all that everybody talks about.  There's a lot of really cool custom stuff that we did in there that remains to this day.  So, our footprint and our fingerprints are all, all over that studio and it's nice to know that it's still, you know, making great records.
Story_ID: 648087
Speaker 1: In 2006, 2007, you produced Grammy Award winning recordings for Yolanda Adams and Chaka Khan, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, Yolanda Adams and "Be Blessed," which was Best Gospel Song [Grammy Award for Best Gospel Song].  And, then Chaka Khan was interesting.  I was sitting with Chak- I was a huge Chaka Khan fan.  And, I remember sitting with her at a dinner for, I believe it was for Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] probably.  I think it was at Babyface's [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] house.  And, I was sitting next to her and she was going to perform that evening.  And, I remember saying to her, "Hey, Chaka, I really, I got to tell you, I'm a big fan," and you know, whatever, whatever.  So, she's heard that before.  I said, "But, I got to really tell you, I really love, I love your solo records that you did but really my favorite stuff is the Rufus stuff.  The Rufus stuff was so special to me because you were like the chick in the band.  I mean, you were just like, you know, the playing, their playing was amazing and you were just like another instrument in that band and it was so cool."  And, she kind of looked at me.  She didn't really say thank you for anything.  She just kind of looked at me and I thought, uh-oh, I don't think she liked that compliment.  Maybe she didn't take it as a compliment.  I'm not sure.  So, anyway, fast forward about six months maybe, and we're now sitting at a Grammy event in Chicago [Illinois] where she's going to be honored.  She asked if I would be the one to introduce her.  And, I thought, well, that's interesting.  But, I was with the recording academy [Minneapolis Media Institute, Edina, Minnesota].  As a matter of fact, I think I was, I was probably, if I wasn't the chairman at that point in time, I was probably the vice chairman of the academy at that time.  So, I flew in.  We ended up sitting right next to each other again.  I said, "Hey, Chaka, how are you?"  She said, "Great."  She--, "Thank you very much for doing this."  I said, "It's my pleasure."  I said, "You know," and I got ready to say, you know, "I hope I didn't say anything wrong to you last time," whatever.  Before I could say anything she said, "By the way, remember our last conversation we had at Babyface's house?"  I said, "Yeah, I, I do remember that."  She said, "You know what? You're right."  She said, "Those records were really special records, those Rufus records.  Those were really special records."  And, I said, "Oh."  I said, "Well, that's what I thought."  I said, "I just, I just thought it was amazing.  I thought it was just the, the perfect combination of band and voice.  Like that kind of stuff doesn't happen."  She said, "So, if we were going to work together, what kind of album would we make?"  And, I said, "Well, Chaka," I said, "we'd make a Rufus album except that we'd be Rufus.  I'd be on the keyboards.  Terry [Terry Lewis] would be on the bass, we'd get a drummer.  We'd put a band together and then we'd just jam.  And, then, as we were jamming you'd just sing stuff over the top and when we got something that we liked, we'd actually then write the song.  But, it would all be just like a big jam session."  She said, "Yeah, like we did in the old days."  I said, "Yeah."  So, she bought into that and she said, "Yeah, you know what, let's do that."  And, that's how we created 'Funk This.'  And, that album went on to win Grammy for Best R and B Album [Grammy Award for Best R and B Album].  And, it's, it was an amazing record to make.  Chaka is, man, she is so, I mean, it's like sometimes you, you get worked up to work with somebody and you can get disappointed because you're expectations are so high.  And, we had high expectations working with her and she surpassed every expectation we had.  She worked hard.  She showed up on time ready to work.  She put so much passion in it.  We still have a bunch of songs from those sessions that we never used.  Terry and I are doing our own album right now and we're thinking about going back and revisiting some of those songs.  And, Chaka keeps threatening to, "Let's make a new album," and we're like, "We're ready to go whenever you are."  So, whenever she's ready to, to make an album, we're, we're certainly game to do that.
Story_ID: 648088
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm tempted to ask this, when speaking about Chaka Khan, her voice is so exceptional.  I mean, is she the, does she have the, I guess, the greatest range of any singer you've worked with?
Speaker 2: The thing that's unique about Chaka is her tone is, is amazing.  She does have a big range technically.  But, what's interesting about her is she does more with one note than any singer I know.  If you think about what a lot of singers do, and I always call it sort of the Mariah Carey syndrome.  It's like Whitney Houston was always able to hit notes and then come off the notes in a, you know, like do the (makes musical sounds) but do it.  But not where it sounded like gymnastics, where it really was soulful, every note she hit.  And, a lot of singers for better or worse would try to do that.  But, it would always sounds to me like, oh, you're just trying to make a run.  Like, "Oh, let me put this run here," rather than being really true to the emotion of what the song was.  Well, Chaka never had any of that.  If you listen to the 'Funk This' album, I guarantee you don't hear a--there might not be a single run on that album.  But, what there is, at the appropriate time on every song is her opening up just one note, right.  And, the one I always think of, not on 'Funk This' but just in her career, is "I'm Every Woman."  If you think about "I'm Every Woman," nice song, right.  (Singing), "I'm every woman (makes musical sounds)."  Really nice song, right.  But, when it gets to the end of the song and they go to the (singing), "I'm every woman," Chaka just goes (makes musical sound); she not going (makes musical sounds).  She's not doing that.  That's the uniqueness and that's beauty of what Chaka does that nobody does.  It's not like she needs a million notes.  It's just the one right note and the right time.  And, for me, it's, it's just chillsville when she does that.  Nobody can do that like her.
Story_ID: 648089
Speaker 1: Now, 2008, now did we discuss The Time reunion, the fiftieth--
Speaker 2: No.  We haven't.
Speaker 1: -Grammy-?  Okay.  All right.  Well, this is ano- another attempt at a Time reunion.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It is.  So, in 2008 we, we decided, we had been talking for a while about getting the band back together.  And, my example that I always use was kind of like when you see an old friend and you go, "Yeah, we should get together some time."  And, they go, "Yeah, we should, we should definitely get together some time."  And, then a date never gets set.  Well, for us the date got set when the Grammys [Grammy Awards], Ken Ehrlich [Kenneth Ehrlich] and I, at this point I'm the chairman of the Grammys.  And, Ken Ehrlich call me, the producer of the show, and he said, "I got an idea."  He said, "I'd love to put you guys with Rihanna, and just do what we do at the Grammys; just cross boundaries and genres and do that."  He said, "I got this idea."  He said, "You guys do a little bit of 'Jungle Love,' she does a little bit of her new record, 'Don't Stop the Music,' we do like a mash up thing.  What do you think about that?"  And, I said, "Well," I said, "Ken," I said, "I think you're a genius and I trust what you say."  I said, "To me the only way that it works is if we get all seven original guys back.  We got to get all the guys back."  And, he said, "Okay."  He said, "So, what do you, what do you need to do?"  And, I said, "I just need to call everybody."  He said, "I just need to say that this is the date.  This is what we're going to do.  If--you're either in or you're out.  And, if everybody's in, I'll give you a call and we'll, we'll do it."  So, everybody was pretty much with it.  Everybody was like, "Okay, yeah, that sounds good, that sounds good."  The one person who was a little reluctant was Jesse [Jesse Johnson].  And, we never, we didn't really know why at the time.  We just was kind of like, "Well, come on Jesse, this'll be, we've already been talking about getting back together.  I mean, what, what better stage to do it than this, and it might be fun," and you know, whatever, whatever, whatever.  And, finally, he relented and said, "You know, what, yeah, let's do it.  Let's do it. I'm in."  So, I called Ken and I said, "Okay, group's in."  He said, "Let me send you a template of what I'm, what I'm thinking arrangement wise."  He said, "You take it, and then you make it whatever you want to do it."  So, I just went in one day and just kind of created this whole thing where the two songs merge together and so on and so forth.  I sent it to him.  He loved it.  Sent it to Rihanna.  Rihanna loved it.  Rihanna had no idea who we were.  We were, to her, we were some '80s [1980s] band, some '80s [1980s] R and B band.  That's what she kept calling us.  Like she had no clue who we were.  I remember the experience of, of actually rehearsing and all of that.  It was probably one of the funnest weeks of my life.  Prob- actually, it was the funnest Grammy week I ever had.  Because I couldn't have been more busy.  I was the chairman of the Grammys, which means I had to make every single event that we had.  I had to do that.  I was also on the TV committee.  So, I had the show to put on, right.  And, then I had to rehearse with the band for the performance on the show.  But, as Ken Ehrlich said, "I've always had this dream in my mind that I would be able to introduce the chairman of the Grammys, and then have them actually be able to play something."  And, he said, "You're--you can do that."  And, I said, "Okay.  That's cool.  That's cool."  So, anyway, it was an absolutely crazy week and I remember walking into the arena the night of the show.  And, I had done the pre-tels, what we call the pre-telecast basically, where you give out a lot more awards over there than on the show.  And, I remember walking in and I remember a couple of interviewers ask me, they said, "Are you nervous about performing tonight?"  And, I said, "Actually, no."  I said, "We're going to perform for like six minutes.  I got a three and a half hour show I got to put on.  That I'm concerned about."  And, then everybody would always laugh when I said it, pardon me, everybody would always laugh when I said that, but that's what I meant.  I wasn't concerned about the performance.  That was easy.
Story_ID: 648090
Speaker 1: And, I remember Prince being backstage right, right before we went on, 'cause I think he introduced somebody, or gave an award or something.  So, and, I remembered the thing he had told us when he heard we were going to do it.  And, he said, "Hey," he said, "I don't want no lip syncing and no," you know, whatever, whatever.  And, said, "Prince, come on, man, you know better than that.  That's not how we do it."  And, he says, "Okay," he said, "I just want to make sure," you know.  "No lip syncing, no, you know, no tricks, you know, just play."  I said, "That's what we're going to do."  And, it was a great experience because my kids [Tyler Harris, Max Harris and Bella Harris] were there.  They had great seats right, right on the same side of the stage that I was on.  It couldn't have been a better thing.  I mean, it just went great.  And, it was only, the only really mistake in the performance was, I missed one little step right at the beginning.  And, then also, Jerome [Jerome Benton] was supposed to--when Rihanna came out, Jerome was supposed to help her down the stairs.  And, Jerome got so caught up in the song that I remember that she was at the top of the stairs and I'm like looking at 'Rome and 'Rome's like out in the front of the stage like dancing around and stuff.  And, I'm like, Rihanna, I'm sure Rihanna will just walk down by herself.  And, of course, she does.  She walks down by herself and if you'd watch the tape, she walks down and right when she gets to the bottom step, then 'Rome remembers and goes and like takes her arm and like let's her down like the final step.  But, he was supposed to kind of walk her down the, the whole way.  But, anyway, it was, it was a, it was a fantastic performance and it was so much fun.  The reaction was great.  The interesting thing was afterwards when we were doing interviews and everybody said, "Well, what's next?  What are you guys going to do next?"  And, we were like, "We don't know."  For this, this was just a one off for us.  We weren't, it wasn't a launching album.  It wasn't to launch a tour.  It should've, you know, in hindsight, yeah, we should've.  We should've had it--when we knew we were going to do it, we should've at least got a single ready and done--we weren't thinking like that.  We were just thinking like, "Let's just do this.  It's fun."  And, then I remember, couple months later, we did get a lot of offers to tour, to do a whole bunch of stuff.  And, Terry [Terry Lewis] and I were busy.  We were like, "Eh, we're not trying to do that."
Story_ID: 648091
Speaker 1: And then I remember we got a call from this guy who worked for, I think he worked for Harrah's [Harrah's Entertainment, Inc.; Caesars Entertainment Corporation].  And, he said, "Okay.  I got the perfect offer for you guys 'cause I know you guys don't really want to travel."  Here's the deal.  "We own the room at the Flamingo [Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada].  Toni Braxton was there.  Toni's sick and she can't complete her dates.  So, we basically have three weeks of an open theatre.  What if we put you guys in the Flamingo theater for three weeks?  We'll do two weeks in the beginning and then one week at the end of the month.  You guys will just do like a, like a residency, I guess as they call it.  And, you know, your fans will come from all around the world to see you and you guys can travel back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] on the weekends if you, not on the weekends but on Sunday and Monday 'cause we'll go dark Sunday and Monday," and whatever.  And, we were like, "Okay.  Cool."  And, that's what we ended up doing.  And, it ended up becoming our summer vacation 'cause we took our families.  It was, as Terry [Terry Lewis], and Terry will explain it to you if you ask him, it was the least we had worked in I don't know how many years.  Because literally our schedule was like this, we'd wake up in the morning, we'd have breakfast.  Then, it would always be, "What pool are we going to go to today?"  'Cause we got, you know, basically carte blanche at all the hotels, right.  They would set it up for us.  They'd go, "Where do you want to go today?"  "The Palms [Palms Casino Resort, Las Vegas, Nevada]."  "Okay, great."  They would set up the Palms pool for us, right.  We'd stay out all night--or, stay out all day in the, in the sun basically, play with the kids, whatever, go have lunch.  Occasionally, there'd be a radio interviewer or whatever, but not a lot to do.  I mean, we didn't have a lot to do.  It was already, they were doing all the promotion.  Six o'clock we'd come back to the room, take a shower.  Seven o'clock we'd get in the elevator, we'd come downstairs and we--they'd let us, it would let us out right backstage basically.  We could either come dressed or we could get dressed in the dressing room, it was up to us.  At 7:30 we would walk on the stage and do the show.  The show was about an hour and a half, a little more.  We would walk off the stage, we'd go down to a meet and greet for the top ticket price I think it was like 185 [dollars] or something like that.  So, the people that paid 185 for a ticket, we would take a picture with them.  We'd sign whatever memorabilia they bought, whatever, whatever.  And, it was people from all over the world, Germany, and France, and Italy, and Japan, and all these people that were coming for these shows, right.  And, it was a pretty amazing experience.  So, we were done by ten o'clock.  Ten o'clock we would go and have dinner where ever we wanted to go.  They'd set us up.  The Palm, the, you know, you name it, where ever you want to go have dinner.  We'd have dinner.  By 11, 11:30 we're in bed and we start the whole process over the next day.  The only thing that changed in that process was that, that was sort of the early process, the thing that changed toward the end of that process, we got a nap in (laughter), 'cause we were so exhausted from being--playing with our kids, we were like, "You guys have fun, I'm taking a nap.  We're too old for this thing."  But, that was, that was a great summer.
Story_ID: 648092
Speaker 1: In 2013, just this year, you entered into a worldwide publishing administration agreement with Universal Music Publishing Group.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Back in about, let me see if I can remember the year, maybe '87 [1987], okay.  I think about '87 [1987], '88 [1988].  So, anyway, back in the sort of the late '80s [1980s], we won, you know, ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers], which is one of the performance rights organizations, always do an award.  And, we won the award.  Not only were we the writer of the year, but we were also the publisher of the year.  And, 'cause we owned our own publishing.  And, I remember it was a tie and each group, each publisher had ten songs.  And, the one, the publisher was, the other publisher was EMI [EMI Music Publishing, Ltd.].  And, EMI is a worldwide company with, I don't know, thousands and thousands of songwriters and they had ten songs that made the top ten of the charts.  Jimmy [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry [Terry Lewis] is Jimmy and Terry, two guys from Minneapolis [Minnesota], two thugs from Minneapolis.  We had ten songs on the charts.  So, we tied the, you know, multi conglomerate corporation.  And, I remember Marty van der [Martin van der Schagt], who was the head of EMI at the time, looked at us (laughter), and he had a look on his face like, how the heck did these guys get ten--how did we tie with these guys?  And, I guess, the attitude is if you, if you can't beat them, join them.  So, we ended up doing a deal with EMI only for foreign, because it was always tough to get paid on your foreign rights.  I mean, obviously, there's, you got to have somebody with strength around the world to go get your money, basically, or else people aren't going to pay you.  So, we started off in that relationship and when we--that over a period of time eventually grew into a worldwide, basically, administration deal where they basically collected our money for us from around the world and the United States also.  And, we had been in that deal for quite a while.  When--kind of and the things that happen is when people start moving around, Marty had gone to Sony/ATV [Sony/ATV Music Publishing LLC], Evan Lamberg who was kind of one of his right hand guys had gone to Universal [Universal Music Publishing Group North America], somebody else had gone to, Big Jon Platt [Jon "Big Jon" Platt] had gone to Warner/Chappell [Warner/Chappell Music, Inc.], so on and so forth.  And, everybody kind of split up.  And, I, for me, I always thought about companies like, the companies as only as good as the people that are there.  I mean, Marty van der for us was really the guy that, you know, was our partner in the publishing business from way back.  And, the fact that he was moving to a different situation made us look and think, you know, we might need to move to another situation.  Well, Evan Lamberg had actually contacted us probably a year before this.  And, he said, "I just want to tell you guys, if I ever move, I want to--I want you guys as publishing.  And, I'm not talking about the old stuff."  He said, "I'm talking about the new stuff."  He said, "I'm, I'm more interested in what we're going to do."  He said, "The old, the old stuff's great and it's lucrative and I get it.  I want to know in a year from now when I come back at you, what you guys want to do.  How do you see yourselves; and what do you want to do?  And, I want to help you do it."  Great.
Story_ID: 648093
Speaker 1: A year went by, Evan [Evan Lamberg] had been installed as the president of Universal Publishing [Universal Music Publishing Group North America]; and called us and said, "Let's have a meeting."  And, we had, I think we had dinner.  I think he came by our studio for a little while.  We played him a lot of stuff that we had in the pipeline that we were working on a stuff.  And, he said, "I want to do a deal with you guys."  He said, "You know, you guys may want to, you know, shop around and do some other things, that's up to you, but," whatever.  For us it was a no brainer.  We had had a little bit of a relationship with Universal before, certainly on the record side, with many artists, New Edition and Mary J. Blige, and Chante Moore, and you know, quite a few things over the years.  But we really like the things they were doing on the, on the publishing side and actually there was a gentleman that had left right before Evan got there who we had kind of grown pretty fond of and stuff.  So, when Evan came in he just said, "I think this is the place."  And, we met, you know, we sat down with his staff, met all his people, kind of saw the way he was shaping what he was trying to do.  And, for us, it's kind of like, number one, we still enjoy writing songs.  We like the idea of coming up with a new idea.  But, we're also collaborators, and we like people that get us in the room with other great song writers and let's see what was can come up with, and other great producers.  That's important too.  Also, we kind of see ourselves as mentors and we would love to get with young writers that are just kind of getting their feet wet and collaborate with them or teach them or, or something.  So, all of those things were kind of important to us, and Evan understood those things.  And, Universal has the worldwide strength and the creative people to make those things happen for us.  And, so, that's what caused us to do the deal over there.  And, we're just going to the second year of the deal now.  We just actually just had a meeting with Evan, and with Lucian [Lucian Grainge] who's the head of all of Universal [Universal Music Group].  And, we just kind of plotted out 2014 and what, what we're planning on doing.  And, we're real excited about it, 'cause we feel like, we, we still have a lot to offer.  You know, listen, we want to raise kids.  There's a lot of other things though that we want to do musically.  We talked a little bit about, you know, the idea of doing a musical based on some of our music, which is very intriguing to us.  So, there's a lot of things out there that, that really interest us.  We're putting, in the process of just finishing up putting up a new studio, which is located very close to our houses so we don't have to drive an hour to, to go to work.  And, we're excited about that.  We have a young group called the Roney Boys that we, actually, my thirteen year old son [Max Harris] discovered on YouTube that we're really excited about that we're going to showcase next year, early in the year, and find them a home.  So, it's just, now it's about just the future.  It just kind of going and having fun.  And, Terry [Terry Lewis] and I are still, you know, we kind of look at each other every five years, and we go, "You ready to retire?  You're ready to move--what do you want to do?"  And, we always look at each other and we go, "Let's got--I think we got a couple more ideas.  Let's, let's stick around."  You know, we think, you know, there's a Janet [Janet Jackson] record in our future from what we understand from her people.  And, I text her, with her every day about non music stuff, just friend stuff.  But, we think that there's a, you know, record there.  There's a New Edition record.  The guys are all ready to make another record, and we're like, we're the right people to make that record, you know, we know that.  It's a couple of other interesting legacy things that are on the plate.  Sam Cooke being one of them.  His, his family and his estate are interested in doing some things.  So, it's kind of like, we, we kind of have a whole future kind of being mapped out as we sit here.  And, and we're excited about it.  And, at the same time we get to raise our kids, you know, we get to go to basketball tournaments and go to dance recitals; and, man, it couldn't, it couldn't really get any better.  It's really, it's really pretty cool.
Story_ID: 648094
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We have, Lisa [Lisa Padilla Harris] and I have three kids.  Our oldest is Tyler [Tyler Harris].  We always call Tyler the golden child.  Tyler is just, well, all my kids are my heart.  But, I mean, your first born.  I mean, it's just, come on it's crazy.  We spoil him way too much, you know.  I think that's part of, you know, being the first, the first kid.  But, Tyler was the one that really opened up--Terry [Terry Lewis] used to always tell me, "When you have kids, you don't really know what love is until you have kids."  Because there's, you know, the love you have for other people and family members and all that kind of stuff.  But, he says, "Your kids, there's a whole nother reservoir of love that you have.  And, that reservoir does not get opened until you actual have kids."  And, he said, "And, in that reservoir is not only love, but there's patience, and there's tolerance, and there's all of these other things."  Like, you, you look at people with kids and you go, "How the heck can they put up with the brat doing that?"  Well, it's because that reservoir of patience has been opened up.  And, they can--it's their kid.  And, I don't hesitate to say, I like kids okay.  I really like my kids (laughter).  I'm pretty selfish like that.  I like my kids.  I don't care about everybody's kids.  Terry is exact opposite.  Terry loves everybody's kids.  Terry--I call Terry the father to the world.  Terry taught me so much though about being unselfish with people, with your time, with all of that, because he's so giving.  And, he's a great example for me.  And, I try to raise my kids really in, with the lessons that Terry taught me.  And, having a chance to watch him raise his kids 'cause Terry has a son [Talin Lewis] my son's, my young son's age.  But, he's got kids that are in their thirties.  So, he's really done it, you know.  So, anyway, Tyler's the, Tyler's the, the oldest.  And, he's a junior this year.  Really good basketball player.  Unfortunately, had a ACL [anterior cruciate ligament] injury this year so he's going to miss this high school season.  But, he'll be back for coach's viewing period.  And, he plays for Kenny Smith's AAU team [Aim High AAU].  So, he's, you know, plays a very high level of basketball and has been seen by, you know, all the coaches and that.  And, we think, hopefully, he makes a recovery.  And, you know, it's good it didn't happen his senior year.  So, he's still got a good, hopefully has a good summer ahead of him and, and does well 'cause that's really his main interest is basketball.  He loves it.  He's got the height.  He's 6'5".  He's a guard.  And, so, yeah.  So, he's, he's good player, smart player.  So, then, my twins, Max [Max Harris] and Bella [Bella Harris].  Bella is, actually, one--Bella's like a minute younger than Max but she's so much as women I think are, or younger girls are, much more mature (laughter).  She's taller than Max.  She's like 5'10".  And, she's really tall.  She's like a super model.  And, Bella's really athletic.  I mean, she plays volleyball.  She plays tennis.  She loves to dance.  She likes to sing.  She, I can't say she loves to sing because it's interesting, I remember my wife and I were talking about it, and she said, "Why don't you ever take Bella to the studio?"  And, I said, "Bella can come to the studio whenever she wants to come.  She has to ask me."  It's just like the boys going, "Dad, can you take me to basketball practice?"  It's the same thing.  If it's something they want to do, I'll make sure they get there.  But, they have to lead it.  I can't lead it.  So, she's the one that decided that she wanted to dance.  She's the one that decided she wanted to play volleyball.  We kind of pushed her into playing tennis because she was good at it.  And, she actually made the finals this year, and then ended having to forfeit 'cause her doubles partner was sick.  But, she had a very successful run.  She's very much her mom.  She's not a daddy's girl at all.  She is, she was more like, she's more like little Lisa.  She's more like a little version of my wife.  They have a lot in common.
Story_ID: 648095
Speaker 1: And, they're both Tauruses so they, man, they butt heads, and it's pretty crazy.  But, my daughter has a sense of style.  My wife has such a great sense of style that Bella [Bella Harris] is--has that same sense.  And, I, and I can imagine Lisa [Lisa Padilla Harris] as a little girl with her mom [Bernardette Padilla] kind of being the same way, you know.  So, it's pretty cool.  It's pretty cool.  I couldn't, I couldn't have a, a better daughter.  And, then Max [Max Harris] is her twin, and does--he will always remind you that he's older than Bella.  And, Max is, Max is a real different kid.  He's an old soul.  He is really my, sort of in many ways, my arbiter of taste.  He likes really all kinds of music.  He's the one that like when 'Blurred Lines' came out, he said, "I want to hear Marvin Gaye's version."  You know, like he, he wants to always dig into, to that.  We were listening to Kanye's [Kanye West] record 'Bound' ['Bound 2'] that everybody's talking about with Kim Kardashian [Kim Kardashian West].  And, I'm like going, "Man, that's sampling that song.  I love that.  I got to find out what that is."  So, I tracked it down and I downloaded it and I played it for Max.  And, said, "Oh, my god, I love this.  This makes me like the record better."  It's like he really has that mind, that curious mind.  He's homeschooled.  He's got one of those minds that works in a different way.  And, homeschool's a perfect situation for him.  He's straight A's.  He's got a couple of tutors he works with and he's just, he blows them away.  I think when he gets in, in high school, he'll probably go to either Oaks Christian [Oaks Christian School, Westlake Village, California] or he may go to, to Westlake [Westlake High School, Westlake Village, California] or where ever the wants to go.  But, I think right now, probably, the best thing for him is, is the homeschool.  But, he's an amazing kid and like I said earlier he actually discovered one of the groups that we're working with, the Roney Boys.  And, kind of reluctantly acts as their manager, you know, a lot of people could say, "Oh, he's their manager."  And, he always goes, "No.  They're my friends," you know.  And, it's like, "Yeah, okay.  They're your friends but they, you know, they're," they're good dudes and they get it.  And, I said, "And, if you ever want to learn about friendship, balancing friendship and business," I said, "just look at me and Terry [Terry Lewis].  We've been doing it for forty-five years."  We've been best friends but we're also, we are business partners too.  So, so, you can do it.  These--those guys and be your friends, but you know you have smart decisions that you can make, and help them do, you know, as a group so.  But, those are, those are the three kids.  Max is a great basketball player.  Started off playing football but now have moved into basketball.  Actually plays on the younger version of Kenny Smith's team [Aim High AAU]; plays on the 13U.  And, will probably be as younger brothers seem to be, will probably be a better basketball player than the older brother [Tyler Harris].  Because, you know, you grow up with the aggression and watching him do what he does; and then, you know, you emulate it; and I think he's going to be a really good player.  He works really, really, hard.
Story_ID: 648096
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well--(background noise) hello?
Speaker 1: That was interesting, sounded like--
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  I think my legacy, I'll go back to a conversation that I had with Michael Jackson.  And, we were working on, we did the duet with his sister, with Janet [Janet Jackson], 'Scream.'  And, Michael always was very curious, and he always liked to pick my brain about stuff.  And, I remember we were having a conversation one day and he said to me, "How do you want to be remembered?"  And, I said, "How do I want to be remembered."  I said, "I don't know, as a nice guy."  And, he said, "No, no, no, no, but how do you want to be remembered?  Like is it for, you know, having the most number one records?"  And, I said, "No.  I'd like to be remembered as a nice guy."  And, he says, "No, no, no, no, no, but is it for, because you sold the most records and," something whatever, "and you're longevity, and whatever?"  And, I said, "No.  I just want to be remembered as a nice guy."  And, I kept saying that, and we kept kind of going back and forth and then finally he said, "Okay."  He said, "Okay.  I don't get it."  I said, "Okay.  That's fine, Michael.  I respect that.  I respect that.  That's fine."  Okay, so, then fast forward a couple years later and we had sampled 'Billie Jean' and I said, somebody said to me, "Well, you'll never get that sample cleared 'cause Michael is the only one that can clear that sample."  I said, "Okay.  Well, I'll give him a call and we'll see what happens."  So, I called his assistant, Evie [ph.], and I said, "Evie," I said, "this is Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] calling."  She said, "Oh, how are you?"  I said, "I'm fine, I'm fine."  I said, "Listen," I said, "if Michael has a minute if he could just give a call, I just wanted to run something by him real quick."  And, she said, "Okay.  I'll have him call."  So, this is when we were still in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  We had a girl name Sue [ph.] who was our administrator.  I remember Sue never would come to my office, she'd always just be on the intercom, "So and So is on the phone, So and So."  I hear her knock at my door.  Sue walks in and she goes, "Jimmy."  And, I said, "Yeah."  "Michael Jackson's on the phone."  And, I said, "Oh, okay."  And, she said, "No, no, no, no.  No, Michael Jackson's on the phone."  I said, "Right.  I got that."  And, she said, "No, no.  Not somebody calling for Michael Jackson.  It's actually Michael Jackson's on the phone."  I said, "Thanks, Sue.  I got it.  Okay.  Thank you very much," right.  So I pick up the phone, I--, "Hey, Michael, how are you?"  "Oh, I'm great, Jimmy.  How are you?"  I said, "Good, good."  He said, "Wow."  He said, "That's great, that's great."  He said, he said, "I know you want to talk to me about something but can I just tell you something real quick?"  And, I said, "Sure, Michael, go ahead and tell me."  He said, "Okay.  So, can I just tell you that every time somebody ask me about you and they go, 'What's Jimmy Jam like?'  And, I say, 'He's the nicest guy.'"  And, I said, "Michael," I says, "so, there you go."  I said, "So, do you get it?"  He said, "I totally get it."  He said, "I get exactly what you're saying."  He said, "A nice guy."  He said, "You know what, and you are a nice guy."  He said, "Absolutely."  And, I said, "Michael, and you know what's really cool?"  And, he says, "What's that?"  I said, "When people ask me about you, I tell them the exact same thing."  And, he said, "Aww, that's so nice.  Well, what did you want?"  And, I said, "Well, I just wanted to sample one of your songs."  "Oh, yeah.  Call (Unclear). He'll take care of it."  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  Done deal.  And, I tell that story, I always tell that story to people 'cause to me that is, at the end of the day that is how I would like to be remembered.  The statistics are going to be the statistics.  You know, whether we're the number one producers or the number one whatever, people will debate that, and you know, whatever.  And, being a nice guy, that's pretty simple because that means when I come in contact with people, I hopefully have made a positive impression of--with them in some way.  And, that is who I want to be remembered as, as a person which is different who career wise I'll be remembered.  But, career wise however, I'm remembered is, that is what it is.  But, yeah.  Nice--at the end of the day, nice guy.  That, that I would love for people to say that about me.  That would be the, the highest compliment.
Story_ID: 648097
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't asked you about we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, if there is (laughter), I've totally forgot about it, or you'll cover it with Terry [Terry Lewis] whenever you talk to him.  I can't, I can't think of anything.  I--there were some things as we were going, but we ended up kind of covering them.  We either kind of backtracked or I either backtracked to them or, or whatever.  But, no.  I, I think it's pretty, pretty thorough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is almost like a trick question (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's just like legacy almost but--and you actually answered it in some ways.  But, the last question is, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) well, I'd like to just be remembered as a nice guy.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: You're welcome, man.
Speaker 1: All right.
