Story_ID: 630998
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Kim Johnson [ph.].  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: John T. Hooker [HistoryMaker John Hooker], H- oh, J-O-H-N, T, middle initial, H-O-O-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Now does the T stand for anything?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Timothy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 25, 1948 and I was one of those children that were born at home really in Chicago, Illinois, 220 North California [Avenue] in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay now that was even unusual for those days for someone to be born at home.
Speaker 2: Well I came in a hurry (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were born without complication and all of right there at home?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's great.  And sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently I am the senior vice president of legislative and government affairs for ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 22nd, 19--sorry about that 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in my office in Chicago at 440 North- South Dear- LaSalle [Street].
Story_ID: 630999
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer.  First question is do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: I think I would have to say my most favorite food is fried chicken which I no longer eat (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm really an earth tone.  I was born in the fall.  Somehow or another I tend to gravitate to earth tones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Brown, yellow, gold, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've been--I enjoy Florida mostly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Particularly Orlando [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  The reason I stuttered is because I have quite a few of them.  So I had to really pick my most favorite one and that is, I'm a strong willed person so I tend not to give in or give up.  I basically just gotta give out.
Story_ID: 631000
Speaker 1: Well I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Arthur Hooker] side.  We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is Rosa Whorton [Rosa Whorton Hooker].  I mean that was her maiden name.  Is that what you're asking for?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I think it was September 13th--I mean September 4th, I think 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Lexington, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?  Can you go back to slavery, or?
Speaker 2: I can't go back to slavery, but I can go back as far as my, my grandparents.  My grand- my, my and, and my--
Speaker 1: Hold on a second.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay. I can go back as far as my great-grandparents on my mother's side and my great-grandfather was a Irish immigrant and my great-grandmother was an Indian [Native American].
Speaker 1: Now that's his wife?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So they, they weren't black at all or African American?
Speaker 2: Not those two. (Laughter) True.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: And then my grandfather who is biracial was you know biracial so he was half Indian and half--
Speaker 1: Irish.
Speaker 2: --Irish.  At the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that moved to my mom.
Speaker 1: So he married a black woman?
Speaker 2: He married a black lady, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Samuel Horton, H-O-R-T-O-N [sic. Samuel Whorton].
Speaker 1: And your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Carrie Whorton [Carrie Pickens Whorton].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay now did that ancestor give your family any special privileges or property or anything?  Was anything attached to--?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  My grand- my, my family did own quite a bit of land in the South and, you know acres I would say upward of about eighty acres, eighty to a hundred acres of land in the South.
Speaker 1: Yeah I would think it would be easier for your grandfather who's part Irish and part Indian to buy land than it would be--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --for an African American.
Speaker 2: It was so as a result of that they were able to acquire some land in the South and worked it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that side of the family didn't have to sharecrop or anything like that because they had--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) their own land.
Speaker 2: Pretty much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other stories about them in terms of their relationship with the rest of the community or any special talents they have or?
Speaker 2: No but I can tell you my grand- you know by us living in Chicago [Illinois] one of the things that I--that, that kind of stun me I mean my grandfather was in my opinion looked more Irish than African American and when he used to travel from the South to here, he would sit where the white folks sat rather than where black folks sat because they would steer him there when he got on the train.  You know it was just that's the way it was.  So that was sort of stunning to me as a little boy you know picking him up you know from the train station when he would come up here.  I don't call that a special privilege it's just something that I observed as a young fella.  Now how much my grandfather played on that I don't know? (Laughter) But--
Speaker 1: Well he actually wouldn't have been black I guess right, he would have been--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Irish and Indian and yeah.  That's a combination that can sit anywhere you wanna sit on the train.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Right.
Speaker 1: I suppose I don't think they had no discrimination against half Indians you know.
Speaker 2: No.  And plus his appearance was more on the Irish side.
Story_ID: 631001
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Rosa Whorton Hooker] talk about what it was like growing up in Lexington [Mississippi]?  Where is Lexington anyway?
Speaker 2: Lexington is about, it's about sixty miles north of Jackson, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'd say off right off I-65 [Interstate 65].
Speaker 1: So it's closer to Tennessee?
Speaker 2: It's a little--it's a bit closer to Tennessee, upper you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did your mother talk about growing up and what it was like growing up in Lexington?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, she was from a family I think of thirteen and they had to work the fields as well as you know go to school and, and make you know so they were a part of the culture of farming and cotton and the whole bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she have to--was her education interrupted by agricultural duties and that sort of thing?  I've heard stories of people that say they could only go to school certain times of the year because of the crops.
Speaker 2: That was, that was, that was prevalent in her era also.  But she did finish high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know the name of the school she?
Speaker 2: I really don't.  Because a lot--some of her brothers and sisters, my uncles and aunts only got through the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she went on a little further.
Speaker 1: Now she would have been close to if I'm thinking right, she would have been close to Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] up, that's like north of Jackson towards Tennessee?
Speaker 2: You got me there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So she finished high school, when did she move to Chicago [Illinois]?  Did she get married before she moved?
Speaker 2: Yeah she got married.  She was married about a year or two before they moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I say, no, I say about three or four years before they moved to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother have any, any stories of growing up that you remember or anything happen there when she was growing up that she talks about?
Speaker 2: Not really other than the way it really was between black and white and my grandfather [Samuel Whorton] was pretty much of a taskmaster at the, at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So aside from that we didn't--she didn't take us back too far.
Speaker 1: Well what did she say it was like for her in terms of race relations?
Speaker 2: Well, she--what I can remember is what she really remembered and had to deal with more than anything else was the separation and as you would imagine back then the separation was more acceptable.  It was like you know your place, you gotta stay in it and to that degree.  So, so, so what she would what was explained to us was some of the differences as we grew up in her era as opposed to ours.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she--well what were some of the specific differences that she talked about that?
Speaker 2: Okay the separation in schools, the separation of the water fountain, drinking out of the water fountain, the separation of the washrooms.  So you know when we were coming up it was a lot different and we could go in different washrooms and what have you or bathrooms and you know and she would remind us that there were a time that that you couldn't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was those types of separations.  It was the separation that's in the educational field that you know she was looking for a better opportunity for us to be educated--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and, and not segregated more or less.
Story_ID: 631002
Speaker 1: I'm gonna move your father's side of the family.  Can you give your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Arthur Hooker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was Lexington, Mississippi and it was a couple of years in front of my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker].  What was that 19--what was hers did I say--what was hers, '16 [1916]?
Speaker 1: Sixteen [1916] yeah or so.
Speaker 2: So he was like '14 [1914].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1914.  Well what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Now they were as much as you could call us African Americans at the time.  They were both basically African American and they were the sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father did finish eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did they have any stories going all the way back to slavery days or Reconstruction, or--?
Speaker 2: Well now my mother--I, I grew up in more of a single family home so I didn't really know that much about my father.  I knew his parents as much as you could with visiting them but--so I didn't really get a chance to live that with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he stay in Mississippi?  Or did he--
Speaker 2: No he came (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He came to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: He was here. He was here, he was here and he was here you know he was the father of our--of all my siblings.  So it wasn't until toward the end that they got divorced and he moved out of the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did he move back down south?
Speaker 2: No, I think he went--he moved to California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well did your father ever talk to you about growing up and about what it was like?
Speaker 2: Again, I really don't--I think I was about four when he left and I really don't know that much about my father other than that and my mom took the role of rearing us up.
Story_ID: 631003
Speaker 1: Now is there a story that they tell about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met--she [Hooker's mother, Rosa Whorton Hooker] was continuing to go to school and he [Hooker's father, Arthur Hooker] would be working and he had his eyes on her so she says and she tells us and that's and they began--they went to the same church [in Lexington, Mississippi] so as a result of that I think that's how they came to come together and, and got married, but that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is there--do they have a--we all know I guess by the Great Migration a lot of black people coming to Chicago [Illinois] but did they have a specific reason for coming?
Speaker 2: No just for better opportunity really.  They felt he did--he was tired of--she said he was tired of sharecropping and felt that he wanted to get a better trade or work, different kind of work in the city and when he came up here he did work in the, the factory so that I can remember he used to build lamps you know.
Speaker 1: Okay so he worked in a lamp factory?
Speaker 2: He worked in a lamp factory.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So but he did have specific--he wanted to stop sharecropping and that's good, that's a good, that's a good reason (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right yeah well that was his drive you know, so you know he had a little bit more ambition and he wanted to move away from that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That was--I don't suppose you know if there was any story about having to to get out without the landlord knowing he was leaving or that sort of thing or?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.  Because what happened was they had built a little house on my grandfather's [Samuel Whorton] land, some of the grandfather's land.
Speaker 1: Okay so they weren't really paying rent to anyone I guess?
Speaker 2: Right other than--
Speaker 1: Your grand- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the sharecropping and working with the grandfather and what have you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they didn't have that kind of issues did they?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't.
Story_ID: 631004
Speaker 1: When you think about it I know you weren't raised with your father [Arthur Hooker], but when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: From what my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] would teach us she said that I probably had his physique and her drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So is he a pretty tall man?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was, he was 6'4" and but my mom was tall too she was 6' or 6'1" or so.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's--
Speaker 2: So they were both pretty tall.
Story_ID: 631005
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in?  Or did you live in one neighborhood primarily or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: No we lived in one neighborhood primarily.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived in the Lawndale neighborhood [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay that's on the West Side?
Speaker 2: On the West Side.
Speaker 1: Lawndale okay.  And is there a specific address that you grew?
Speaker 2: Yeah I lived at 1851 South Central Park [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was that neighborhood like I mean, then?  Was it all black then?
Speaker 2: When we first moved in there, it was, it was more Jewish. That's when we first moved in there.  I was a little bitty guy but I you know I knew it was more Jewish later on because I was told that that was the type of neighborhood it was but, but that's where, that's what it really was and then it began to tra- change over and become predominantly African American.
Story_ID: 631006
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest or some earlier?
Speaker 1: Well, if you don't have an earliest, I'll settle for some earlier.
Speaker 2: All right.  All right.  Well I mean let's see, my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] was sort of statuesque and she had--it was eleven of us, seven boys and four girls, so she was a disciplinarian.
Speaker 1: So well that's a big--there were eleven boys in your--?
Speaker 2: There were seven boys.
Speaker 1: Seven, okay I'm sorry. Seven (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And four girls.
Speaker 1: That's eleven, eleven siblings?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Seven you know boys and four girls.  Wow.  So is there--well I hate to ask this question now was it a big family part of the reason your father [Arthur Hooker] left you think?
Speaker 2: Well I don't really know because I think from what I learned later he ended up with another big family so I don't think that was--that's just me, that couldn't have been it, all of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you know any reason that he may have given for leaving?
Speaker 2: No I really didn't know him and my mom would never talk ill of him.  She would never talk ill of him and so I really never knew him as an individual.
Speaker 1: So where did you fit in the, in the?
Speaker 2: I was third from the bottom.
Speaker 1: Third from okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So you know it was sort of unique. The way it was unique it was like the first three were boys and then the girl and then it was girl boy all the way down.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Yeah, that's a big family.
Story_ID: 631007
Speaker 1: Go ahead what, what were some of your childhood memories?
Speaker 2: I was, as I was about to say my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] was pretty much a disciplinarian and she kind of had to be with boys like that and and she made the commitment to stay and help raise us.  Then we, we lived in a two--we had, we had a two--we lived in a two flat building [in Chicago, Illinois] and it was four bedrooms on one floor, one bathroom and they had bought that together before he [Hooker's father, Arthur Hooker] left and one of the things I can remember a lot is that you know she could not, my mom could not, would not take public assistance because public assistance would have wanted her to give up the two flat that she had and where would she go move with eleven kids?  You see what I mean?  All the landlords didn't want that.  So what she was faced with was trying to rear us all as some of the older ones grew up and got a little older and grown and moved on.  We were still there.  So it was quite a few of us still in the same house.  So she was faced with keeping the family together under one roof and then having to work as best she could--
Speaker 1: Now that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and she was a seamstress and she did some day work a little bit but she was a seamstress and she did a lot of sewing at home for others and, and for, and for you know for money as best we could to make the ends meet.  So those are some of the earliest kind and so you figure with that many kids you, you can't make enough to pay babysitting and we were teamed up where one had to kind of help the other as we went down the you know one when my, my sister started school, when I started kindergarten it was her job to take me.  When my sister under me started, it was my job to take her so she moved it down the ladder like that.  So we all grew up with a sense of ownership of working with and helping one another as well as being supportive but then like most families you know there the you know there were times my brothers wanted to beat up on me and vice versa so you know that kind of happens.  But it would not happen in her presence.  She didn't tolerate that nonsense (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there any other people in the household?  Any grandparents or anything?
Speaker 2: No there really wasn't.  Later in the years when my grandfather [Samuel Whorton] or when my grandmother [Carrie Pickens Whorton] passed away and my grandfather was getting a little older, he came up and kind of stayed with us a bit which mean we had to juggle around you know in a four bedroom house you know.  She had to keep the boys in the back and the girls in the front.  And just about the time we thought we get you know I wouldn't have to have three in a bed or, or four in a bed, my grandfather came so that blew that and we had to stay the say it was.  And you know it's, it gives you a sense of never forgetting from which you came, [HistoryMaker] John Hooker, it allows me to understand and know that I came from humble beginnings.
Speaker 1: So times were tough I guess.
Speaker 2: Very tough.  They were very tough but you know I think most folks--a lot of folks would say we were poor but I didn't know we were poor.  You know I mean, I didn't really go hungry and I was always clean.  My clothes were always clean.  I remember one time I told my mom that, that I had a hole in my sock.  I basically told her that hole was coming in my sock for her to kind of sew it up for me and her retort was, "Okay give it to me but God said live holy not raggedy." (Laughter) But it's, it's--that's the kind of thought pattern that she would have as she drove us to become the best we could be.
Story_ID: 631008
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Say that again?
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Lawndale [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Lawndale was a tough community.  It got to be a very, very tough community.  It's still a tough community today if you're familiar with it.  I would have to say only maybe two--one or two out of ten of the folks I grew up with made it out.  And what I mean by that, they made choices.  They either you know got on drugs, committed crimes and went to jail or dead.  So it was very, very tough growing up there and you know you can't--you couldn't grow up in that environment and be separate--separated of it so in order to exist you gotta kind of be a part of it just to continue to thrive but yet you had to be smart enough and strong enough to make choices.  I tell people now I made choices very early in life, choices not to get on drugs, choices to go to school and get good grades, choices not to be with my same buddies. When they got ready to go stick up somebody or, or do wrong, I needed to go home.
Speaker 1: Now was it pressure to join gangs and things?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the major gang over there when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well the gangs in my opinion started on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], started in my neighborhood. And there was a dividing line there but you had the Vice Lords and then you had the Cobras [Egyptian Cobras].
Speaker 1: The Cokers?
Speaker 2: The Cobras, the Cobras.
Speaker 1: Cobras.
Speaker 2: Yeah Cobras.
Speaker 1: Okay yeah all right.
Speaker 2: And they were in what they call K-Town.  See Central Park [Avenue] was the 3600 West and Pulaski [Road] started at 4000 West and all the streets west of Pulaski begins in K like Karlov [Avenue], Komensky [Avenue]--
Speaker 1: Kilbourn [Avenue], yeah.
Speaker 2: --Kirkland [sic.], Kostner [Avenue].  They used to call that K-Town so that's where the Cobras were.  You go over there, they know you didn't belong there then you had one coming.  Well, east of that was the Vice Lords area and so the Vice Lords may more or less started the gang stuff.  It wasn't like it was, it was today where they were shooting and killing you know; they disagreed, they'd fight it out you know.  Periodically somebody got cut or something but the guns were not as rampant as they are today and the value for life, other's lives, had a value then.  I don't think today young--some of these young folks in these gangs understand that there is a value of life.
Speaker 1: And in those days, correct me if I'm wrong, but the gangs weren't organized around narcotics sales right?
Speaker 2: They were not organized around narcotics.  They were organized around territory more or less.
Speaker 1: So neighborhood identity--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was really more important than.
Speaker 2: So now you're growing up in an area where there's a known established gang.  My mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] didn't stand for none of that mess.  So we couldn't bring stuff in the house that we didn't--that wasn't bought and we didn't have all enough money to go buy all this stuff so if you know you gonna come in there with a new coat or a new something, "Where you get this from?"  You know what I mean?
Story_ID: 631009
Speaker 1: I don't know if you're familiar with a--there's a book by [HistoryMaker] Useni Eugene Perkins.  He used to be director of Better Boys Foundation [BBF Family Services, Chicago, Illinois] called 'Home is a Dirty Street' ['Home is a Dirty Street: The Social Oppression of Black Children,' Useni Eugene Perkins].  He was a sociologist, he still--he's at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] now. But it's about Lawndale [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] and I think Collins was the congressman over there.
Speaker 2: George Collins [George W. Collins] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George Collins, right.
Speaker 2: --was the congressman and Better Boys Foundation was right there right off of 15th [Street] and Pulaski [Road].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: We used to play ball there.  So I went to Herzl grammar school [Theodore Herzl Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which is around 14th [Street] and Lawndale [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Named after Theodor Herzl--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --founder of Jewish nationalism.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah Zionism.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm that's who Theodor Herzl was.
Speaker 1: Yeah so you were right about that neighborhood being Jewish.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It was really a hardcore Jewish neighborhood.
Speaker 2: It really was.  And then you had the Douglas Boulevard there where you had the big statue in front of there you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did Better Boys Foundation provide any relief from the things going on in the street?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know we had the Better Boys Foundation and then we had Archie Moore, boxer Archie Moore built a gym [Archie Moore Boxing Gym, Chicago, Illinois] not too far from there that we were able to, to work with.  But again, you're dealing with territorial stuff.  So some of the folks that were, some of the folks that were in charge of those were pretty tough and didn't allow a lot of that gang stuff in there.  So you could get there and get some tutoring and some mentoring, but now you got to get home.  (Laughter) I mean you were safe as you could be when you were there because everybody knew that that was grounds that you don't mess up on.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard that you know there's various techniques for getting home you know, and what did you--how did you all do it?  How'd you get from one place to another if you were someplace where you knew there was territory issue?  How would you negotiate your way back?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, earlier I told you you had to, you had to be in that, you couldn't be separate in the neighborhood. You had to be a part of it.  So I had to be able to be just as tough as some of the others.  I mean you couldn't always run so you had to sometimes fight your way home.  I mean you know it just, that was the way it was so, and the average person at that, when you get into a tussle and you get to fighting and you if you win, the other person don't wanna mess with you too many more times.  So you get established being strong and tough enough to do and to exist but then again you know there are strength in many so if you had enough that you were gonna play softball, play basketball, we had enough that were doing it at the time, some of the gang didn't wanna mess with us.  But then we all went to school together so we knew one another and we got to know who was who and who wasn't.
Story_ID: 631010
Speaker 1: What specific things were you interested in when you were coming up?  Were you interested in sports or, or school or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I was interested in basketball and mostly softball.  I liked to play softball and those were the two sports that I were--that I gravitated to and kind of excelled in.
Speaker 1: Okay so did you play you know for high school [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I played high school ball and but I had to work so after about three years of that, I needed to work a part time job more.  One to get some of the things I wanted and always to assist home.  So any of us that had a job had to help bring money back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you remember your first job?  Or how old you were when you got your first job?
Speaker 2: My first job was--as you know I had brothers so my brother over me had a paper route and then he got to be the branch captain of the, of the, the, the--
Speaker 1: The district (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the district we were in and I was able to start and have my--get a paper route job at nine.  They usually like you to be eleven or twelve but I was able to get mine at nine and the way I was able to get it was he was the branch captain and I got my block, Central Park [Avenue], the street I grew up on.  So and I knew everybody and everybody knew me so it made it very nice.  I could get up and go with him and I could do my route and then when at that time we used to have to collect and when I collect, everybody knew not to bother me and so it worked out pretty good.  So I was about nine years old.
Speaker 1: Okay so that could be a crisis when you collect all the money right in the neighborhood [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well it could be, but you know they knew my brother was pretty tough and strong and there was like hands off of that.  And then I had other brothers too, so.
Speaker 1: So it didn't hurt coming from a large family with seven brothers?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah to that degree it didn't.
Story_ID: 631011
Speaker 1: So well tell us about school.  Now you went to Herzl?
Speaker 2: I went to Herzl grammar school [Theodore Herzl Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Theodore Herzl grammar school.  What was it like?  Was it mostly black when you were there?
Speaker 2: It was.  It was mostly black.  It was--by the time I came along it was I'd say about 90 percent still it was about 90 percent black and by the time I got out of there, come out of Herzl--well let me just tell you.  When I was there, they end up going, it used to go it went to eighth grade because at one time it was kind of like a two week college, but it went to eighth grade but then they split it and they started that upper grade center stuff so seventh and eighth grade went to what Hess Upper Grade Center [Julius H. Hess Upper Grade Center], which was on Douglas [Douglas Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois] just east of there.
Speaker 1: Okay so you went to sixth grade at Herzl?
Speaker 2: I went up to sixth grade at Herzl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then went to Hess Upper Grade Center?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I don't know who Hess was named after.  I hate to say Rudolph, it couldn't be Rudolph (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, I don't know.  I knew the old--I knew the school song but I didn't know the background of it.  I didn't--I don't know that.
Speaker 1: That's the upper grade center, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, that was--when I look back over my grammar school education, Hess was really a pivotal point for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How so?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in seventh grade, my English teacher was Al Raby [Albert Raby], which was in the movement or got to be strong in the movement.
Speaker 1: Yeah now Al Raby is a legendary figure in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A community civil rights leader--
Speaker 2: Right.  He was--
Speaker 1: --the one who organized Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] trip (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he is.  Yeah that's who--
Speaker 1: --when he came here in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: --he is that's who we talked about.  And he was my seventh grade teacher.
Speaker 1: That's, R-A-B-Y, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Al Raby.
Speaker 2: So and as you know he was a driver for that.  My math teacher was [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders.
Speaker 1: Now Warner Saunders's also a civic leader and a famous athlete and sports, newscaster now for--
Speaker 2: But he was one tough math teacher and you could see he was statuesque back then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's about 6'5" or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah about 6'6".  So the gangs and what not as tough as they were didn't wanna mess with Warner Saunders that much.
Speaker 1: Now he had a reputation too on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] as being an athlete?
Speaker 2: Yes, a very good basketball player.  So when you look back at some of those and you know we had, we had some very committed, dedicated teachers back then.
Speaker 1: So did those two men mentor you--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in a special way or were they just good examples?
Speaker 2: They were good examples and it's not like they took me under their wing.  What they did was tried to help us all.
Speaker 1: Okay so they just didn't pick you out?
Speaker 2: Right, no.  And, and we had some strong, very, very strong teachers back then that didn't tolerate a whole lot of nonsense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they knew the area was tough and they had to be tough to be in the area.
Story_ID: 631012
Speaker 1: Now were you, were you playing ball then?  Were you playing basketball or baseball?
Speaker 2: I played, played them both back then too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In upper grade [Julius H. Hess Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois] but again between you know, between trying to work a little bit and keep up with my studies it was a little difficult.  So I was playing ball more for fun and recreation than for aspiration.  What I mean what I'm really saying is I didn't look that as saying I'm gonna be a ball player or softball player or great center fielder or you know, Mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] stressed more education than that so it was more recreation.
Speaker 1: Okay now were your brothers good students ahead of you?  Did they set a tone?
Speaker 2: A couple of them were, a couple of them were but my sister right over me was an extremely good student.  She was an A student.  I was a, I was a good solid B student had to work to make B plus, had to work real hard to make an A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's not a small accomplishment though considering the circumstances I would think.  So your sister was an A student and so she preceded you and people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so the people had an expectation you would do well too because of her?
Speaker 2: Well, again you know we had come from a big family so the brother that was over her was the tough guy and, and did not excel as much in school so you know he like messed the name up and she cleaned it up (laughter) you know and it was that kind of thing coming down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So sh- he dominated the streets and she--(laughter) okay all right.
Speaker 2: You know we had the same tree and the same type of teacher and I just think we heard it differently (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right now so did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked history more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it about history, what aspect of it did you like?  Now those days, in those days were they teaching black history in school?
Speaker 2: They weren't teaching black history in the school, but they called it social studies, you know what I mean?
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's pre-black history but you like social studies and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause I got chance to learn about you know you learn about different cultures.  You learned about, you know you learned about things that that I was not associated with or accustomed to.
Speaker 1: So it just expanded your world.
Speaker 2: That's what, that's, that's what to me that's what history did.  Now I probably and I would have to say math is probably my weakest course (laughter) and English was a course I knew I needed to be able to do all the other stuff with the other courses as well as math but I would have to say math was one of my--was not one of my strong suits but you got a chance to look at business, you got a chance to look at social studies and then in high school history and what not.  So it allowed you to kind of get an expansion of that which is more than in your circular world or, or your surroundings.
Story_ID: 631013
Speaker 1: Now was popular culture, you know music and movies, television, were they influential in terms of your growing up?
Speaker 2: You know I remember when we had our first TV and my uncle helped purchase it for us and you know how kids would come together and sit there and look at it a little bit.  I--it was okay.  I was never--I just never sat right in front of the TV and was a real TV person.  Enjoyed it for what it was worth but not idolized it.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite show?
Speaker 2: Back in those days I was more of a Western guy.  You know I did.  I liked the Westerns, I liked the, you know, the old Randolph Scott movies and the John Wayne movies and 'The Lone Ranger' and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Now did you go to the movies much?
Speaker 2: We went--us going to the movies was a treat you know.  We, you know a real treat because it was a lot of us and she [Hooker's mother, Rosa Whorton Hooker] didn't have a lot of money to send a lot of us to the movies.  So when if we went--I went to the movies sparingly let's put it like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because of economics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Was there a neighborhood theater there [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: There was a neighborhood theater that we could walk to about a mile and--about two miles but you know you still have to have enough to get in.
Story_ID: 631014
Speaker 1: Now, I'm always fascinated by this in Chicago [Illinois]. A lot--I've met a lot of kids in the neighborhoods that never go downtown.  Did, did you come downtown for anything?
Speaker 2: She would periodically--my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] would periodically bring us downtown and kind of expose us to what downtown looked like and we had--and it was kind of nice for us because we had the "L" [elevated train] right there at Ogden [Avenue] and Central Park [Avenue] that would take you right down to Jackson [Boulevard] and State [Street].  So we could get on that you know.  I used to ride the "L" and after I, after I moved away from selling--being a newspaper guy, I used to sell the Jets.  And I used to sell them on the "L" back and forth.
Speaker 1: That sounds like that was probably be a pretty good job.
Speaker 2: It was a pretty good job.  They didn't bother you too much and all you had to do was pay one fare and you could ride the "L" one way and get off and switch and never leave out and go the other side then and ride it back the other way.
Speaker 1: So you could walk through the trains that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the Jet was twenty cents I think then?
Speaker 2: Jet was twenty cents.  It got up to be twenty-five cents and they had they own little special satchel the little satchel that we used to have and carried them in.
Speaker 1: So did you have to make that connection down at Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] or did they, or did you do it through the newspaper distribution?
Speaker 2: Yeah we did it through the newspaper distribution we had a branch there.
Speaker 1: Now did you deliver the Defender [Chicago Defender] too?
Speaker 2: No, I did not deliver the Defender.
Speaker 1: So was it Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] or the Daily News [Chicago Daily News]?
Speaker 2: It was the Sun-Times, it was the Daily News, and it was the Tribune [Chicago Tribune].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay so Jet, Jet delivery you know I think you're the first person that's really--that I met that really was a Jet delivery person.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: But if you go back I bet you a lot of them did it because you know when Jet came out we, we did those.
Story_ID: 631015
Speaker 1: Oh, wha- what about music?  Now was music a big deal growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you about music.  My mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] was very religious you know.  She was you know she would turn to the church after divorce and what not and to help rear us so we were reared in the church from a very religious standpoint.
Speaker 1: Now what church did you go to?
Speaker 2: Well I went to, I went to two churches.  While we lived on California [Avenue], I went to Holy Temple Church of God in Christ [Greater Holy Temple Church of God in Christ, Chicago, Illinois] and then we moved over on Central Park [Avenue] and I went to it was Carol Divine Temple Church of God in Christ [Chicago, Illinois] yeah.
Speaker 1: Now are these like big churches or are they storefronts or?
Speaker 2: No, they were--one was big.  The first one was a big church the other one was medium sized.  They were--neither one was a storefront.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Church of God in Christ is big in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah and it's Pentecostal so it is pretty big.
Speaker 1: So there's pretty catchy music then?
Speaker 2: Well getting back to the music scene, my mom didn't allow us to really have a lot of the what they call the worldly type music coming under the religious banner so it wasn't until some of my siblings got a little older and was able to bring some of that to the house or with transistor radios stuff like that when we were able to really hear it.  I mean I would hear it outside, but it wasn't something that was brought inside the house as much.
Speaker 1: So she didn't play any secular music in the house?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, no, you know, we kept to piano and the organ and stuff at church and what not but as far as getting really musically inclined and having the, the music in the house, it wasn't that much.
Story_ID: 631016
Speaker 1: Now well tell us about high school.  Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Farragut High School [Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay. Farragut High School (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) David Glasgow Farragut.
Speaker 1: That's right. The--
Speaker 2: Admiral.
Speaker 1: Yeah right, right.  I think that's the school that Kim Novak went to at one time so it was like an Eastern European neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah Kim Novak went there.  Matter of fact a couple of years before me was Pat Sajak went there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is like--they're like Polish aren't they, I think, Sajak and Novak?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And they were there I guess in the '50s [1950s], the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Well '50s [1950s] and the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay and you started in 1962, I guess right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was it like when you were there?  I mean was it all black when you were there?
Speaker 2: No it was about I'd say 60 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brothers--some of my brothers went there and they were like only 10 percent.  But by the time I got there it was about 60 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was it like?  Were there many black teachers there when you were there?
Speaker 2: I would say about a third.  And the third--the black teachers that were there as I reflect back on it now were some of the younger ones so some of the ol- most of the older teachers that were there were Caucasian descent.  So I would--now that I look back on it I would say and some of the teachers were coming out of high school, I mean college and what not, they were infiltrating it a bit.
Speaker 1: Now was Harold Charles teaching there then?  I know he taught chemistry there.
Speaker 2: Harold Charles before he changed his name to Hannibal Afrik [Baba Hannibal Afrik], yes he was there.  I know him very, very well.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was a young teacher there?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a young teacher and got caught up in the movement and, and began to deal with our heritage and, and the freedom of who we are, and where we are and what we need to do to excel in this world from a teaching standpoint all the way to a heritage from Africa to be proud of what you are and where you are.  Matter of fact I think, Charles was one of the first as we began to wear the naturals and the dashikis and what not.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  He became the leader of the national group, the Council for Independent Black Institutions [sic. Council of Independent Black Institutions]--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and founded the school called Shule Ya Watoto on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.  That was the south though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But he was, he was young and at Farragut at the time.  I think Farragut was one of the first schools that he taught at when he came out of college.
Speaker 1: Did you have him?
Speaker 2: I did because he was--he taught, was it history?
Speaker 1: I think he taught chemistry, right?
Speaker 2: No, he taught chemistry first, biology, I had him for biology first.  That's when I got him.  I had him for biology first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did pick him back up again when I did have to have to take chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was he as cultural then?  Had he become?
Speaker 2: It wasn't as, it wasn't outwardly as much as it was so let's say if where he's at today is 100 percent, he was about 30 percent and growing that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a good thing because he began--he was trying to teach us our heritage and our identity as well as the curriculum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did you have a favorite course in high school?
Speaker 2: Again, I'd have to say it was the, the history and contemporary his- you know we had history we also had the contemporary history then you know and what the contemporary history at that time that's when you--when we began to be exposed to periodicals like Time magazine and Newsweek and, and you know keeping up with those kinds of happenings.
Story_ID: 631017
Speaker 1: Now when you were in school [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], a lot was going on.  Well not that it ever diminishes any, at any time but when you were--
Speaker 2: It was more like a renaissance period.
Speaker 1: Yeah the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] government was in.
Speaker 2: Right.  And it changed and--you know, because you know Kennedy was killed in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the atmosphere was like when Kennedy was assassinated and how people felt on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was like, it was like, it was really like we had lost.  There was a great loss because the Kennedy era got folks more from the West Side to begin to look at politics for what it could do and should do because it talked a different kind of talk.  It wasn't the same old politic talk and it was more from a humane side--a humanitarian side you know.
Story_ID: 631018
Speaker 1: Now, by that time had George Collins [George W. Collins] ascended to congressman (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes he had.
Speaker 1: All right. Now that's a big deal.  The West Side [Chicago, Illinois] having a congressman and, so--
Speaker 2: Well you know by the time but you know before then, we--the West Side had a very strong organization, war type of organization under Richard J. Daley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the strongest ones was Ben Lewis [Benjamin Lewis] who was an alderman who got assassinated.
Speaker 1: I didn't know--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) now what happened?
Speaker 2: Ben was a strong advocate of, of help, self-helping and trying to rid out a lot of the, the gangs and all the other type elements in the area and I really, I was a little younger so I really didn't follow that but I--you knew of Ben Lewis because of his strength and what he had done and was able to bring back to the neighborhood, being an elected official.  And from that descendant came Collins.
Speaker 1: Okay so he kind of came out of the movement that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  All right.  So, so Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is killed in '63 [1963]. You're I guess a sophomore then--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I'm trying to think what else is going on.  The Vietnam War was really starting to crank up.
Speaker 2: Vietnam was getting, was really starting up pretty good. Guys were being drafted more from our area and you know at that time you had to have a--was it eighteen you had to go down and get your draft card.
Speaker 1: Now was Nancy Jefferson a big figure?
Speaker 2: Nancy was a little later but she was a little north of there too okay.  When I say a little north of there, she came along a little bit later than the Collins in the early '60s [1960s].  You know she was around but she wasn't as prominent but she was a little north, Nancy was by the time folks began to move toward Pulaski [Road] and north of Madison [Street].  When I say I'm saying African Americans began to migrate into those neighborhoods.  So Nancy Jackson was--Nancy, Nancy Jefferson was a little bit in that era.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A strong advocate of self-help.
Story_ID: 631019
Speaker 1: Now you were, let's see so when you were in high school [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois], the Civil Rights Movement was brewing down south, did your parents discuss, I mean did your mother [Rosa Whorton Hooker] discuss it with you, and--
Speaker 2: Yes you know she, you know because she would show us some of the things.  By the time I was--in the early days of my high school, my mom would be--would reflect on some of the things that were done and to show us to say now this is how it really was you know, how the policemen would beat up and do black folks back then.
Speaker 1: Yeah I guess you were in high school when Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party went to the Atlantic City convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey], with Fannie Lou Hamer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did she know anything about the people, you know the people that were involved?
Speaker 2: Yeah but she didn't really know that but she understood it more than we did.  You know you have to understand by the time I was there, coming along, you know I'm struggling to see how to get out of here, (laughter) not worrying--and that was probably part of the problem that we had.  We were so, we were so independent and segregated in our own world and I think Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] helped bring a lot of that--opened that up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Dr. King came to town your senior year I guess right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Yeah Dr. King came to town and went to Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois].  It was on the West Side also.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he lived on the West Side.
Speaker 2: He lived on the West Side and let's see what was, which was that before Mark Clark and Fred Hampton?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir it was.
Speaker 2: Yes it was and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were killed in '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Right that was before then, yes.
Speaker 1: So '66 [1966] reverend--his name is on the tip of my tongue and I can't--Shelvin Hall [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Shelvin Jerome Hall] I guess was--he hosted Dr. King on the West Side think.
Speaker 2: And put him up in an apartment on the West Side there.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So did you get a chance to participate in any of the marches or rallies when Dr. King was in town?
Speaker 2: And the answer is yes, but I didn't really understand or have a knowledge base other than--
Story_ID: 631020
Speaker 1: So we were talking about 1966 and Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being in town and you said that you were tangentially involved and didn't--you know, you were a young fella--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) trying to get your own thing together. And so when you're a senior now had you, had you played ball on a team or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Well I played ball, I played what they call--I played ball in high school [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] up to frosh-soph and junior year then I--early part of junior year I decided I needed to work.  Some things I wanted and then I wanted--had an old piece of car that my brother would give me, but you couldn't have it without having insurance.  My mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] wouldn't allow that so you had to pay the insurance on it so you had to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did you get a job that could?
Speaker 2: I got a job at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] at the--you know Sears was the headquarters were at Homan [Avenue] and Arthington [Street] on the West Side there [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: I think that's where Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] has his headquarters there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where Danny--Danny got his headquarters there now.  There used to be a great--the big building to the west of there, the big warehouse which you know Sears was a warehousing--a catalog sales and that's where it was housed at so we could get we could get part time work and some would stay on and do full time work.
Speaker 1: Okay so you started work in your--was it your junior year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well I worked there up until we got a chance to leave and graduate but so I didn't really--you know again, ball was more recreation for me than, than an aspiration.
Story_ID: 631021
Speaker 1: Now did you have any counseling about college when you were in school [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I did but you know one of the things that was bad was--and this was a me--being a good solid B student and if you really worked hard and I worked hard in those courses I really wanted to work hard at and get an A, but in my mind I didn't have enough money to go to college and it is unfortunate because there are all kinds of help you could get if you want--can believe that it's there and then achieve, get the right kind of grades and so being on the border line of a strong B you're not in upper 10 percent of your automatic graduating class that got automatic scholarships you know what I mean?  So I--it's probably should have worked a little harder earlier you know in retrospect but that's, that's not an excuse, it's an is.
Speaker 1: Well a lot of times you can't really find someone who can let you know what the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] is--can offer.  It was not always possible in an integrated school you know to find people that are willing to help you channel through the scholarships and stuff.  So you didn't--were the counselors all white or were there any black ones?
Speaker 2: I'd say maybe one or two out of about eight, twelve, eight to ten.
Speaker 1: Okay well let me put it this way, what did you wanna do, what were your aspirations and did you have anybody who tried to steer you towards college?
Speaker 2: College was quote, the right thing to do, but coming from the humble beginning that I came from and none of my other siblings preceded me went and finished college.  My sister that was really a good sharp A student was going to junior college at the time and working so--or community college.  You call them junior college but they were community college and working, so the drive and then the teachers some of them were but actually getting the counselor to sit down and kind of help map that out and tell you what and why and how, we didn't really get and I'm not--I can't say that's all on them.  Some of that is on me and I knew my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] couldn't help send me to college no way.  So I always knew I needed to get out and work and then maybe if something happen worthwhile I would go to school and then that's basically what happened.
Story_ID: 631022
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1966 [from Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and what did you do immediately after graduation, just keep working, or?
Speaker 2: I was working and end up getting very close to my girlfriend and we end up getting pregnant and got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I end up moving into a family.
Speaker 1: Okay so you moved in with her family?
Speaker 2: No, no, we, we got married and I was working.  I had started a job here and what not and we were making ends meet.
Speaker 1: Okay now did you still work for Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] then?
Speaker 2: No, I left Sears and, and got on with ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] as a mail boy.
Story_ID: 631023
Speaker 1: Now, were you one of the first blacks hired by ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I was, let's put it like this.  There was an era of, of, of some black folks that got hired and I say it was a group and if you wanna you could say maybe top fifty, that was a little older than me and I'd say by about five years or better.  I was--I came in, I'm the younger of the, well the first group let's put it like that that, if you can follow me there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we had some, but it was quite sparingly.
Speaker 1: So, was ComEd trying to live up to affirmative action guidelines or, or (cough) some kind of a quota or?
Speaker 2: At the very beginning, with some of those that went before me, some of them had degrees and worked their way through and then had come in, had degrees and had to stop--start lower than their degree--their counterparts with degrees.  I don't think it was the affirmative action movement had began to move.  You know affirmative action really didn't get going good until the mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Yeah until after Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] and until--yeah.
Speaker 2: You see what I'm saying?  So that's you gotta go five years earlier to '62 [1962], '61 [1961], '58 [1958].  There were a few that that started at ComEd and somebody attained officership and, and vice presidency and senior vice presidency and then some were in the accounting area and and ComEd was a place where you could come in and you could start at the bottom through seniority and work your way up.
Speaker 1: Okay but when you started there weren't any black executives at ComEd?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were I would say there were about three or four up there, black--about let's say two.
Speaker 1: Had they been there long?
Speaker 2: Been there quite a while you know and one ascended to be head of the nuclear division which is the largest nuclear division in the country. It was [HistoryMaker] Cordell Reed (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Give us some names?
Speaker 2: It was Cordell Reed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was degreed out of University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  Then we had, we had a gentleman by the name of Lester Dugas [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] who had attained what they called a divisional vice president.  He was a double degree out of University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].  We had John Viera who was a degreed engineer out of Wisconsin.  Who else did we have?  I think we had a Bill Ferrell [ph.] who was really one of the strong pioneers that was degreed and working, he played ball, but he was working at the post office and he was working here too because they would not let him have the job that his degree called for but he ended up ascending in the human resource area and being a pioneer and paving the way.  We had a gentleman, another gentleman by the name of Bill Dunbar [William Dunbar, Jr.] which was a double E [electrical engineering] out of University of Illinois.  He end up working and going to school nights and part time and we had another gentleman by the name of Al Courtney who was an engineer, degreed engineer out of Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay so ComEd had already--
Speaker 2: And--right. And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) established some black people in key people.
Speaker 2: Right in key positions.  And these guys have gotten--broke the line, color line and got established and then after that you had then it moved from, from that sector of about a four year or five year difference, or four year difference then you moved and then you ended up with a [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark who has done your HistoryMaker also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he--Frank is our chairman and CEO today, first one in 102 years.
Speaker 1: Okay so he's the current ComEd--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) chairman and CEO?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then two years behind him is me.
Story_ID: 631024
Speaker 1: So did you have a sense when you were hired by ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] of--that there was possibility because these other black people were here and had risen?
Speaker 2: I did.  Matter of fact in high school we had, what they had what they called the youth motivation where the different schools, different jobs would send folks in and tell you about their company and in their own way try to entice you to do two things: stay in school, get a good education. And if by chance you get out of school and need a job, be it after high school or college, come check us out and Bill Ferrell [ph.] was the guy that got my attention at the time at Farragut [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh that's good.  Okay, that's how the connection was made?
Speaker 2: That's how the connection was really, really made.
Speaker 1: So he sort of recruited you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so you know you could come in and see a few up there.  Even though I was at the very, very bottom, but you could see some had moved up and there was, there appeared to be opportunity there if you apply yourself.
Story_ID: 631025
Speaker 1: That's very much different from the phone company.  We interviewed William Bonaparte [HistoryMaker William Bonaparte, Jr.] who was the first--
Speaker 2: I know Bill Bonaparte (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black phone employee.  He, he really went through hell you know as the only--the first and only one around the same time you know, wasn't too much--
Speaker 2: Well the Bill Ferrells [ph.] and the, the [HistoryMaker] Cordell Reeds and the Lester Dugases [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.], they went through the same type here [Commonwealth Edison Company].  They were a little bit older than Bonapart so they caught it a little tougher than he did here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories that they passed down about what happened to them when they started?
Speaker 2: Well you know at that time it was fashionable to be a racist. It was fashionable to be a bigot, it was acceptable so knowing that and understanding that you knew that were certain, were certain distance that you could go or you could push so far and then you had to be careful and then you know you still had to live within these guidelines and they didn't make it very easy for you.
Speaker 1: Okay so it was tough for this early group?
Speaker 2: It was tough with the early group.  It was still tough in my time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have any--
Speaker 2: See because I didn't come in degreed.  I came in and started at the very bottom as a mail boy.  And [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark did too, but he was a couple years in front of me and I met Frank and he was in the mailroom downtown and I was in the mailroom out in our west division there and shortly after that Frank got drafted and went to Vietnam.  I escaped that by getting married and having, having a kid on the way and being classified as 3-A, you know how that went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And not 1-A.
Speaker 1: All right. So there had to be a national crisis or something for them to call you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 631026
Speaker 1: Well how did, how did things go at ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company]?  You, you been (laughter) here all your life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I been here all my life.
Speaker 1: --so I guess it worked out?
Speaker 2: Forty years.
Speaker 1: Well tell us how it worked out and what the transition's been?
Speaker 2: Well again like I told you it was even tough even during my time.  I mean yeah there were and when I look back on it, I, let me predicate it myself by saying becoming a mail boy at ComEd at the time, was, was one of the best jobs I had had and even as I look back over all the jobs I've had in my career today, I would still put that in the top two.
Speaker 1: Okay, why so?
Speaker 2: Well, it allowed me to get to know the company a lot faster and get to know people.  Everybody get mail.  So if you're going to have the right attitude in delivering the mail and I, I would have to say that I was somewhat of a charismatic individual.  I like people.  I like to work with people.  I like all people.  So, I didn't meet many strangers and I didn't feel intimidated by strangers.  So being the mail boy I got a chance to meet and talk with people about their area, super- individuals, supervisors, managers and vice presidents.  So it allowed me again to meet folks that you wouldn't ordinarily meet as a, as a meter reader or, or a clerk typist or something like this or something like that.  So I was able to move around.  There were some tough times back there too now.  In the mid-'60s [1960s] is when things were changing, that's when affirmative action so I was one of those folks that they looked at that some of the Caucasians felt that affirmative action brought me in.  So you know I didn't have that across my forehead but I didn't need to.  I was African American (laughter) and you know nepotism was, was something we had to overcome here also.
Speaker 1: Okay so that was the order of the day here?
Speaker 2: Right you know you had two or three generation of family members working here.
Speaker 1: Was there a particular ethnic group that--
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  There were--there was really, it was broad. But now, you mentioned the term ethnic you knowing the neighborhood I come from [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois], I mean outside of some, outside of my Catholic priest and police and the bus drivers and the guys at the corner store down there and teachers, I mean I just knew it was white folks.  I mean I didn't know the difference between Italian and Irish and Lithuanian and Polish.  I mean they knew that, but a guy like me coming from where I come from, there was no one to teach me about that.  You know what I'm saying.  So I didn't learn about the various nationalities.  Now granted I had some history in school and what not, but even though you have it, you don't--it don't hit you upside the head as much as if one would teach you a bit about that.  So it was acceptable that it was white or black.  So as a result of that you know I did end up learning about the various nationalities (laughter) once I got here and and the cliques and how they come together and the nepotism and how all that worked.
Story_ID: 631027
Speaker 1: I mean so much so it was pretty tough in our day.  I mean even in my time because I mean I was telling somebo- a person the other day about a story.  You know you promote from within but you had ninety days to prove that you can do the job.  And if you didn't succeed in ninety days then you got demoted back to where you were.  And I was like and I had progressed to a couple different jobs.  Just to tell you two incidents, which was kind of tough.  You know I got in the clerical field because I took typing in high school [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and learned how to type and passed the typing test.  Well when I started the mail boy, my next promotion was to be a clerk typist [at the Commonwealth Edison Company].  They had me sitting next to the guy that over--that was the supervisor and oversaw me.  Well he wasn't the supervisor but he was next to the supervisor and you know how when you make a mistake you rip it out the typewriter.  I had an old manual typewriter.  You know what I'm talking about.  And I throw it in the can.  After the first thirty days when they had to do my assessment of me in my accomplishments, he had gone every evening through the can and took 'em all out, those I balled up and those I didn't and laid 'em all out in front of them and says, "Well these are the kind of mistakes he's making."  Now my finished product didn't hardly have any errors but they used--he had an old notebook full of all of that that I had thrown away.  He'd stay every day and take them out.  So okay after that and you get a review after thirty, sixty, ninety days.  I says well okay.  So then when I made a mistake, I didn't rip it out of the typewriter anymore nor did I ball it up, nor did I throw them in the can.  I'd fold them up and lay them beside my notebook and I would end up taking them home every evening (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah that's really something to think that somebody would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So but I would leave a couple in there periodically to let him know that I was still making some and he was such a critical guy you could almost make a--you know we didn't have whiteout and we didn't have where they had the old snow pack stuff come in and then you got the little white ribbon thing and now you got the little blot out there you can blot a line out.  So you had to make--I had to learn to make corrections with a razor blade.  You know like if you make a T and you need to make an R out of take part of it off and make it an R. Click it right over there.  So those were the kind of things that we had to do--that I had to go through.
Story_ID: 631028
Speaker 1: My next move after that which was a big move, and I was the first African American timekeeper at ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company].  And you're dealing with the guys in the street, the line mans and the different shift workers and what not, time keeping.  Well, that was a super promotion to get because it was close to about three--a little bit over three dollars an hour so that really put you in another bracket and I needed that job.  They had decided that they wasn't gonna teach it to me (laughter) because they wanted the Italian guy who just got out of Vietnam and came back to get it.  So every day you know I'd teach them--they give me a little this, a little knowledge here a little help there but I would stay late and, and not get paid overtime and do it.  They went to the union and told the union if he's not completed his ninety days yet, he doesn't qualify for overtime so therefore one of us should get it.  So when they took--called me in and told me that, I told the boss, I said, "Well look, they're not really teaching and helping me."  He says, "I know but you just can't stay late though no more."  So then I said, "Okay."  I start taking stuff home with me.  Well I was getting caught up during the day a bit more 'cause I'd go home at 4:30 and I'd work 'til 9:30, 10:00 on my own.  They found out I was getting caught up they start watching me more and they realize I was taking it home, they took me back to the boss, the union and says, "He's taking company documents home.  They should never leave the premise." So I said, "Well you see they're not really working with me."  He says, "Yes I understand," and he said, "I'll try to help you as much as I can but you can't take records home anymore."  So I said, "Now what am I gonna do?"  So then at the end--it was--where the division was located, it was two blocks in and a dead end almost so they had to come back out east to get to Cicero [Illinois] to get on the expressway.  But at the corner there they had a beef place where they sold beef, Italian beef sandwiches.  So I'd leave at 4:30, beat them all out, go down there, order me a beef sandwich, stand up in the window and have a little sheet and I'd check off each one that left and by the time--and the beef was cold by the time I finished eating it and checked everybody off.  Then I'd go back into the office and work late.  So then they was wondering how was I able to do all of that and they weren't teaching me the job.  So all of a sudden the boss called me back in again and he says, "Look we understand you've been coming back in here.  I told you you can't stay here and work late and I shouldn't have to tell you this anymore so if I have to tell you this again, then you can't have this job."  So then I figured I said, "How did they know I was coming back?"  So I realized the only person knew I was coming back staying 'til ten o'clock was the janitor.  So I went and talked to him and he was a Polish guy and I told him what they were doing to me and he felt sort of bad about it but he told me they were paying him five dollars to tell me every time I came back.  So and he felt bad, he didn't wanna--he says, "I won't do it anymore."  I said, "Well no, I tell you what I'll do.  I'll pay you ten dollars not to tell them."  He didn't wanna take the money but he said, "Okay I'll take it and I won't tell them."  So by the time I really got to ninety days, I passed all of the tests and all of that but they didn't teach it to me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now that is persistence.  That is persistence.  This is a classic duel.
Speaker 1: Yeah I told you earlier I don't believe in giving up or giving in, I just gotta give out.  I believe in going all the way to the end.  So I looked for a way to achieve and that's what we have to do. Even today, we have to--and African Americans continue to work on figuring ways to achieve regardless of the obstacles.
Speaker 2: That's a great story, that's a great story.  So glad that we talked to you.  That is a great story.  Thank goodness you had the perseverance.
Speaker 1: And I think I got a lot of that from my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker], the drive.  It really is you know.  You can make excuses, but she always said you know a good reason or a good excuse is only good one time.
Story_ID: 631029
Speaker 1: So okay so now you're a timekeeper [for the Commonwealth Edison Company].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what happens next?
Speaker 2: I did that job well and I, through seniority you know in four years, I promoted up to material clerk.  Material clerk is the one that order the material for the trucks that goes out in the field.  And it's really supplies and what have you.  The problem with that job now was those guys didn't wanna teach me that job either but they had heard about my drive and whatnot.  So what I did was to make it easy on me with them was number, one I didn't get in their way of the overtime 'cause I was going to night school and I was working a part time job.
Speaker 1: Okay now what year is this?  Where are we?
Speaker 2: This is in '60 [1960]--no this is in I'd say about '70 [1970], '70 [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay '70 [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Right I was working, I was working--I was going to night school to get a degree because I realized that at some point I was getting high up in the union and I was gonna level off.  It would have been a good place to level off if that's all--if that's where you wanted to stop but I didn't want that.  I knew then that I needed additional education because I didn't need not having a degree to be the reason that they gave me for not promoting me.
Story_ID: 631030
Speaker 1: So after timekeeping I was in, I got to be a material clerk (unclear).
Speaker 2: And you said you were going to night school.  Now where'd you go to school?
Speaker 1: I, I graduated from Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] but I started out at DePaul University at the College of Commerce [Driehaus College of Business] downtown--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Chicago [Illinois] and moved, and then I ended up, I went over to Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] for a good semester and then I was transferred out to the South Side office and it was more conducive for me to go to Chicago State University from where I was working at.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which is, which was good for me.
Speaker 2: So what year did you get your bachelor's [degree] from Chicago State?
Speaker 1: I think I, I think I got my bachelor's from Chicago State in 1990.
Speaker 2: Okay so this is a protracted kind of thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah well part of that's my fault too because I should have been out earlier and I got in a dispute with the university over a course that they felt that they said I should have taken and I did take and they didn't have the record of it and I just got and I just felt and they said I needed to take this course and I went through a good year or two semesters of arguing about that and at the--the bottom line is at the end of the day I got ticked off and left it alone and here I am almost degreed minus one course to getting my degree in my hand.  So some of the older guys said, "That don't make sense.  Get back in there and you go on and take that course."  The problem with that was I was out for about three semesters.  Unbeknowing to me at the time, any time you're out over two semesters, you can't graduate under the catalog you come in under okay.  So now all of a sudden I got another catalog I gotta graduate under and instead of taking one course, I had to take four courses because they had added four more courses to the curriculum (laughter)--three more courses I'm sorry.  So had I bit the bullet and did what they told me to do I would have been out of there in the mid-'80s [1980s] with one course I had to take.  Instead I had to end up taking four different courses which was another good whole year of taking two a semester working nights.  So I worked days and I worked, and I went to school nights.  In the interim I had, I had a--you know I got married and had a young daughter [Felicia Hooker] on the way and my first wife passed away when my daughter was eighteen months old.  So now I'm a single parent raising a daughter.  So we moved back to the two flat where my mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] lived and I took over the second floor and realized that my mom had quite a bit of debt on the place.  So what I did was I took on a part time job.  So I had a full time job, going to school two nights a week, Tuesdays and Thursdays and I worked again back at Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] part time and I was pumping gas and I worked Friday night, all day Saturday and all day Sunday.  So I worked seven days a week.  Only reason I didn't work eight because it wasn't but seven in a week.  And any time I was off at ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company], they were able to let me work over there and I used all of those funds to pay off expenses that was on my mom's place and when I paid off everything after two and a half years of that, I, I resigned, I quit.  I had a purpose for the part time job and when I achieved the purpose, I resigned from it.
Story_ID: 631031
Speaker 1: Well, let's pick up back with the material--
Speaker 2: Clerk.
Speaker 1: --clerk yeah.
Speaker 2: What the material clerk was you had to order the material that goes on the truck.  So now I've never worked in the field right?  So each of, each of the material had what they called item--a store's item number okay.  So like a cable clamp, that had a store's item number to it.  Well the guys didn't wanna teach that to me too much but you know I had enough sense to work and work the sheet.  So now I'm dealing with guys that grew up in the field, the crew leaders and foremens and unbeknowing to me they got slang names for the, for this material.  You know so like a cable clamp that you, that you can pull the cable through with, they don't call it a cable, they call it a cable clamp I just go down there order five of them.  He'd call up and say, "Give me ten of those come alongs."  Well that's the slang name.  So now all of a sudden I gotta go ask the guys, "Well what's a come along?"  And they don't halfway want to tell you so what I decided to do was there was a couple of African American guys down in the storage department [at Commonwealth Edison Company], the warehouse department so everyday what I would do is I typed out every--on the warehouse sheet, I took all the store's item numbers and the names for them and I created a sheet alphabetically and then had another column for the slang name and once I went down and talked--so every day for my lunch for my lunch and my break period, which they were pretty strict at in those days.  You got a half hour and then you got a fifteen minute break in the morning and afternoon, I would spend down there going through the list with the guys, seeing what the equipment was, what is the slang name for it?  So at the end of the day I would have alphabetically the slang name as well as the company name and store's item number.  So I would eat, I'd bring my lunch and I eat a little sandwich and drink a pop and go down there and I'd work twenty minutes down there sometime a half an hour and I'd come back and I have my little notebook which I then after about thirty, I say about sixty days, I was able to order material from the slang name because the guys out in the field a lot of them called it the slang name, they grew up with it and they were not really just trying to be difficult.  But they felt a guy in stock should know what they talking about.  (Laughter) So it was those kind of things as a clerk that I had to go through to be successful.  Now one of the things I've always wanted to do and I pride myself on this and I believe it today that I've always wanted to be the best at whatever job I had.  My competition was always that person this side of me, this side of me and in front of me.  Now no matter what I did with it, I wanted to be known as the best at doing that job and I believe today that's where I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've achieved that, I believe.
Story_ID: 631032
Speaker 1: Okay so you went from material clerk to, what was next [at Commonwealth Edison Company]?
Speaker 2: From a material clerk I then was close to my degree and one of the human resource managers had worked with me in seeing me over the years and had an opening in human resources.  So at that point I was promoted to management.
Speaker 1: So this was about 1990?
Speaker 2: That was in 19--no, no that was in 19--that was in 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you took a position in human resources.
Speaker 2: Human resources.  I was a human resource representative.  And you know I was able to hire and hire meter read- hire clerks and meter readers and mail clerks.  So the person that hired me, I had achieved and attained that job.
Story_ID: 631033
Speaker 1: And so I was there for about a year and a half and my degree that I was working on was in marketing and a few positions opened up in marketing and I was selected to take on one of those positions.
Speaker 2: So what year was is when you moved to marketing?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, and how did that work out I guess?
Speaker 1: It worked out very well because it was a job that allowed you to go out. You had a territory.  You had to go out in the street and you deal with the customers and you dealt with new business, you dealt with contractors that need electrical service, you dealt with high rises.  You dealt--I, I was really the representative from Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] to the customer so what I decided I would do to make sure that I was--that I, that I did that job as well as I could, I, I turned myself as a 51 percent person.  And I had an old guy that sat behind me and he used to because I would always run and get things done.  I was always trying to do what I needed to do to get it done.  He'd always tell me to slow down, slow down you know.  You work the job, don't let the job work you. (Laughter) And he remind me that when he see me running back and forth.  But I felt that I was--I called myself the 51 percent person and what is that?  That is just when I'm in the company going out to meet the customers, I needed to be 51 percent company and tell the customers what they needed to do and how they needed to be, and what they needed to get to get the best from the company.  But when I came back in, I was 51 percent customer because the customer couldn't come in and get to where I was and see who I saw.  So I felt it was my job to try to convey what the customer needed and wanted and be an advocate for the customer that 51 percent and as I taught people that job, I used that analogy and it worked very, very well because you're our company person yet you're still a representative and you're hired by the company to do a good job but you're able to take a position of trying to convey what the customer needed and wanted at the time and I liked that.  It was, it was a fun job and you know it had different levels of it and I achieved all three levels you know representative and engineer type and then senior.
Story_ID: 631034
Speaker 1: Did executives or people involved in marketing--did your predecessors listen to customers as a general rule?  Is that something that--
Speaker 2: Some did and some didn't.  And that's in any job you get.  Some toed the company line, line a hundred percent.  Some did as little as they could to get by and others like myself went that distance and beyond.  So it's hard to kind of group--to take and just put an umbrella and group them all like that, you know, I learned doing different jobs that you're gonna have some that take it to heart, some that believe that it's an--it's an opportunity to do and excel and others this is just a job and as soon as I can get out, get over to 4:30 I'm going home.
Speaker 1: Okay, I've often wondered what the motivation is to serve the customer when you're dealing with like a one source utility.  You know when I came to Chicago [Illinois] I think it's been a law passed when people have some choice starting this year?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What electric source they used for electric power but it's always been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was part of that.
Speaker 1: Yes right, you were instrumental in it.  And but you know the general rule people think of the phone company or they used to in those days especially you know one phone company and one electrical company and one gas company.  You don't like it, lump it, you know, that's how the average person is frustrated by something they felt that what would even cause a company to listen to them but what was it like on the inside of ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company]?  I mean in those days?
Speaker 2: Well on the inside we were, even though we were a monopoly, there were--the company's philosophy was to be customer oriented.  Now did you have some take advantage of being a monopoly and did as little as they could? Yes you did.  But I think the overall drive of the company was to do the best job you can with and for the customer and to put yourself in the customer's position.  So I think I, I would have to say as we--as I was taught the job and learned it. That's the way it was even some of the customer service.  So you know I'm not--I can't tell you that everybody that had those jobs were Johnny on the spot and customer driven and looking to make the customer believe that we're super.  But I had an old guy that, that talked to me and was teaching me the job and he said, "You know what you need to do in your job now is make sure whatever customer you deal with whatever day, make them feel and believe when you leave that you were the best thing happened to them as it relates to your company."  So that was the kind of training that I had and came up with.
Story_ID: 631035
Speaker 1: Do you think your background coming from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] like many black people that grew up in the family where you're barely paying the bills, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you see these companies as just you know like almost like the weather or something you know, they're big, you know.  Did you think, do you think coming from a background like that helped you to--helps you to empathize more with the customer?
Speaker 2: No doubt about it, no doubt about it.  Number one the knowledge base coming from a background or I look back at some of the folks that were still there, I knew that they didn't know all of what they should be asking for or getting.  So as a result of that, I felt it was incumbent on me in serving the company [Commonwealth Edison Company] as well as the customer to give them the best that we had to offer.  So there's no doubt about it, the company had some, had some form of drive and inspiration for me to excel and treat people the right way.  And then as I look around I can see some that weren't doing that.
Speaker 1: Had you ever experienced when you were coming up the electricity being cut off or I mean due to your non-payment of bill or due to some natural problem and having to wait a long time for it to come back?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm, I'm fortunate and blessed in a way we never had it cut off.  Mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] was always able to make those ends meet one way or the other so I never experienced that for non-payment. (Background noise) In those early years, Chicago [Illinois] had what I would call some of the best service and it was--outages was far and few in between so we didn't have that much (background noise).
Story_ID: 631036
Speaker 1: (Background noise) This an indictment toward the company, we went on in the mid-'60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s] we went on a building program to build nuclear stations because of the oil and what have you and I think it was the right decision to do at that time and it's paying off even more today because we've got our nuclear plants running and producing at a 98, 95, 96 percent capacity.
Speaker 2: Is Chicago [Illinois] unique in the country?  Because I know when I came in '77 [1977], I took some school children on a trip to Cook nuclear facility [Donald C. Cook Nuclear Plant, Michigan] and that's one of those stations that serves Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --there are three of them right?
Speaker 1: Well they're each we have about--we had about twelve, we had over thirteen nuclear plants, twelve or thirteen plants in Illinois.  This is--we have more plants here than any other location in the--I mean twelve or thirteen yeah plants, locations in anywhere in the United States.  What it was, they were not running to capacity.  We barely got past 45 percent.  So a nuclear--building a nuclear program, an expensive program, and then not running them as well and kind of deferring some of the monies to building the plants and not putting it back into the system, we end up paying for that in the early '90s [1990s] with having outages and whatnot but and that has turned around and we've been, we've been putting more money into our, in our system in the last, past seven, eight years almost twice as much as you would normally put in a utility this size and some of that was because it wasn't done earlier and the system got old and had had to be maintained better and you just had to build new infrastructures.
Speaker 2: Yeah I heard during 1995, I think it was 1995 when we had like the horrible heat wave in the summer.  I think some of the transformers downtown were just too old to handle to load or something?
Speaker 1: Well in '99 [1999] we had the--where we had our outage our blackout downtown Chicago which was the apex of, of, of one hell of a problem for Commonwealth Edison, I think we have moved past that.  We've came under a lot of scrutiny, our outages now are down 50 percent, our--the duration of how long you're out is down and that's because we put a lot of money in the system.  We put--a lot of other utilities are putting six, seven hundred million in the system we're putting a billion or better every year.  So the new CEO said we're gonna fix this problem and we're gonna tell you when we're doing it and that's what we're going to do and I'm proud to say that's what we have done and the company has turned around and we are one of the premiere companies right now and our rates are a lot lower than a lot of other companies but our, our customers now have gotten to the point where they--and this is gonna be throughout the country, expect a lot out of utilities, especially electric utilities.  And the reason for it is in my opinion we affect the quality of life for our customers.  What do I mean by that?  I mean our customers believe that they have a right to breathe nice clean, good fresh air.  That's a quality of life.  They have a right to drink good clean water.  And these are public type services.  Well here we are a privately owned company and they put us up there with air and water now and say we have a right to have good reliable electricity at a low price.  So since that's the way our customers are looking at us as a company, we have got to continue to perform and continue to raise the bar to live up to some of those expectations.
Story_ID: 631037
Speaker 1: Now okay. Well let's con- go back to the career here.
Speaker 2: Sorry about that I got to talking about the company [Commonwealth Edison Company].
Speaker 1: Yeah that's good, no that's good.  So let's take you to--now you're working for human resources.  We had you in human resources and--
Speaker 2: And then to marketing.
Speaker 1: --and then to marketing right.
Speaker 2: I left--I went, I, I excelled in the three different levels of marketing and even got to be a supervisor and department head out in our Bolingbrook [Illinois] area.  I was out there until--I went out there in around 1984--from '76 [1976] to '84 [1984]. I had promoted, excelled in marketing and I was there 'til about a little about, a bit around '85 [1985], '86 [1986], early '86 [1986]. Then they picked the powers to be said that our good Mayor Harold Washington had been elected and Harold Washington said that you know he wanted companies to begin to send people over to help develop African Americans and other minorities.  If you don't have any, train them and that was his philosophy.  So our company had decided that the guy that had the job as liaison for the City of Chicago [Illinois] was about to retire and they wanted me to come over and work with our good mayor and represent the company.  And at the time you know there was some dispute with the council [Chicago City Council] and whatnot and I had to come over and, and that's not a job that I had welcomed at the time because you had the twenty-one and the twenty- twenty-nine was fighting the mayor and so I was told that that's the job I had, pack up and come downtown (laughter).  Got in and met with the mayor and let him what--that I was assigned to be the liaison to city hall and that I was gonna do the best job that I could possibly do.
Story_ID: 631038
Speaker 1: Well knowing black folks like I do, I knew that that was gonna be a big challenge because if I came in downtown, if I came over there, they were gonna expect me to be doing all the things that they want the alderman to--that they wanted me to do as a representative.  And I agree that should be done but I also knew that they would want me to lean more to that than not.  I felt my job was to be a representative to all of city hall, black, white, polka dot, green whatever didn't matter.  So what I did was I went to some of the African Americans and said, "I need your help.  I gotta learn how to do this job and that I'm not--I don't have any personal thing here.  I'm coming over to do a job for Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] and when you see me here, that's what I'm doing.  If you see me with this person, I'm representing the company, if you see me with that person.  Now I know you're gonna be wondering what am I doing so let me just tell you up front.'  And I laid it on the line.  I said, "Look, I, I'm taking this job from a Caucasian guy that has had it for a long time and he took of the other side very well and worked with you all a bit.  What I can guarantee you is that I'm gonna work with both sides.  The other side will continue to get what they been getting.  What I will tell you and commit to you is that I'll make sure that you get what they get from the company," and that was only fair and whatever that may be.  And we did a lot of things.  Because see all of elected officials' constituents are our customers.
Speaker 2: Now give us an example of something that, that you would do you know for a political--I mean what an alderman would want out of Commonwealth Edison that you know?
Speaker 1: They, they--first of all you can't you know you're, you're limited on how much financial support you can give any elected official in the city unless they say they don't wanna be reelected, they want to be reelected.  And how do they get reelected is to be able to help their constituency.  So an example is there're rules and regulations that we have to abide by even though you know we're somewhat of a monopoly to a degree, we're still governed by Illinois Commerce Commission so there's rules in which we have to abide by and then you have some customers that run into hard times and can't pay their electric bill, you have some that just won't pay.  Well, if they go to their elected--most times they know what our rules and regulations are and they'll use up our favors and use up our plans and get to the point you know of no return and we may have to disconnect them.  That's part of the policy and procedure here.  When you've gone through and don't pay and continually not pay, then they may go to their elected official and he may call me and say, "So and so is in a bind.  Is there anything your company can do or any other plan that you got to help them with?"  And at that point I would look a little further and we would try to work out whatever we could at least one more time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay and that's one to say, "Look they've come to you, we're gonna do what we can but we can't keep doing this, and you've gotta tell 'em and you can't keep, you can't come back to me with this one."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You know.  But that's where we are.
Story_ID: 631039
Speaker 1: With that in mind, we would render the different services that we have or you know it's--everything's above board.  There's nothing that you would--we would go out and try to do that shouldn't be done or couldn't be done.
Speaker 2: But there's probably perceptions there as you were saying earlier?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Someone might perceive that you're doing more for one than another?
Speaker 1: Right.  So I, I try (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And 'cause it's an inside you know.
Speaker 1: Right but as a representative I worked with the department head, the commissioners.  So I worked with all of the folks over at city hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois] from the mayor's office, down, not just aldermen, but all of them.  And began to get a different perception of what Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] was all about, could, should and would do for our customers.  And I felt good about that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So you held that position while Harold was mayor--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Harold Washington was mayor and--
Speaker 1: I held that position while he was mayor.  He passed away in '87 [1987].  At the time we were working on what they call a franchise which is a permit and for the City of Chicago [Illinois] for us to do work in alleys and whatnot and we're working on a different franchise agreement.  That took until about with the new mayor coming in because we was almost there with Harold and the new mayor looked at it and wanted to review it and study it.  That took until about '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Okay that's with [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer's administration?
Speaker 1: Eugene Sawyer and then Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] came in.  Well Sawyer was only there like what a year or two?
Speaker 2: Year and a half something like that yeah.
Speaker 1: Year and half.
Speaker 2: Or two, right.
Speaker 1: Right.  And then and worked with that administration, then worked with the Daley administration and after we got that passed through, after we got the franchise agreement passed through and I did a lot of one on one explaining and working with the different aldermens and the different department heads and the legal department the whole bit, I was promoted out as an area manager out in the western suburbs.
Story_ID: 631040
Speaker 1: That's the second job that I liked the most of all the jobs I've had.  From the--the mail boy was number one and you know I did a talk one day and I, and I said, "The evolution of [HistoryMaker] John Hooker." And I had my assistant, I'd write down mail boy and she would change it to mail person.  I says, "No, I was the mail boy then and that's what it was called and that's what I was and I was happy to be it."
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's an old movie 'How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Something--
Speaker 2: Where the guy he starts as mail boy.
Speaker 1: So I went out to area out west to the western division [of Commonwealth Edison Company] I mean then I was in the Bolingbrook [Illinois] area and we had like about twelve district and division and district offices at the time and they were all like mini companies.  It, it was comprised of a geographical area and you had your customer service, you had your overhead and your underground and your meter reading.  Though you had just sort of like a mini company and I was--I led that and I think when I went out there statistically on those things that they count and measure, out of the twelve we were like ten, eight in some areas, eleven.  When I left in a couple of years, we were either one or two in those statistics.  So I enjoyed managing people and working with them and having them work with me.  And then we kind of split up the divisions and went to consolidating and whatnot in about '92 [1992].
Story_ID: 631041
Speaker 1: Now there's something I wanted to cover--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --before that is asso- it's associated, but you had in 1990, you were one of the founder- founding members of the of Exelon African American Members Association?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that?
Speaker 2: That, what that was, the company was real big and we're all over everywhere but we didn't know who certain African Americans were out in the western division or out in the northern division or the southern division or in the nuclear area.  So we were all, we were all trying to come together and do our thing and, and excel in this company and not knowing who's who nor how to help be supportive.  I mean the experience that I had coming in here I could have easily been able to help somebody else coming behind me to not have to be subjected to some of that if we knew them.  So it started out as more of a networking and to be supportive of one another and, and get to know one another and then continue to do all that we could to become the best that we could be for us as African Americans as also for the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Like a lot of professionals you decide to organize yourselves.  Now there's a black preachers association, black teachers organized, black firefighters, we could go on and on, but was there any--did you get any backlash or resistance from whites and say well we're not organizers the white you know they're all already white?
Speaker 2: Yes we did and it was about six or seven of us that came together to do this and we knew this was not gonna be embraced with open arms.  We felt there would be some backlash but we didn't realize to what degree and we decided that this is something that we really felt would be--would and could be an asset to the company as well as to us.  Now [HistoryMaker] John Hooker, out of all six or seven of us, happened to have had the broadest and the most well rounded exposure and to a degree I was if you looked at that group you'd say if there's one that was most likely to succeed, it would been me that's what we all would say.  So what some of the older ones in the group said as we came together and did this, now let me tell you we did that here at ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] but Illinois Bell [Illinois Bell Telephone Company] was the first company utility to have done that and they did it like two years before we did.  The born part was there.
Story_ID: 631042
Speaker 1: So what, what we, what they decided, what the group said to me was, "Well John [HistoryMaker John Hooker] we've talked and we decided that you would probably be the best person to carry this to upper management, to senior management and ask them for acceptance of this organization [Exelon African American Members Association] within the company [Commonwealth Edison Company].  But before we ask you to really do this, we want you to know that out of this group, we believe you're the best and have the broadest exposure number one and number two we also know and believe that you have the most to lose.  So that's where we are.  So you've been a part of this whole group all this time.  But we--it's time to move this another level.  Are you willing to do it?"  I thought about it and I said yes.  Well when I took it to upper management, took it to my senior vice president first, dealing with protocol, he really didn't like it and didn't feel it was necessary and just felt that this is something that ought not be.  And I told him I respect, I respected his--respected him and I accept his opinion but I wanted to move further.  I needed to get to the president and then to the chairman and I was gonna ask for that but I wouldn't do it without him knowing it and hopefully let him allow to get me there.  And after a few days and he realized that I was gonna continue to move on in spite some of the things that he thought and said that wouldn't be encouraging (laughter), he decided I just ask him point blank, "Do I ask for this meeting or are you gonna help me try to get it your way?"  He says, "Well since you won't go away, I guess I'll do it."
Speaker 2: So this like the March on Washington?  If you can't get him to stop it you better get in it.
Speaker 1: So but I also knew that he was gonna tell his side and tell it the way he wanted to tell it and allow me an opportunity to try to say what it was.  But that's now coming behind, but it is what it is.  So after we got going a while and I met--I had to go meet with all the senior officers and they basically said almost all of them and this is something we don't need and the union didn't like it 'cause they felt we were trying to organize and that's what they do or did and upper management didn't feel it was necessary so one of the guys that higher officer said to me he said, "You know John, I know you well. I believe I'm close enough to you to tell you the way I really feel about this," and he said to me, he says, "I know and believe that you don't need this group.  As an individual you have a bright future ahead of you and you don't really need this group and I felt compelled to tell you that and why are you taking the lead in charge in trying to get this thing established?"  And I told him, "You may be right, I may not need this group, but I believe this group needs me.  So that's why I'm doing what I'm doing."  And we got it started.
Story_ID: 631043
Speaker 1: And yesterday I think we celebrated what I think the seventeenth year, was it the seventeenth? Ninety-one [1991]?
Speaker 2: Yeah that sounds like it the seventeenth year.
Speaker 1: Yeah we celebrated--
Speaker 2: And last night you, you were presented with a handsome African statue here--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --right behind us.
Speaker 1: Yeah and that statue was basically the drum beater and I'm very proud of it.  I didn't do this by, I didn't do that by myself.  There were six or seven other people behind me and beside me and took some of the lumps that we all took but I believe that and I still believe today that it's something that's needed.  Not to overthrow the company [Commonwealth Edison Company], not to, not to to be a subgroup of the company other than to become a supportive group and a network for other young African Americans that come to the company and help them move forward and cover ground that they don't have to just plow over.  The road is there and direct them to a degree.  And I think that only makes a very, very good employee and can only strengthen the company in this position as we continue to move forward.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So does management sort of buy that idea now that the--
Speaker 1: Yeah upper management.
Speaker 2: --employees in the company should not be at war with the black employees?
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah upper management has embraced it and they call them ENG groups [executive network groups], network groups and today we have and I'm proud to say that we have other employee groups, Afri- I mean Hispanic groups, Asian group, gay and lesbian group and I'm proud to say that these groups were able to come about as a result of us taking a stance in getting the African American Members Association [Exelon African American Members Association] going forward.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's not a me thing.  A lot of people had a lot to do with that and we did it together and I'm happy as well as proud that it's taken the route it's taken and people feel good enough to become members and strong enough to help each other.
Speaker 2: I'm just curious like how far down the ranks did the idea come from?  I mean did it you know was it generated you know I know it was generated by African American employees but how far down the rank were the people who generated the idea?
Speaker 1: I would say all of the members were management at the time and they were from the entry level management position to the directorship.  There was no vice presidentships in there okay or no seniors, nothing like that but it did get as high as manager and, manager and perhaps one director.
Speaker 2: Okay those presumably will be the ones that were probably catching the most hell down to the entry level I would guess?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.
Speaker 1: But I would have to say the company has embraced it, embraced other network groups within the company and it's part of our culture now.  It's part of who we are and what we are.
Speaker 2: So the group makes it easier for African American to survive--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and hopefully get to a place where you are today?
Speaker 1: Um-hm yes.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: They may not be as persevered as--have the perseverance you had but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah but if they, if they if one would ask or need to talk to me and what not to learn that I'd be more than happy to share it with them.  You know you know and I've told you some stories on some of the things that I had to encounter coming up but I don't think these kind of stories or those kind of stories were any different here than in many other companies.  What I'm most proud about is where we are today and where we're trying to go.  I mean we actually have as one of our core competencies in our vision statement diversity as a goal from hiring to retention, or better yet, from--hiring to promoting to retention.
Story_ID: 631044
Speaker 1: Let's go on to, let's see. Let me take you to--so we're about 19--we're in the early '90s [1990s] now?
Speaker 2: We are I've just moved into--I've just, I've just left the area managers job right yeah.  I mean yeah.
Speaker 1: Now 1994--now you completed the Leadership Greater Chicago program?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that affect you?
Speaker 2: Well Leadership Greater Chicago, I came back downtown from after we began to consolidate the divisions in the areas and I was a director in our external affairs area which I've had--we had three directors for our company [Commonwealth Edison Company].  You know our company they have like eleven thousand square miles we cover.  We got all of northern Illinois like from Pontiac [Illinois] all the way to the Wisconsin line from, from the lake [Lake Michigan] all the way out to Quad Cities all the way over.  So we had, we had regional directors of our community relations and public affairs area and I was what they call the urban, we had an urban region, suburban region and a rural region.  And I had the urban region which was all of Chicago [Illinois] and the surrounding suburban areas such as our south, near south Crestwood [Illinois] area which takes us up to Orland Park [Illinois] and all of that stuff and I had the western, part of the western suburbs the Maywood [Illinois] area along with the city and the northern piece there on Evanston [Illinois] and what not.  So all of those were under me and I worked with and I had managers that worked and represented the company from a PR [public relations] standpoint and a company representative to work with the elected officials, the different chambers, the different chamber of commerces and also different organizations and they were more or less an extension of a PR from within the company to their geographical area.
Story_ID: 631045
Speaker 1: Now I moved into, went to Leadership of Greater Chicago [sic. Leadership Greater Chicago] that's a program, and I think it's a great program.  It's a program where they bring young, young up and coming executives into it and you meet once a week for a good nine months or so on a Friday and you cover everything in the business world in the city world and whatnot.  You cover rac- you cover topics like racism.  You cover topics--we end up touring the county jail and, and stuff like that.  We went and visited all sections of the city as a group and you've got people from all over at these various companies, some of them never been to the West Side.  Some never been to the South Side you know and vice versa.  And we were seeing all parts of the city, becoming a part of it and understanding the business side of it but what makes Chicago [Illinois] tick.  So in the completion of that course, you really had what I called and it's an outside organization and you become what they call a fellow which is an alumni and each year you have a different class come through and each class consist of about maybe anywhere from thirty-five to maybe forty-five people that come together from all different persuasions, backgrounds, professions and you begin to learn about one another, learn what the city is all about, learn its culture, learn its diversity, learn its neighborhoods and you begin to learn its politics and you get a chance to see how Chicago really works.  Its real estate, its banking, its various other businesses and you get a firsthand of it because the members in this organization at this time are from each one of those parts.  So you're able to get into it and it's usually up and coming.
Speaker 2: Okay so it gives you a sense of something larger than the part that you're playing?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now do the leaders stay in touch with other over the--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah we get together usually once a year at least.  It's an alumni type of association all its own from a business perspective.  We, we've got booklets on one another if we need that. If you're looking for some type of person or employee to fill this type you can easily reach back and see what some of your other fellows have available or doing.  So, so it's, it's a good resource.
Story_ID: 631046
Speaker 1: So that was 1994 and at that time you said you were director of external affairs [for the Commonwealth Edison Company]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was your next move?
Speaker 2: My next move was in the--in about '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Oh wait a minute before we get past that now you got married again in '94 [1994] right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  You gonna tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm still married to the same woman [Kim Hooker].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I married a very lovely lady who had a son [Sandor Williams] or who has a son and we got him through college, civil engineer, M.B.A., and he is doing very, very well and we worked together to get him through and to establish a life for ourselves and it's, it's worked well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I just wanted since I had a note here.  I guess that's a milestone because you had been single all this time with--
Speaker 2: I've been--
Speaker 1: --and had your daughter [Felicia Hooker]?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was a single parent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But by this time I guess your daughter was grown?
Speaker 2: Yeah my daughter currently now--I had really I got married again about six years--let's see, I'll tell you about me I would have to say in '72 [1972], '73 [1973] I think.
Speaker 1: So you were a second time then?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was married a second to that--
Speaker 1: For about six years?
Speaker 2: --and to that union, I had another daughter [LaToya Hooker] and married about six years and we were divorced in '80 [1980] no I was single about six years then I got married and we were--I was married from like about eighty--'73 [1973] I think to '79 [1979].  And I had another daughter at that time.  And after that I just chose that I said I wouldn't get--after we got divorced you know my youngest daughter went with her mom and I kept the oldest one.  And I decided I wouldn't--I just didn't want to get married again until she was grown and up and gone more or less.  I always felt at that point she wouldn't have a voice in me ever getting married again but I did want her to have a choice, the choice to stay with me, obey all the house rules and all of that or be old enough and out of school and what not and be on your own enough to make your choices.  So in '94 [1994], I got married again and I'm still married to the same person and to that union came--well she had a son and he was just finishing high school, going into college so we got him out of college, got his master's degree and doing well and I'm living in the South Loop [Chicago, Illinois] with my wife and all our kids are gone and it's great.
Story_ID: 631047
Speaker 1: All right so we're picking up in I guess the mid-'90s [1990s] now.  So what's going on career wise in the mid-'90s [1990s]?
Speaker 2: I end up in the mid-'90s [1990s], going, coming over into governmental affairs, working with [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark again and our, our job then was to get the company set where it could move into this deregulated world that you were talking about earlier and working with our legislators in, in, in our Springfield [Illinois], our capital, General Assembly [Illinois General Assembly] members.
Speaker 1: Now what year is this and what was your title?  Were you vice president of governmental affairs?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was director in governmental affairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had still had some of the external affairs stuff with me also.  I then--I--then they end up putting some of the other areas of the company under me because I think in ninety--that was like '94 [1994], '95 [1995] then I had that job for a while and in ninety--oh let's say '95 [1995] yeah I had some divisional stuff so I had all the external affairs stuff with me and in Springfield we were working to try, we were moving into a deregulated market that had to be passed through the general assembly and working closely with [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark for about three years we worked on this and finally got a bill passed after several ups and downs and others would call that wins and losses.  (Laughter) We were able to get a bill passed that allowed the company to deregulate the utility, the electric utilities in the state and we froze the rates for we froze the rates for ten years and then we decreased them at 20 percent and then froze them and so now we move fast forward and then in that time we shortly after that we changed chairmans.  John Rowe came to ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] in '98 [1998] and we began we to look at the legislation that was passed and what's some of the things could be done with it and the company grew under that period with John Rowe up until where we are today.  Sold off some of our fossil stations and kept the nuclear ones.  Merged with another company in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], PECO electric we merged with them.  And I maintained--I became a vice president and an officer of ComEd and so now we're moving into 2000, the early 2000.
Story_ID: 631048
Speaker 1: Let me revisit the law again for a second.  But the law is 1997 the Electric Service Customer Choice and the Rate Relief Law of 1997 [Electric Service Customer Choice and Rate Relief Law of 1997] or the customer choice law.  Now what is that in plain terms, what does--how does that benefit us?
Speaker 2: In plain choice that was to dereg- deregulate the industry.  Now there's a certain portion of our business that will always be regulated.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask now.  The customer may want some regulations.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember when Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] deregulated the air traffic controllers.  That's not necessarily what we want, so.
Speaker 2: But there's a certain amount in this business that will always be regulated and, and rightfully so.  Okay because there's an opportunity that you--that would be an opportunity to increase prices an awful lot whereas under regulated atmosphere you can--you have to kind of justify I mean you're, you're, you're under the banner that you're allowed to get a certain amount of money on return earnings.  So a certain percentage you should get of that.   But if you, if, if you, you don't watch it that can get away from you.  It's easy for a company like this to need to spend a lot of money to do the right things for our customers as well as our shareholders and it's very easy.  So what do you say--what am I really saying?  We now have fast forward a little bit and I'll go back a little bit but we're now in front of our commission [Illinois Commerce Commission] and asking for a rate increase and we're asking to give us because with with regulation regulating us there's always a lag, you have to have a test year.  So a test year could be a ninety--'96 [1996] or '97 [1997] test year you know or you know or 2004 test year and this is 2007 so you're really behind time.  So if they're gonna test us based on what we spend in 2004 and justify giving us an increase relative to the 2004 costs as well as spend, we're in '98 [1998]--I mean 2000--2008 so we got a lag of four years there.  So it's easy to say well I need to do a little bit more for the customers such as we talked about the quality of life and the expectation of our customers.  Our customers expect us to know when they're out of power.  That's a logical thing.  That's common sense.  You should know.
Speaker 1: Is there a way, has there been a way that ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] would know if my power went out now?
Speaker 2: Well currently there isn't--there is a way we can do it now.
Speaker 1: But there wasn't before?
Speaker 2: Prior to that, prior to now we--the system we have in place now you have to call us to tell us when you're out of power.  We know when our main line, our main circuit lines are out.  I mean it records on the system we know that.  But there's--that's like the, that's like the trunk of the tree.  Now there're branches that are out, we can look up and kind of find out what branches there may be out and they all may not be out but then there's sub-branches to that branch so now all of a sudden you don't really know that individual service that's out of power.  They've got a thing called a smart meter now.  Well this smart meter can tell us with a recording on it it can tell--we can know the minute you go out of power when you're out.  That seems like a logical thing we should invest in and do.  But in order for us to invest in and do that, that's gonna cost quite a bit more money.  We need to know that, that the commission will allow us to recover that money.  I don't need to know that four years from now and you as a customer are expecting us to be able to tell you that next year and you want me to install that now right?  Well, the problem with me installing it now if the commission would deem that it's not prudent that I spend those kinds of dollars on that kind of meter when the current meter is still is a good meter, then I'm out of luck.  So what we're trying to do now that's what--is say take a look at this now and let's see if this is something that you want to give us the okay to do.  So these are changing times.  They're gonna change--they're gonna call for some changing ways of thinking and we're working on that and we'll continue to do so.  Because in order for us to serve our customers better, we have to keep up with the time. Creativity and innovation and then those things that are out there can do that.
Story_ID: 631049
Speaker 1: So now we talk about the law [Electric Service Customer Choice and Rate Relief Law of 1997] a little bit more.  So the law allowed us to do all of those kinds of things as far as deregulating it and it was for price really if your competition would bring on lower prices.  And it will and it should and I believe it does.  Most of our large customers are no longer with us [Commonwealth Edison Company].  But now they have the wherewithal as well as, when I say the wherewithal, they have the dollars to spend on equipment.  They have engineers in place to monitor it whereas on the other hand the regular common residential customer don't have all of that.  So how do they get competition?  Well, the consumer group that worked with us in the time in '97 [1997] said we been through this with the telephone, the telecommunication industry and we didn't get ours that well.  We didn't get the benefit of, of deregulation.  So when the electric utilities industry decided to do that, we want ours up front.  That's how you got a 20 percent rate reduction as well as a ten year freeze.  Well the problem with that came at the end of ten years now we need to come up to market cost and everybody forgot about their rates being frozen because they bill still tends to go up but it goes up because of usage, not the rate.  The rate is low as it was in '97 [1997] before last year, before the end of '07 [2007].  The rate was lower than it was in '97 [1997] but now you got microwaves, you got electric toothbrush, you got electric hairbrush and so you got, you got iPods, you got cell phones that you're charging.  So you're using a lot more electricity than you ever used before so as a result of that your bill is actually going up but the rate isn't.  Your usage goes up and that's why the bill is going up.  So we've got to continue to do our job, to inform our customers how we--how they can conserve and keep their bills low.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's how the law really worked and where we are with that.  So now we're at a point where we're implementing the law.  We've been in a showdown with the General Assembly members [Illinois General Assembly] for the last two and one half years and wanted--had they saw this coming--wanted to take us back.  Well taking us backwards and back would bankrupt us.  So we end up working out a settlement last year understanding that there are--there're going to be some hardships and that going up 20 percent or 22 percent right off the top of the bat cause- could cause a problem for those that are unable to pay it yet.  So we were able to come up with a settlement where the utilities put money into to ease this transition and I at the end of the day I think it was a good settlement.  The utilities ended up putting about a billion dollars up to help transition and ease the customers into the new rates and to the new market rates.
Story_ID: 631050
Speaker 1: Now, all right, let's track your, your position. You seem--now some of these moves I don't know if they're--are they all like upward moves, or some of them lateral or what?
Speaker 2: They've, they've been, they've been for the last ten years or so upper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ten, twelve years they've been upwards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I got to be vice president in early 2000 and an officer of the company [Commonwealth Edison Company].
Speaker 1: Now what does it mean to become an officer of the company?
Speaker 2: You know you have a board of directors which governs and manage the company and you have you know the CEO and the chairman is on that.  But then CEO and chairman have officers in the company that help make decisions about the company. And I would tease some of the folks sometime and said I came from the, from the boiler room or the mailroom to the boardroom.  And I sometimes say boiler room because the mailroom was right next to the boiler room (laughter) and then by that time my office sat right out next to the boardroom.  So I would tease and say I really came from the mailroom to the boardroom.  So that's what we were doing as an officer you help make decisions about the company.
Speaker 1: Well that's the highest decision making level of the company I guess?
Speaker 2: Outside the board.  The board of directors are the highest decision making entity within a--within the company--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) along with the CEO and chairman--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --which is one in the same here.
Story_ID: 631051
Speaker 1: How do you like your current job?  And what's your, what's your title again?
Speaker 2: I'm a senior vice president now in charge of our legislative and governmental affairs.  We--just last year we spun off the external affairs, the community PR [public relations] stuff.  I still have some of--I still have the real estate, the company's real estate and facilities under me also.  I manage that.  But so I'm a senior VP in charge of the governmental and legislative area of the company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I like it a lot.  I've grown with some of the legislators.  Let them know some of the things that they need, think and work with them and they got a chance to see an integral part of our business, what we are, what we do and why we do it, and when we do it.
Speaker 1: It must--is it refreshing to--for someone like say State Senator Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] to be one of the black persons on ComEd board [Commonwealth Edison Company] or you know?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I would have to say I work with all of the legislators in the General Assembly [Illinois General Assembly].  I've known Senator Jones long before he became president.  Matter of fact Senator Jones mentored [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark and I when we first got to Springfield [Illinois] and said you know, "I'm gonna try and teach you guys and show you how things work down here."  And that was a great learning curve.  We--he used to take us under his wings and kind of teach us some of the dos and don'ts and but to answer your question I would think he's a, he, he's always told us that he was not anti-white by no means but he is pro-black and he wanted to make sure that, that our schools get better and he didn't just want the black schools to become better, he wanted all the schools to become better.  And so I admired that in the president of the Senate [Illinois Senate].  I feel good being I worked with other presidents.  I enjoyed working with them as well.  I feel very, very good working with Senator, President Senator Jones and just he's not the first African American senate president of Illinois.  We had Partee, I say well he's the second one that--the second African American senate president of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it Charlie Chew [Charles Chew] who said?
Speaker 2: No, Cecil Partee--
Speaker 1: Partee.
Speaker 2: --was the first one.  Charlie Chew was a senator a very good senator, and represented his district very, very well.  But he never reached the presidency.  But Cecil Partee did and President Jones after him.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Not directly after him but the second one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were a few other presidents in between that were not African American.
Story_ID: 631052
Speaker 1: Now what would you consider to be I guess the highlight of your career so far?
Speaker 2: I like to help.  I, I just--I like giving and this job afforded me the opportunity to give back what I know and how I could help those from my old neighborhood that I came from Lawndale [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] that didn't know all of the things that they need to to get the things that they should have.  I like helping and mentoring and giving back to younger employees--African American, white, black doesn't matter--that come through.  If there's a person that want to talk to me about how things were or how they can help get to where they wanna go, I definitely take the time out to do that.  So I would say reaching the level in which I have reached, knowing that there are folks that would love to get to meet with me and talk with me and ask me what I did and how I did it, I always take the time out to do that, always.  And that's a form of giving that I like to do.
Story_ID: 631053
Speaker 1: What are some your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I believe the sky is the limit.  I've never put limits on myself.  My mom [Rosa Whorton Hooker] taught us that.  It's nice that you ask that today when you look at Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who I knew when he came to the Illinois Senate to where he is today in the running to become a candidate for the presidency of the United States, in the running to become the Democratic candidacy.  To be able to say this can happen, it's attainable but you gotta apply yourself early and you gotta have a record, that, that you can live on and stand on early.  In other words, you can't do little things and become the president of the United States.  That's a big job that requires a clean record.  So you can tell people that, but if you know I always say little boys can't be what they don't see.  Now girls sometimes do a little different, but it's hard for little boys to be what they don't see.  So I tried to say that there is opportunity out there if you apply yourself.  I use, I use being the best as a prerequisite.  I mean I've had people come, sit up and talk to me to say you know, "I'd like to come work in your department."  And I say to them, "Well where you are now, are you the best at the job you're doing?  You got about thirty people in your department, are you the best?"  And most times they say no, but they know who the best is.  I say, "Well who is the best?"  "Well I'm in the top five."  "No who is the best?"  They'll tell me and I say, "Go tell that person to call me because--'cause when I have my next opening that's who I want.  Now you get to be the best, and when you come back and tell me you're the best, I'm a work like hell to get you a spot in my group too."  So I use that as a parameter.  I mean it's just not a cut and dry, it's not cut and dry but I try to motivate and inspire all at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, and, and that's two different things, but when they come together they're dynamic and they're powerful.
Story_ID: 631054
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I told you earlier that I got married early and had a child early.  I can tell you looking back on that, I don't regret that as a big mistake.  Should I have done it like that? Probably not.  If I could do only one thing different, I would apply myself and go to school and get my education first and then do that.  Now the reason why I don't regret that because I'm at a point now where I'm thinking about after forty years you know it's time to come and time to go for all of us.  After forty years, I'm considering and looking at when it's gonna be my time to go now after I train a person that I brought in to replace me [at Commonwealth Edison Company].  I figure I got a couple of good years left to really work with that person so I'm young enough and I'm strong enough and hopefully my health stays good enough where I can enjoy the fruits of my labor now.  And my kids are old enough and out there on their own long enough for me to feel very comfortable about that.  So the only thing that I think I would do different if I could sit down and draw my life out, is apply myself in school earlier and go into college and and not just go into college for college's sake.  Go into college as a way of completing my education, first things first.  You know people say go to college, go to college.  Well what the hell does that mean at times?  To me it means completing your education and going to the next step and continue to grow from there.  You know I wouldn't have had to work two jobs and go to night school at the same time (laughter) you know.  So no regrets.  But if--to answer your question, if there's one thing that I could do differently, it would be to complete my education first.
Story_ID: 631055
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at your life to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would consider two things from a professional side I believe what, what, what we retained in this company [Commonwealth Edison Company]--when I say we I mean [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark and I came together years ago and said at some point, they always had one or two up top that I thought it would be he and I at some point would be that one or two which has worked out to be true.  And we would have to support one another and not be like a lot of people we know, especially some African Americans that's like crab, won't let the other one up.  I realize and he realized there could only be one number one.  So if you can be number two and be very supportive to help build number one, you could bring up others.  So my biggest legacy to me and if I had to be remembered and could draw out how I want to be remembered is that two African Americans came together early in life, worked within the system, reached the top of the corporate world and was supportive of one another all the way through and let me just tell you this is a funny thing.  We were at a high school speaking with some students on, on applying yourself and, and coming out and you could become a president, you could become a senior vice president, you can become a chairman.  One guy raise his hand up and he says, "Mr. Hooker [HistoryMaker John Hooker], tell me something?  How you like being number two?" (Laughter) "Mr. Clark is number one so you gotta be number two."  And my first answer to him was, "Hertz rental car [The Hertz Corporation] is the number one rental car in the world and they're rich.  Avis [Avis Rent a Car System] is the number two rental car in the world and they're also rich.  And anytime you go to Hertz to get a rental car and they're out, if you walk over to Avis, they gonna be out too.  So now you got Budget [Budget Rent A Car System, Inc.], you got econoline, you got all those other ones that's done popped up because the number one and number two is sold out and they're very rich in what they've done."  He says, "So what you saying is you and Mr. Clark rich?"  (Laughter) I said, "If you wanna nail it down to that, yes.  But number one, there's only gonna be one number one and the number two needs to always be very supportive." And the legacy that I would like to leave behind more than anything else is that you can come together and work together and be supportive of one another for the common good and goal and then reach back and help others.
Story_ID: 631056
Speaker 1: Now, well tell us a little bit about your family.  Now, you have like two daughters and a son?
Speaker 2: I have two daughters and one son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have, my, one of my daughters is a principal from K-8 [kindergarten to eighth grade], my oldest one and her name is Felicia [Felicia Hooker].  I have another daughter that went into education also and she's heading up the whole counseling department at my old alma mater high school Farragut [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  Her name is LaToya Hooker.  And I have a son, his name is Sandor Williams, and he's a civil engineer with an M.B.A. and he's working for a civil--currently working for a civil engineering company and they're all on their own with advanced degrees and they're doing pretty good.  I worked hard and my motto was to work hard to take care of the first degree and they have to get the second one on their own, but somehow or another it didn't work that way.  It look like it always came back they need a lot of help (laughter).  And I didn't mind helping pay for additional education, I really didn't.
Story_ID: 631057
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked that you think we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I believe we did it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as number one a person that worked with number--the first, the first thing I'd like to be remembered by is an African American man that started at the bottom and worked my way up to the top and excelled in every area that I have worked in and helped people along the way as I went.  And when I got to the higher part of that, that tree, I ran into another person that I knew [HistoryMaker Frank Clark] and worked with and realized that if we came together and worked together and not pull at each other, we could do the company [Commonwealth Edison Company] a, a better good and we could help our community and we could also help all of the employees that we leave behind as we leave and if we do that, and since we have done that, I believe that we and working with that, with that concept our good has become better, and our better now has become best.
Story_ID: 631058
Speaker 1: Just briefly I was thinking like what are some of the organizations that you volunteer to help?  And did you have to have any pet organizations that you--?
Speaker 2: Well I do, I, I serve on the board of People Consumer Co-operative [People's Consumer Co-Operative, Inc.] for housing, that's housing for the elderly and it's some subsidized housing in there, some market rate rent in there, housing, but it's really nice decent housing for the elderly.  I'm, I'm a board member and I help out there.  I worked with the Safer Foundation [Chicago, Illinois], which is--helps ex-offenders get back into society, trying to help them with jobs and also mentoring.  I work with my alma mater Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois].  I was working with the Business Hall of Fame which acknowledged different businessmen in the community and last but not least I'm working with the Chicago State board on, non-profit board to get money for the university.
Story_ID: 631059
Speaker 1: I know that's my high school picture.  I'm not sure if it's junior or senior year [at Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].  But I was the--I think I'm not sure I think I was president of the senior class so I think that's the senior high school picture.  No, no I know it's junior, the senior one is a different one.  It's a junior high school picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay
Speaker 1: That one is VQ, that's a VQ button I got on.  Vision through quality that's what that stood for and that was in the--I have to say that was in the '84 [1984], '84 [1984] timeframe.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCISSION)
Speaker 1: That picture was the first--I was the department head of marketing in Bolingbrook [Illinois] area.  That was in '83 [1983], '82 [1982], '83 [1983] area.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh that was a fairly recent picture here.  This was at--there's a state representative [HistoryMaker] Arthur Turner with the hat one, straw hat, and that was at his golf outing.  I believe it was last year 2007.  Myself in the red and my left there is George Dosier [ph.] who is retired ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company] employee and headed up our transportation area and over to the right of Arthur Turner, Representative Turner is William Harris [ph.], he's an accountant, has an accounting firm and the further guy is Wilbur, Wilbur Marshall [ph.] and he's head of the division in the state police area.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 1: This is--this is a presentation I was giving to our ELI class which is the Exelon Leadership Institute at Kelloggs [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois].  These are all employees of Exelon in here and it was the first Exelon Institute--Leadership Institute class that I was a member of. This is I believe my thirty-fifth anniversary here at ComEd and that was about five years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's John Rowe our chairman and CEO of Exelon [Exelon Corporation].  That's at my fortieth anniversary last year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Another one of the anniversaries.  I think it's the thirty-fifth.  I'm sure that's the thirty-fifth one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right.
Speaker 1: Move on to the next?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Same suit, that's the thirty-fifth also.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay again that's the thirty-fifth anniversary at ComEd.  Ed O'Toole [ph.], yes, he's a retired engineer and he was one of the gentlemen who helped me when I was ordering material, when I was a material clerk.  We go all the way back to those days and he was one that decided that he would try to help me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Well this is I think that same thirty-fifth and we've got a lot of people in here.  The three ladies, Ruth and Tami. To the far left is Ruth.  She's with the City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] now, the general counsel and Tami Creole [ph.] is now Tami White [ph.] and she's got her own firm, energy management firm and Arlene Jursack [ph.] one that's bending over, she's retired.  She was an engineer with us and last on the other hand this last one at the very right is Ruth Ann Gillis [Ruth Ann M. Gillis] and she's still currently our executive vice president of our business services area at Exelon. You've got Congressman Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] to my left and this is an entrepreneur [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins, builder and developer to my right. I believe that's the same affair and that's George Lofton--[HistoryMaker] Frank Clark on the left--what's that--no that's George Lofton and that's Frank Clark.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: Currently that photo is my current company's photo a corporate photo that we're using now of me.  It's about a year about a little bit more than about a year almost two years old.
Speaker 2: That's a photo--that's a photograph of me and my wife and that's gotta be around 1995.  Again my wife is Kim Hooker.
Speaker 1: That's a picture there in 1990--let's see that's 1987 right after Harold Washington had passed away and that's when Mayor Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], that's when Gene Sawyer got to be mayor.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of some of the--this is a very good picture Larry [Larry Crowe] here.  This picture, the photograph in the back is one of the pioneers in the company of Lester Dugas [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] who is a vice president for ComEd and they dedicated a park in his name last year and that's him and I'm all the way over to the left there.  That in the blue jacket is [HistoryMaker] Cordell Reed who was a senior vice president in charge of nuclear program, the largest nuclear program in the country, he's retired.  The center guy is vice president John Viera who was in that pioneer day that we talked about and then you got Toni Eberhart here, she's an external affairs manager in the south suburbs area, south suburban area who worked with us in regulatory for years and George Lofton again who is about to retire at the end of the month who he and I are working together right now reporting to me and the end picture here on the right is Frank Clark and that was last year November--August of 2007.  A park was being dedicated to Lester Dugas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's another photo from that dedication and that was just before Frank was gonna speak to the group on behalf of ComEd.  Lester Dugas paved the way for a lot of us in that picture.  I think Lester was--would have been the oldest in that group and the one that preceded him would have been Bill Ferrell [ph.] so that's what that is.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's, that's a better photo same people of Lester Dugas in the park being dedicated to him.  Again, John Hooker on the far left, Cordell Reed, John Viera, George Lofton and Frank Clark. That's a photo of Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.] and myself and that had to be about four or five years ago.  So that would be eighty--2002, 2001 something like that. Oh my goodness.  We were at--I was at an affair the picture of the young lady with me is Ms. Sandra Mack [ph.] and that was an affair that was held at Xavier--Saint Xavier [Saint Xavier University] affair that was held in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] here. And that's where that photo was from.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right, that's a photo of President Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] in the center, Frank Clark to the right, that's the chairman and CEO of ComEd and [HistoryMaker] John Hooker to the left, myself at Senator Jones' fundraiser.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. That's a photo of my mom which is Rosa Hooker [Rosa Whorton Hooker] who we discussed earlier, the matriarch of our family, and she was ninety years old when she--last year when she passed away and that was a picture on the booklet that we put on her booklet.
