Story_ID: 465807
Speaker 1: I'll reintroduce myself I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers the interviewer and this is Neculai Burghelea the videographer.
Speaker 2: Hi Shawn, hi Neculai.
Speaker 1: And we will have you state your full name, including your middle name and spelling it out for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, my name is Cheryl Auval Beatrice Willis Hudson [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson], that's C-H-E-R-Y-L, A-U-V-A-L, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, W-I-L-L-I-S, H-U-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Now who was Beatrice?
Speaker 2: Beatrice is my mother's [Lillian Watson Willis] middle name.
Speaker 1: And Auval?
Speaker 2: Auval is my father's sister's [Auval Willis] name, she was a nurse and she helped deliver me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is April 7, 1948.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Portsmouth, Virginia. I was born at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an editorial director and publisher, also a graphic designer.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're here at our offices, Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.], 356 Glenwood Avenue, East Orange, New Jersey?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Saturday, April 28th [2007].
Story_ID: 465808
Speaker 1: So you know what, I, you just reminded me of something, I'm gonna have to go back and do with Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson], but I'll start with you and I didn't start with him this way. But, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potatoes and broccoli.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Mauve.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anywhere where there's a beach (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Go with the flow, haven't thought about that, but that sounds right.
Story_ID: 465809
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start. We're gonna start with your mother's side of the family first, and as much as you can tell me about that side of the family. And then we'll talk about your father's [Hayes Willis III] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, your mother's full name, her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lillian Beatrice Watson Willis [Lillian Watson Willis]. She was born in Charlottesville, Virginia part of Albemarle County [Virginia], November 18th, 1921.
Speaker 1: So she lived, also was raised during the Depression [Great Depression]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did that affect the family, did she ever talk about her life as a child in Charlottesville, Virginia?
Speaker 2: My mother talks about her life quite a bit, she's still alive. She just reached her eighty-sixth birthday in November. She was raised in Charlottesville under the shadow of the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and [President] Thomas Jefferson. There's a tight knit black community there and she was an only child. Her mother and father [Louis Watson] however had quite a few siblings. And they were two families in Charlottesville the Watsons and the Carters. And both of these families sort of intermarried, so there're double first cousins on both sides of the family. My mother's mother is Viola Carter Watson [Viola Carter Brown], she married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But before we talk about your grandmother, let's stick with your mother for a moment.
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: And tell me some of the things she told you about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Well she grew up as an only child, but she had lots of cousins. And she grew up in a part of, of Charlottesville called Carters Town [sic. Carters View, Charlottesville, Virginia] and that's where the Carters had their property. Cousins, brothers, sisters parceled out land on either side of, I believe it's Grove Street or I'm, I'm not sure if it still exists. But, Carters, Carters Town. She remembers walking to school up and down hills, because it's hilly, it's beautiful country, in the Blue Ridge Mountains. And she talks about living with her mother, but she talks a lot about her grandmother, who also helped to raised her. My mother was a, known as a very bright child. And the stories that I remember from when we were growing up is that, she went to elementary school, but she went to college when she was fourteen. So, at that time I believe high schools went up to eighth or ninth grade. But, she had skipped a couple of grades when she was in elementary school. So, so by the time she was ready to go to college she was about fourteen and half and she attended Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And what years did she attend, it must have been the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: She, I believe she was there in '38 [1938] to '41 [1941], I think she graduated in 1941.
Speaker 1: And then she did what after that, she taught (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She taught school.
Speaker 1: Where did she teach?
Speaker 2: She taught in Albemarle County back in Charlottesville the county outside of Charlottesville. She also taught in Bluefield, West Virginia for a period of time. And I believe she, she met my father in Charlottesville. And after they got married she taught in Virginia. When they moved and resettled, in, in Virginia, Portsmouth, Virginia after the Second World War [World War II, WWII] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did your mother ever talk about who her role models were?
Speaker 2: She, I think she adored her grandmother, tall lady, very statuesque.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother's [sic. maternal great-grandmother] name?
Speaker 2: Annie Scott Watson.
Speaker 1: And her, see this is your mother's grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Not even her mother?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: She adored her grandmother?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was her grandmother's date of birth, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd, I'd have to find that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, but she adored her grandmother?
Speaker 2: Her grandmother.
Speaker 1: What was it about her grandmother that she adored?
Speaker 2: I really don't know, I think she, she was a very peaceful woman, she had raised thirteen children. She lived in the house on 6 1/2 Street. And those siblings her, her children ran in and out of the house. They, a lot of the people that she raised they were very creative people, gregarious people a lot of them worked in service. So they worked for rich white people or they went off from Charlottesville and went to Englewood [New Jersey] or Montclair [Virginia] or different places. And it's just something about my grandmother that, that smile came to her face every time she talks about her so.
Speaker 1: What did she--what was her mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother is Viola Carter Watson Brown. She married twice so, the Watson was from the Watsons and she married a second time to Uriel Brown [ph.].
Speaker 1: And her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Grandma, Grandma's birthday was in January 1898, I believe. I don't know the exact date of her birth in January, but she was born in January.
Speaker 1: Now, can you explain for me the relationship between the Carters and the Watsons?
Speaker 2: Well I think that they were two families who lived in Charlottesville.
Speaker 1: And they were two well-to-do families?
Speaker 2: No, I don't believe so, they worked in service. They worked as most of the people in Charlottesville did, either as domestics or on the railroad. They were not farmers, I think they had gardens, they did own property, they owned their own homes. But they were not wealthy by, by any means.
Story_ID: 465810
Speaker 1: When was the university [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] started?
Speaker 2: [President] Thomas Jefferson started the university maybe in eighteen--he was secretary of state in 1803 [sic.]. And I think the university was built sometime in the early 1800s. I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: So, they [Hudson's maternal family] would have worked then for a lot of the university's professors?
Speaker 2: Probably or in the university itself.
Speaker 1: Now, did the university--growing up in a university town did that make it a bit more liberal for them? Or, or did they--were they exposed things perhaps that, maybe you know, that they were not exposed in other parts of Virginia?
Speaker 2: I think that Charlottesville [Virginia] was maybe a seat, where there were sort of the landed gentry (laughter), their wealthy families that lived there. The university was there, Carters Town [sic. Carters View, Charlottesville, Virginia] was on the other side of the tracks just below the university. So, there were probably black people all over the area just where as in college town the people who live there, work for the university or people around. So, I know that some of my aunts worked for wealthy families who literally had modern day plantations. Or they were the domestics there, who waited, there was always you know Hors d'oeuvres. And my [maternal] grandmother [Viola Carter Brown] was a lady that wore gloves and hats, and knew how to set a table. And this was picked up from the people that she obviously worked for. So, the, the--I don't think the blacks were anymore well-to-do it was just from a different area of the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Or, and what they were exposed to.
Speaker 2: And what they were, probably what they were exposed to.
Speaker 1: Yeah. What they, yeah what they saw, the manners (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 465811
Speaker 1: Viola [Viola Carter Brown] did--she was a domestic?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how far in school did she go?
Speaker 2: I think my [maternal] grandmother went to the eighth grade. At that time there was no high school in Charlottesville [Virginia] for, for blacks. If you wanted to go to high school, you would have to go to Baltimore [Maryland] or Richmond [Virginia] or some other area. And this was, there--as a matter of fact we saw a picture that, that the university [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia]. There's a website that has some old photographs, that was, that were taken by a photographer in the, 1808 through 1919. And I found a, a picture of my grandmother there in her graduation dress from the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: So, she was able to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And would perhaps, would have gone on to college had there been--
Speaker 2: She may have and I think that my mother [Lillian Watson Willis] said my grandmother had, was I think the oldest girl. She had a younger brother who did have an opportunity to go to college, he didn't finish.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Waverly Carter. And the story is told that her father Jon Carter [Jon Carter, Jr.]--who supposedly he was a chef, at one of the hotels in Charlottesville. And he sent his son away to school and Waverly in, in West Virginia, but he walked back home. And my grandmother I don't think ever forgave him for that. She thought that she would have had a chance to go school. She did have an older sister I believe, Tillie [sic. Lillian Carter], and my mother said--
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Tillie.
Speaker 1: Tillie?
Speaker 2: I think her name was Tillie and she had an opportunity to go to college, but she contracted tuberculosis. And so, my grandmother didn't get a chance to go.
Speaker 1: Did she die from tuberculosis?
Speaker 2: I think she did.
Speaker 1: So, the Watsons and the Carters, they--
Speaker 2: A couple of them married each other (laughter).
Speaker 1: Each other?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's how you had a couple of the, you said double first cousins?
Speaker 2: Double first cousins.
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: I don't know like my mother's, my grandmother married, my grandmother was Viola Carter, she married Louis Watson so they were married. Louis Watson's youngest baby sister was Alice Watson [Alice Watson Carter] and Alice Watson married my grandmother's baby brother, who was Waverly Carter. So, they all divorced (laughter), but we're all still related, so that's how it goes.
Speaker 1: So, any oth- any legends or stories that they told you about people that you perhaps wouldn't know, like your great-great-grandparents? Like the women of the family? Because you'd said that your, your mother wasn't the first to go off the college? (Unclear) you know the first woman there are generations before her that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and the generation before her would have been my grandmother's sister Tillie, would I believe did have an opportunity to go to college. But, she I think the story is that she contracted tuberculosis and, and--
Speaker 1: So, those are the only two that you know of?
Speaker 2: That I, that I know of yes, on my, on the Watson side of the family though, there was a professor known as the Professor, who I believe was a brother of my great-great-grandfather. And he started a school in Covington, Virginia. My great-great-grandfather [sic. maternal great-grandfather] was Allen Watson. He built his own home on 6 1/2 Street. And one of his younger brothers was this professor, who started a school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of the school now, but I believe it was in Covington, Virginia. I have an article about it that one of my cousins sent to me.
Speaker 1: Who taught in the school?
Speaker 2: He did, but he was a contemporary of Booker T. Washington. And there were a couple of other people the Townslers [ph.] who were family friends, who were great friends of Booker T. Washington. So, so there's some stories about him coming to Charlottesville and Professor Townsler. Also, and I don't know whether this is because they were erudite or because they had an opportunity to go college, but they were known as professors.
Speaker 1: You got to tell me about Professor Townsler.
Speaker 2: Professor Townsler, I believe was a principal in, in Charlottesville. And he was a close associate of Booker T. Washington. And I think that my mother and his daughter were very good friends. And, and the, the friendship has kind of gone on down through generations. But, there was a really high regard for education in the community.
Speaker 1: Did your family know any of the Jeffersons? Like the black Jeffersons?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have no idea, they always joke about it. They say everybody in Charlottesville is related to [President] Thomas Jefferson. But, I don't, I don't think so, we've never attended any of those, those reunions that they have.
Speaker 1: But, I'm saying did they know any of the black Jeffersons that were living in the town? Did they associate with them, at all even?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know, it would be an interesting story.
Story_ID: 465812
Speaker 1: So, the men of the family, then tell me about the men, your [maternal] grandfather who was Viola's [Viola Carter Brown] husband, his name and?
Speaker 2: His name was Louis Carroll Watson [Louis Watson] and he was one of, of thirteen children, I'm not sure where he was in the line. But, he was a real character. He, he was a soldier in World War I [WWI], in the, and the, the picture that I have 'In Praises of Our Fathers and Our Mothers' ['In Praise of Our Fathers and Our Mothers: A Black Family Treasury by Outstanding Authors and Artists,' Wade Hudson and Cheryl Hudson] shows him in his [U.S.] Army uniform. I remember him when I was a young girl up to being a teenager, as a voracious reader, he loved mysteries and he loved Chester Himes. He was read- every time I saw him he had a book. But, the opportunities for men after World War I, were fairly limited. He I b- I believe worked as a porter on the railroad, he wasn't, he was not a Pullman porter. He was colorful. I think he liked the races. And that probably was one of the reasons that he and my grandmother didn't, stay together.
Speaker 1: What do you mean he like the races?
Speaker 2: He liked to, he liked to go to the horse races. And my grandmother had, she had an opportunity I believe probably would have been a fashion designer or involved in some kind of hoity-toity (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's the one who wore the gloves?
Speaker 2: The kid gloves, long kid gloves. She lived with us when I was growing up and she always had fresh flowers on the table. The table was always set beautifully. She always drank her tea out of beautiful little china cups. She would have, she would have been a diva in another (laughter), in another era. Viola was something else. She made all of her clothes or most of her clothes. She made these elaborate hats and her, her clothes were always color coordinated. She just loved beautiful things.
Speaker 1: But you were telling me about her husband Louis?
Speaker 2: And I think Louis, I think he was a fun loving guy.
Speaker 1: Do you remember him?
Speaker 2: And I remember him, I remember him. He lived to be about eighty-six years old. And, and again he loved to read. I think he, he, I'm thinking of a word sport in life. I mean I think he would have been somebody who would have like to, to own a horse, you know rather than just be at the race track. But, again the, the opportunities were limited so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what did he do for a living after World War I?
Speaker 2: He, he worked on the railroad he had a--
Speaker 1: I mean only the porter job, was the only job that he?
Speaker 2: That's the only one that I know of. When I knew of him he had, he was retired. He was in his sixties, seventies, he died when he was eighty-six. So, to me he was just grandpa, and I didn't know very much about what else he was done.
Speaker 1: What about the husband to your mother's grandmother [Annie Scott Watson] that she really loved.
Speaker 2: Now, that was Allen Watson, and I believe he was a carpenter. He built their, their home. And this was right after he was born, I think he was born--he died in the 1920s, he died as a relatively young man. And my grandmother lived a long time after.
Speaker 1: You mean--
Speaker 2: After that, my great-grandmother I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Great-grandmother, yeah.
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother. I believe he was a carpenter.
Speaker 1: So, and that's pretty much, as much as you know about--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, or any stories, or any that you can think of about legends or funny times that they may have shared with you about them being children?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember my mother [Lillian Watson Willis] talking about how Grandma Watt. That's, that's her grandmother used to sit on the porch with some of her sisters and brothers and this was in the late 1800s. And how this old white man would come to visit them, maybe some relation, the family I don't know. And the children would have to, he would come sit on the porch. And the children would have to fan him. Now, I don't know where that comes from, whether he was somebody who was related or just what. But, you get little snatches of those kinds of, of stories nothing specific. And as I said before everybody used to joke about [President] Thomas Jefferson being the godfather of everybody in Charlottesville [Virginia]. But--
Speaker 1: Well, can they ever connect for you, like any white relatives? I mean did they ever you know the stories of about (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, but there was a story that there might have been a sister who was very, very fair. I believe her name was Robinette [ph.] and that--
Speaker 1: And whose sister would she have been?
Speaker 2: This would have been my great-grandmother's sister. And there was some intimation that there may have been some planter or somebody back in the family (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, did she live as a white woman?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And leave the family?
Speaker 2: No, she did not.
Speaker 1: No. Okay, so moving forward--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And this all happened in Charlottesville?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 465813
Speaker 1: How did they, your parents get to Portsmouth [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, my father worked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, we should talk about him first and then we'll talk about how they got to Portsmouth.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, your father's name is?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Hayes Elijah Willis III [Hayes Willis III]. I don't know who the second was because I believe his father's name was Milton [Milton Willis]. I recently found a photograph of Hayes Elijah Willis in some family photos from my [paternal] grandmother's [Isaleen Spurlock Willis] home.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that out for me?
Speaker 2: Hayes H-A-Y-E-S, Elijah as in the bible, E-L-I-J-A-H, Willis W-I-L-L-I-S. He was born in Richmond, Virginia, 1915 March the 10th. He had four brothers, sisters, two sisters Mary Willis, Auval Willis. He had an older brother Orion [William Willis]--
Speaker 1: How do you spell Auval?
Speaker 2: A-U-V-A-L, I was named for her.
Speaker 1: And then Orium [sic.], how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Orion is like the constellation, O-R-I-O-N. One older brother and another brother James Milton [ph.], who I believe, who died in infancy. He, he was raised in, on the Church Hill section, in the Church Hill section of, of Richmond [Virginia]. And I believe before he join the [U.S.] Army, he had begun working as a, a insurance agent for Virginia Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, which is a black owned insurance company, founded in the home office is in Richmond.
Speaker 1: Oh, we were just doing some talking about black insurance companies, because we interviewed someone else who, you know. So, what do you know about, what did your father share with you about the history of that in, Virginia Mutual Life Insurance Company?
Speaker 2: Well, I always knew that my dad was taking care of business, you know. He always worked with figures he had big ledgers. He was an outgoing person everybody in the community seem to gravitation toward him. He had an affinity with people. So, he, he sold insurance, starting in Richmond then went to Lynchburg [Virginia]. And came back did a lot of traveling and ended up for a short time in Charlottesville [Virginia]. And I think that's where he, he met my mother [Lillian Watson Willis]. And he was, as long as I know, he had been with this insurance agency after the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. And Virginia Mutual was a benefit life insurance company. So, I believe it started in whole life and to term insurance. But, it came together originally black people benefiting one another, for burial and that kind of thing. And it grew into a large agency. But, it was black owned and he was very proud to be a part of, of black owned company. And I remember other insurance agencies. So, after he left Charlottesville and they got married. And there was a war and he came back. They, the insurance company grew so the set up a branch office in Portsmouth, Virginia. So, neither one of my parents had ever been there before. But, because they wanted to grow the business in, in a thriving area in Virginia that's where they settled. And that's where he, he started a home office, an agency there.
Story_ID: 465814
Speaker 1: Now, you were born there?
Speaker 2: I was born in Portsmouth [Virginia], yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Portsmouth, do you--what are your earliest memories of it?
Speaker 2: I remember living at Bedford Court, Carver Circle. It was a community of these little houses, that I, I think of as looking like little milk cartons. Because some of them, well they were just little cottages one or two bedroom homes. And I believe they were built for black families after the Second World War [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Named after Carver, George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: You know what I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Because I mean there's a Carver Circle in my home town and I grew up in Mississippi and I'm like oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, may, may have been may have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah, may have been Carver, okay. So, go ahead.
Speaker 2: But there, there were houses and they were either green or maroon or brown. And I remember in the summer, mosquitoes, and but playing outside. I remember we had a, we had a coal stove. And, and there's a coal house in the back, which we really you know talking about getting black you know you'd, you'd play in the coal house in the summertime (laughter). And 'cause it was cool in there. 'Cause there's no coal there during the summertime. So it's like having this fun little house in the backyard.
Speaker 1: Now, Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] said they didn't have indoor plumbing, did you have indoor plumbing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did, yes.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, Portsmouth is a, a considered a city then of how many people?
Speaker 2: I think now--
Speaker 1: But even back then?
Speaker 2: Back then I don't know maybe a hundred and twenty-five thousand.
Speaker 1: That's a lot though.
Speaker 2: It's a pretty big city. It's a port town right across from Norfolk [Virginia]. So, there's a lot of industry there. With people working with the naval shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia], the Drydock [Drydock Number One, Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia], the amphibious base [Naval Amphibious Base Little Creek; Joint Expeditionary Base Little Creek-Fort Story, Virginia], the navy yard. There were a lot of naval instillations [sic. installations] during the time that I was growing up. So, I remember seeing lots of big ships all the time. And hearing the whistle blow for people who worked at the navy yard.
Story_ID: 465815
Speaker 1: Who were the neighbors when you lived on Carver Circle?
Speaker 2: Now, my best friend Charlemagne McHenry [ph.] lived on Manor Street [sic. Manor Avenue] which was behind our street. The backyards were together, faced one another. And she's the person that I remember playing with. I don't remember we lived there only up until the time I was about six, six years old. So, I don't remember names of a lot of, of kids. But, we'd played outside a lot.
Speaker 1: But, up to the point that you were six years old, can you describe for me, because this is before you started school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your daily life, did your mom [Lillian Watson Willis] stay home to keep you, did you go off to a babysitter?
Speaker 2: My mom was at home most of the time, I think. Because my brother [Hayes Willis] and I, my oldest brother who is now deceased--is a year and three months than, than I am. And the other brother [Roderick Willis] is two years later. So, my mother was a teacher. But, she was not teaching full-time then she was having babies and, and raising us. And I believe she went back to teach after my youngest brother [Orion Willis] was, was born, and that was in 1954.
Speaker 1: So, you remember her being home?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: As a home, as a homemaker (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Homemaker, yes.
Speaker 1: A stay at home mom?
Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you move when you left that little Carver Circle area?
Speaker 2: When, when we left actually the name of the community was Douglas Park [Portsmouth, Virginia]. Now, that I'm thinking of it, I lived on Carver Circle, Bedford Court, the name of the community was Douglas Park. And when we left my father [Hayes Willis III] and mother built their own home. We moved to another section of called the Mount Hermon [Portsmouth, Virginia] section, Norcom Park [Portsmouth, Virginia] section of a, of a, of Portsmouth [Virginia]. And my, my father and mother built their own home and that's where we moved.
Speaker 1: So, how many bedrooms did they build?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was sort of a ranch style house but it had, was kind of modified. Because it had a steeper roof it wasn't really ranch style.
Story_ID: 465816
Speaker 1: Before we talk about you moving away to the ranch house when you were living in the Circle, Carver Circle and your mom [Lillian Watson Willis] stayed home, did she cook every day?
Speaker 2: I remember my mother cooking, my father [Hayes Willis III] would go to, to work. My mother would cook, we always ate as a family. We lived in Douglas Park [Portsmouth, Virginia], up to the time I was about six years old. So, I had an older brother [Hayes Willis], and a younger brother [Roderick Willis]. But, we always ate as a family. We had a little garden in the front yard. We had another neighbor named Ms. Marianne [ph.]. And Ms. Marianne used to babysit for us sometimes. Because I remember my mother and father and maybe I'm remember it from photographs, but seems like they had like kind of a active social life. They went out to, to parties, my mother was a member of a, a club the Amulets [ph.]. Other ladies in Douglas Park who were either working or had small children and they had a social club. I think it was a card club. But, they got together and had dinners and little parties and things. So, I always looked forward to club meeting. Because that's when we had like fancy food, you know like little crab cakes and finger foods and things like that. But, we always sat at the table and had grace. We were members of the, the Baptist church, Zion Baptist Church [Portsmouth, Virginia]. So, we always had dinner together.
Speaker 1: What would that, I mean as much as you can remember, what would those conversations be about, at that dinner table?
Speaker 2: Probably, what did I do today? What you know, what did my father do today, you know during the day? We, I remember we did have a, a telephone and we were one of the few people in the area that had a telephone. And people would come by and leave a dime, if they wanted to use the telephone. And it wasn't accepted, it wasn't ask for but it was the polite thing to do. I mean people were very neighborly and, and friendly. So, most of the conversations I think had to do with friendship and, and family.
Story_ID: 465817
Speaker 1: So, in Portsmouth [Virginia], I mean it's kind of a silly question but, I'm going someplace with it. Do you remember when you saw a white person for the first time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did it even register with you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--
Speaker 1: --that there were two, that your, that you were living in a segregated world?
Speaker 2: I don't think it, it when I was very young it, it didn't. I think it became more apparent in junior high school.
Speaker 1: So, up until then when you were like first grade, it was still an all-black?
Speaker 2: It was an all-black world. I, I remember our elementary school, which was Mount Hermon Elementary School [Portsmouth, Virginia], was on the border line. And that if you walk just a little bit further down Douglas Avenue, that's when the street changed and the people became white people. And at that time all of the black kids walked to school or their parents might drop them off. But, but the white kids rode on buses. And I remember buses passing by with white kids in them. And that was like a privilege they could ride in a bus but we had to walk to school. So, there was some, there was some awareness of the difference in, these are white people and these are black people. But, I think we had a fairly cohesive community as blacks. So, again segregation existed but it, it wasn't them and us. We always thought, well you know black people, there's something wrong with white people, why they, why do they, why do they act like they do, you know. Because we knew we, we had our own community. We had our own schools we had our own businesses. You know there were the dry cleaners, there was the barbershop, you had your own churches. Everything was separate except to when you went downtown. If you had to go shopping then you became much more aware of, of white people, who could try on hats in the store. And I remember, I do remember when my mother [Lillian Watson Willis] was pregnant with my youngest brother [Orion Willis]. And I remember going to one of the department stores with her in Portsmouth. And she wanted to buy something I don't know was a maternity outfit or something. And I remember one of the salespeople showing her to like the broom closet. Because there was no dressing room, you weren't allowed to try on clothes in the store. You had to buy 'em and if they fit that's fine (laughter), but then black women were not allowed to try on hats. I remember that because my mother and my [maternal] grandmother [Viola Carter Brown] loved hats. So, you, you were aware that there were separate worlds.
Speaker 1: What was the main street in the black community where all of the businesses where located? Where they concentrated in one area?
Speaker 2: A lot of them were on Effingham Street and Chestnut Street downtown. That's what I remember, that's where my father's [Hayes Willis III] insurance company was on Effingham Street.
Speaker 1: And Effingham Street describe that for me? What did it look like? What were the other businesses?
Speaker 2: I remember there was a barbershop on the corner. Virginia Mutual [Virginia Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company] was in the same building as the Masonic lodge. It was kind of a yellow stucco two or three story building. I think the insurance company was on the second floor. And I think the Masonic lodge was on the first floor. I believe there was a cafe a little bit further down the street. Directly across the street from the insurance company was Ebenezer Baptist Church [Portsmouth, Virginia], which was one of the largest black churches. Farther down Effingham Street and maybe Chestnut Street, had been the area where one of the first black high schools in Portsmouth, was I think Riddick-Weaver Center [Portsmouth, Virginia], was the name. It was a junior high school then it became an elementary school.
Speaker 1: Who was it named after?
Speaker 2: Riddick-Weaver [sic. Lavina Weaver] and I believe he was a, a, a either an educator or a civic leader, a black civic leader in, in Portsmouth. But, there were black communities around Douglas Park [Portsmouth, Virginia] was one area. There was another area downtown were Fort--London Street, Queen Street. High Street was sort of the main drag of the, the city itself.
Speaker 1: For the whole city?
Speaker 2: For the whole city.
Speaker 1: So, where would like the--were there black doctors?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and actually Dr. Wooden's [ph.] office and Dr. Lee's office may have been Effingham Street also those were the black--Dr. Lee, Phillip Lee [ph.] delivered me at home. And Dr. Wooden was a pediatrician and think of them had offices in that area, I don't know the exact and there was a pharmacy too, I believe in the building where they had their offices.
Speaker 1: Were there was a black pharmacist?
Speaker 2: I believe so, I'm thinking there was, I'm vague memories, it's been a long time.
Speaker 1: Why did he deliver you at home?
Speaker 2: I think my mother just didn't get to the hospital in time. Because my older brother [Hayes Willis] had, had, was born in Norfolk Community Hospital, which was the black hospital in Norfolk [Virginia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you had two separate hospitals?
Speaker 2: Yes, well Norfolk Community Hospital was the black hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, there was not one in Portsmouth?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.
Speaker 1: But, you would have to cross the river and--
Speaker 2: To go to Norfolk, um-hm. And I think I just came faster (laughter). I don't think my mother made it, yeah.
Story_ID: 465818
Speaker 1: So first grade, who were your teachers?
Speaker 2: My first grade teacher was Ms. Bessie Harris [ph.]. And Ms. Bessie Harris was the sweetest lady. She was, she had to be about, well, I thought she was just a little bit taller than I was. She had to be like 4'5" or something. But, she taught first and second grade and she was also I think like the vice principal. And Mount Hermon School [Mount Hermon Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia] was the, I went to school there they had the old building which was an old building, actually the classrooms they were maybe eight classrooms two floors little steps going straight up, the corridor. But, I remember we did have outdoor toilets there, the bathrooms where outside, where not a part of the building. So, that was Mount Hermon School and I remember Ms. Bessie ringing the bell, she had a hand bell. And she'd be out in the school yard, she'd ring the bell, you'd have the line up to get ready to go to your class. So, I had Ms. Bessie for first grade and I think part of the second grade.
Speaker 1: And Mount Hermon you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mount Hermon.
Speaker 1: Who was that named after?
Speaker 2: I don't know who it, it's was a, it's a section of near, not too far from the water, Mount Hermon, Pinners Point were parts of Portsmouth [Virginia]. And I don't know if it's named after a person or it's a location.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were born in forty--
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948], so you were extremely young when Brown verse Board of Ed. [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], ruled against segregated schools. Did that cause you to be bused to a white school?
Speaker 2: No, this was long before anything was happening in terms of integration. The, the school systems in Portsmouth weren't really integrated until the '60s [1960s]. Nineteen fifty-four [1954] was the year that my youngest brother [Orion Willis] was born and that was I think '54 [1954], '55 [1955] was Brown versus Board of Education. So, I was aware of it in terms of hearing my father [Hayes Willis III], 'cause my father was inv- involved in civic activities. He was an AMVET [American Veterans, Inc.], he helped with the Boys Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. He was a member of the Civil Defense Patrol [sic. Civil Air Patrol] and a lot of activities with other men in the community and they talked about the news and what was happening. So, we were aware of, of that, but the schools in, in Portsmouth were not integrated. I don't believe until maybe it was about 1963, that I was aware. Certainly, the elementary schools were not integrated at all. There was no massive resistance in Portsmouth with respect to the school system. I do remember though during the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] there were students who came to Portsmouth to go to school from Farmville [Virginia], from (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) White students?
Speaker 2: No, they were black students
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because during that time because of the protest and desire to get equal education in Farmville, the schools were closed for seven years to black students. That was when--
Speaker 1: For seven years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in, in Prince, Prince Edward County [Virginia], the schools were closed it was a massive demonstration. And I'm trying to remember the predecessor, Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] predecessor, at, in--at Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church], at his church in Atlanta [Georgia]. Vernon Johns, Vernon Johns help to lead that movement. And his, his granddaughter and there were some other people who were involved in it. But, they closed the schools in Prince Edward County. And I remember students coming to our church to talk about it. And then there were some other students who came and actually went to school in Portsmouth because the public schools were closed.
Story_ID: 465819
Speaker 1: I'm jumping around a little bit, but during that time more--how old were you?
Speaker 2: Twelve, thirteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twelve. And how aware of you, how aware were you of what was going on? Like the fact that they were--you know how aware were you?
Speaker 2: I think that, that--
Speaker 1: And how protected were you?
Speaker 2: We were, we were pretty much protected in, in our community. I mean there was, there were some attempts to desegregate. But, Portsmouth [Virginia] and Norfolk [Virginia] the area was considered to be progressive and moderate change was expected to happen. So, there were no violent civil rights protests, there were some attempts to integrate the, the library. I remember going to get my lib- trying to get my library card when I was maybe twelve or thirteen years old. And that was a big deal because up until that point no one had used the pub- blacks had not used the public library.
Speaker 1: What library did you have access to?
Speaker 2: There was the colored library which was a part, it was actually more like a reading room. That was a part of the colored Y [Young Men's Christian Association] it was a very small YMCA building on Chestnut Street. And it really wasn't a library, that we did have, Ms. Bertha Edwards was a wonderful librarian. Who was a trained librarian, who had gone to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And she was a wonderful woman who read stories and tried to make things available, but literally there was no budget. The books that we had in the library were hand me down books from the white library. And the Court Street library [Portsmouth Public Library - Central Library, Portsmouth, Virginia] was considered the main library. And I think I was twelve, I was in, in junior high school, when we integrated the, the library. And that may have been in 1960, 1960. And up until that time there were no black students who attended any of the white school--Woodrow Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] was the, the white high school. The black high school was I.C. Norcom [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and we were very proud Greyhounds. And really most of the students they had no interest at all in, integrating the school system. So, I believe in 1962 or 1963 actually one of my friends, family friends, Lynwood Strong [ph.] integrated the white high school, one.
Speaker 1: That was 1960?
Speaker 2: I think it was 1963, and actually he was a contemporary of my brother, he was in, he would have been in my brother's class.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about what his experience was like being one black student? Did it cause an uproar like the, in Little Rock [Arkansas], what, what we saw?
Speaker 2: No, I, it, it didn't it was, it because it was just one. And I think he was kind of a protected, and a kind of control situation. I think the founding fathers, the city civic leaders knew that this was going to happen and we're gonna do this little test case. And we'll try one, if one person wants to enter and we're gonna try to make this work. So, after his first year the next year there were a few other students that went. But, it was not with, without incident but I don't remember it, it being a really traumatic kind of situation for him (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 465820
Speaker 1: As during that time did you, were you ever, did you ever participate in music class? Did you take piano lessons or any of those (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well I took--
Speaker 1: Were you member of any clubs?
Speaker 2: In, in, in, I took piano, I mean, you know growing up in Portsmouth [Virginia], I mean it, almost every little girl at least maybe in, in my group you know took ballet lessons for at least a year (laughter), or piano lesson. Everybody had, had to take piano lessons for at least a little while. I, I was not talented in that field. Ms. Ophelia [ph.] was my piano teacher and I love music but I just couldn't get through that charms book. I, I took lessons for a year probably in about the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Why do you think and, and, and it's almost true that every--why was that so important for your parents [Lillian Watson Willis and Hayes Willis III] to have you do those two things?
Speaker 2: I think it, it was a matter of exposing you to culture, what was called culture and the world. We got books for Christmas, or a book we got toys sometimes but we would always get a book for Christmas because that was something that you had or something that was necessary, something that would open up your eyes to the larger world. My father and my mother both loved poetry, and my mother was always quoting somebody. She would, my mother taught after first grade when I started school and my mother started teaching, she had taught in the late '50s [1950s]. She was a French teacher at the, the high school [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]. And after my youngest brother [Orion Willis] was born she went back and she taught in elementary school for a while. Then she came back into the, the high school and taught French and English. But, she had grown up with teachers who emphasize elocution. And there were teachers that had speech clubs where a voice choir where you'd have thirty kids reciting the same poem at the same time with all of this inflection. So, I remember my mother quoting Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer] when I was little. And I didn't know what it was, it just sounded interesting, (speaking Old English) "Whan that Aprill, with his shoures soote, the droghte of March hath perced to the roote" ['The Canterbury Tales,' Geoffrey Chaucer], and I mean I can remember it now. And I'm like, what is that the Ides of March or whatever, you know, when April comes. And, and, and I think it was in, in high school when I figured out what it was. When we had to study Chaucer and you could hear this and see this Old English. But, that was something that she had learned either in high school or when she was at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. And she would quote and my father would, would quote little lines from poetry. And there was, there were books in the house you know Bartlett Shorter [sic. Shorter Bartlett] quotations and little poems on the wall. So, I think that there was an emphasis on music and art as something that made your life more full and enriched. So I, I took piano lessons for a little while, wasn't good with that, took ballet lesson for a little while, not graceful at all. But, it was in junior high school that we had a lot more opportunities and things really started to change and that was in 1960. And that was really during the time of the space age and NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and a lot more emphasis was being placed on getting kids interested in science and we had a band, so I joined the, the band and I learned to play the flute. So, music was always very important.
Speaker 1: Where you a good flute player?
Speaker 2: Well pretty good, yeah, pretty good.
Speaker 1: Where in a marching band or the--
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't in junior, junior high school we didn't, we had a concert band and high school there was a marching band. So, yes I was in the marching band and concert band in high school.
Story_ID: 465821
Speaker 1: What type of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a nerd.  I was a, you know we were in the, what they called then the accelerated class so from junior high school and through high school [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] kids to- together at the same, we only had one junior high school and one high school. So, a lot of the people that I was in seventh grade with, I ended up going all the way through high school with. So, I was involved in the academic program. I loved science, loved math, was in the science club and math club. And every year we had competitions and this was again we had separate science fairs for the black schools and white schools. It was the Southeast science conference and each spring there were competitions. So, either by taking a test or oral quizzes or science projects, and I pretty much participated in those from seventh grade through, through high school through graduation.
Speaker 1: They didn't let the two groups of kids compete against each other in the science fair (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They--the--no, they were two separate groups until about I think it was my junior year in high school. Our high school began to participate in what was then called the Tidewater Science Fair [Tidewater Science and Engineering Fair] and that was the science fair that the white kids had. So, went in that year and it was always, you know the thing about that's so insidious about desegregate and the separation of races. And this whole racist thing is that you know you're supposed to have separate but equal and we know that inherently separate is unequal. But, the philosophy is that for some reason white people are better than black people. So, so you're not as smart as, or you don't have the skills as, or you don't have the competiveness that your white counterparts have. So you know you gotta keep us separate. And I think that growing up in a good high school and we had excellent teachers. And many of the teachers, all of them had college degrees many of them had done further study, and had master's [degrees]. And still were underpaid or paid less than their white counterparts. But, teachers were very supportive of students. And being in the accelerated class, if you had some interest in science or math or you wanted to go to college there was the group of teachers that really supported you in what you wanted to do. So, we had this really active science group that studied after in the spring for the, for the competitions. And when we integrated this Tidewaters Science Fair, you know it was like, "Oh wow, are we going to be able to win anything now?" 'Cause we always had this black science fair, so maybe we didn't, and we knew that our equipment wasn't as good as their equipment. But, we went into the science, the, the Tidewaters Fair and we won most of the highest honors. So, it's sort of a validation to say you know, all this stuff is, is ridiculous. And in spite of the fact that we didn't have the same kinds of facilities or the kinds of money, the same kinds of books, we were able to do just as good or, or better than our counterparts. So, that was sort of a revelation, you talked earlier, mentioned earlier you know when did you become aware of, of race? And I think underlying things, you're always aware that race is there, but then when you have this kind of aha moment, like this is stupid you know. That sort of started happening in my high school years.
Story_ID: 465822
Speaker 1: During this time what did you think you'd become? A teacher like your mother [Lillian Watson Willis]?
Speaker 2: I didn't want to become a teacher, precisely because my mother was a teacher (laughter). I thought I was going to be a scientist. I was going to major in biology and I, I, I--not medicine, I was going to be a research scientist.
Speaker 1: Where there, where did that come from I mean because you couldn't see any- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it came from, I think it came from the, the, the fact that this was the age of Sputnik. I was involved from eighth grade on through high school [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] with summer science programs, and National Science Foundation [NSF] had summer programs, where you could study science. I participated in a, a program at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] after my sophomore year and--
Speaker 1: Tell me about that summer?
Speaker 2: That was great, I mean you know I was the first time I really been away from home, stayed in the dorm with kids from all over the country who came there to, to study science. So, I had a course in electronics and had a course in--
Speaker 1: Now, this is the summer of what? Summer of--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-three [1963] or '64 [1964], '63 [1963], '64 [1964], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Then you had all of these experiences and I'm jumping a little forward--but I'll go back--you had all of these experiences and, and at all black institutions, then why did your parents choose to not send you to a historically black college [HBCU]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually it was, it was my choice and I, I, have to back up all bit to say that my mother taught in the black high school, my father [Hayes Willis III] died when I was twelve so he, he didn't even live to see me go to, to junior high school. So, my mother really basically raised the four of us after my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As a single mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. And, but she was always supportive of us in terms of our academics.
Speaker 1: Did he benefit from having been in an insurance plan, did he have insurance that helped her, or was she on her own (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that it, I think that that, I think that my father was a smart man and I don't know but I think that he probably set things up so that my mother did not have to lose the house, 'cause we had built a, a house. There was mortgage and maybe there was mortgage insurance or something, But, I think that he set things up so that, that when he did pass on, it wasn't a tremendous strain on my mother. My mother continued to work, she never did not work after my father passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father passed away when you were twelve and you were saying that--so, he wasn't around with that decision making, so it was you and your mother?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To have to decide, where you were going to go college?
Speaker 2: Right, but I, I think what, what happened is I mean my brother, my older brother [Hayes Willis] and I were very close and he graduated from high school in 1964.
Speaker 1: And where did he go to college?
Speaker 2: He went to Mount Union College [University of Mount Union, Alliance, Ohio] in Ohio. And while he as--'cause we were competitive too--but he was my big brother. While he was looking into going to colleges, I'm reading the col- college applications and all of the catalogs too. So, he applied to a number of, of colleges and he went to an integrated college in Ohio and that was a big deal going away from Portsmouth [Virginia].
Speaker 1: To Ohio, yeah.
Speaker 2: To Ohio, right.
Speaker 1: To the Midwest, where you don't know what to expect?
Speaker 2: To the Midwest, um-hm. But, then I kind of, of followed in his footsteps. Because he had, he had not applied to, to Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] here I went. But, I, I remember seeing that as one of the colleges that he was looking into. So, when it came time for me to apply to schools I considered a number of options. I, I got a scholarship to, to Howard and I, I think I got a scholarship to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] as well. But, I did apply to, to other schools. And I, I, I made my own decision.
Speaker 1: And you choose not to go to Howard or Hampton because (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, well I had, I had been to Howard and there was a wonderful summer that I spent with the National Science Foundation. We did research projects and we studied protozoa and zoology and electronics and math. And the next summer I, I went to Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] and did a, a kind of internship in chemistry. And the next summer I, I after--between my, the last year in, in high school and my first year of college, I went to a summer program that my math teacher had recommended. He had been a teacher at Phillips Exeter Academy [Exeter, New Hampshire] during the summer, and which is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had been a teacher, he was a black guy and had been a teacher there?
Speaker 2: He was, he was brilliant, brilliant man John Cannon [ph.]. And what I, what I, what I'd like to, to emphasis is that even though we had a desegregated separate high school we had some dynamic and excellent teachers. And I took college placement math, I finished my math requirements in the eleventh grade. So, we had ca- I had calculus and trigonometry and I had finished my requirements by, by the eleventh grade. And John Cannon was a, a teacher, who set up an extra class so that you could take functions and other higher math. And because he was such a dynamic teacher, I just you know, I loved the math. And he had spent a summer being a teacher in a summer program at Exeter. And he said, "Well you know you really should go to this program, it will you know open your eyes to the world," you know. So, that's what I did and that was sort of my first integration experience going to, to Exeter for the summer. And that provided a transition between high school and, and college.
Story_ID: 465823
Speaker 1: And we were going to change the tapes but can you just in, in a minute tell me how you would sum up that experience at that, at, at Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire]?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That integrated experience, for the first time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was wonderful 'cause I mean I was with all these rich white kids and I, I was like wow you know, they got money. You know somebody's father had built the Great Northwestern Railroad [sic. Great Northwest Railroad] and they were like Kennedys and Katzenbachs, names that you would see in the news. And here were kids in this summer program. But, the difference was, I mean was there--and you know the facilities and the library and just the grounds and just beautiful stuff. And I was just having a great time learning stuff. A lot of these kids were here because their parents we in Europe for the summer. And, and were putting them in boarding school or you know they were trying to improve their SAT scores for the next time around. Which was a whole different kind of a achievement orientated thing that I was not really use to. I kind of, of you know, you took the SAT test once because that's how much you could afford to pay for it. And if you did all right that's fine but you didn't take it three or four times. So, it was a, it was a culturally enriching experience. But, I think it was mutually beneficial because again there were only a few Negroes there at the time.
Story_ID: 465824
Speaker 1: And you're just gonna wrap up that summer experience?
Speaker 2: The summer experience at Exeter [Phillips Exeter Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] was wonderful. I was, I had been away from home before. I had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] one summer. I had gone to Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] one summer. But, this was different because this was New Hampshire. It was New England, I was living in a, a dormitory with other white kids. Kids who really were a, a lot of them were from a different social class, an upper class kids. There were a few black students on campus during the summer. But, again it, it was a mutual- mutually beneficial kind of experience because I think on, on a social level if you get to know someone by living with them, by talking with them, by having meals together. You have a different perception of, of them rather than just seeing somebody on, the news, so you recognize one another as, as individuals, as, as human beings rather than as a white person or a black person, or somebody who's integrating a situation in a social context. I really enjoyed it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, that was nineteen--
Speaker 2: That was 1966.
Speaker 1: The summer--
Story_ID: 465825
Speaker 1: And you'd then go into Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], the fall of '66 [1966] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fall of '66 [1966], um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: And have you declared a major, do you know what you're going to major in?
Speaker 2: Well, the interest was again in science and biology.
Speaker 1: Science, yeah.
Speaker 2: That changed (laughter) after my first class in chemistry, see the thing about Oberlin, I think the thing about colleges outside of your area when you get into a situation where everybody's not from Virginia. Everybody's not from Portsmouth [Virginia], people come from all kinds of, of backgrounds. They had been to, a lot of kids went to prep school or they had been a studied abroad during high school. So, the experiences were, while I was an A student in high school [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and I was the valedictorian of my class and got all these scholarships and thought I was hot stuff. Then you, you enter a class of three hundred or four hundred people where everybody's the valedictorian of their class. And everybody has scored high on their SATs or whatever. So, that was again an adjustment, just adjusting to both the freedom of being away from, from home. Being in an environment that was really liberal and, and different from being in Portsmouth, Virginia where you know you're expected to do the kind of status quo thing and I had taken a little bit of a step and leap by not going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. I wanted to go someplace different I wanted to go a place that would challenge my sensitivities and my abilities more (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what was your fall back, once you took the chemistry class and you said, okay I'm not gonna continue this?
Speaker 2: Well, I, what happened was I just realized that I had been in a fast track for science because the smart kids took science and so if you're smart you take science and you take math and that's what you're gonna be. So, I hadn't I although I loved in terms of the study and the academics, I really hadn't really thought about what I wanted to do. So, going to a small liberal arts college gave me the ability to take a lot of different courses, to take music and art and philosophy and literature. So, I changed my major maybe three times.
Speaker 1: What was the turning point to get you to illustration? Or to yeah, what became a turning point to get you to on the track that you later?
Speaker 2: I love books. I love to read I went from biology to maybe physiology, sociology, English lit. I liked art, I wanted to take art classes. And I think I realized that I didn't have to do just one thing. If I loved books, I could find a way to use all my interests. And what other- what was the perfect way for everything to come together in, in a book. Books were my passion, I love reading, I love literature and I think that directed me more in the literary field. So, I, I'd always like to draw, but I was always told you know you can't make a living being an artist. So, that was something that I had never had an opportunity to take when I was in high school and I took advantage of the college setting to take art history courses and studio courses. And so all of those kind of things sort of came together.
Story_ID: 465826
Speaker 1: So, in 1967, you met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Marin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did that happen?
Speaker 2: In '66 [1967], '67 [1967] I was working to register voters in Cleveland [Ohio] for Carl Stokes' mayoral campaign. And I don't know why Dr. Martin Luther King was in Cleveland. He may have been there supporting Carl Stokes. And I was just walking down the street, and I met both and him and Dr. Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy], in a car that happened pull up alongside where I was walking.
Speaker 1: You recognized him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he introduced himself, (unclear) Dr. Abernathy said, "Would you like to meet Dr. Martin Luther King?" I said, "Sure." So, I reached in, and he didn't get out of the car and I shook his hand and that was it. It was just a, a just a moment.
Speaker 1: And what do you think that moment was about in the context of your life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I really--
Speaker 1: I mean nothing happened, everything happens for a reason. What, would you give the reason for that moment?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I mean maybe I was supposed to be in that place at that time. I think that sometimes you embark on a, a path that takes you circuitously in, in different directions. I had not been active in civil rights, so I had not integrated a school. But, I felt that it was important to help to register voters for Carl Stokes' campaign because that was an important moment in, in history. And Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] itself has always sort of a hotbed for social change and social action and a lot of students had been involved in Freedom Summer or going to Mississippi to help register people to vote so. And it was the first coed college in the United States, and had sort of a liberal tradition. So, there were always interesting things that were happening and people were always involved in doing something for other people or, or moving, and not just sitting still and talking about issues. So, I, I think just volunteering for that effort was something, here's something I--that I can do.  I don't have to ask my mom's [Lillian Watson Willis] permission (laughter).
Speaker 1: What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is something that I want to do.
Story_ID: 465827
Speaker 1: What year did your father [Hayes Willis III] die?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]. So, he died without ever having seen all of the changes that would later come about?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: But, your mother's [Lillian Watson Willis] still alive--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and had seen all of the changes come about?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, does she ever talk about the differences, and does she ever speak about how the world is now versus what it was when you were a child?
Speaker 2: In some ways because she was involved as a teacher in more massive integration. When the schools, at first there was, there was Lynwood Strong [ph.] and there was Angela Mercer [ph.] and there were one or two people that you could by name who would, who integrated the school by being the only one. But, in subsequent years white teachers started teaching in the black high school, black teachers started teaching in the white high schools, and they the populations merged. And my mother was a part of that wave, they built a new magnet school to, to solve some of the integrations problems and she was one of the teachers in the school working with white teachers and having a mixed population of, of kids. So, I think she saw a lot of the changes that were going on during that, during that period.
Speaker 1: Why do you think she felt it was important for you to be a part of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] when you were growing up those early years?
Speaker 2: I think it was a social thing. There were other, I'm trying to remember who else was, there was another one of my friends in high school [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], Brenda Walls [ph.] was a in the Jack and Jills. And Connie Belton [ph.] and I think my mother was asked to, you know, I think you had to be invited. You know, I don't know what the whole social thing is, but many of the people the, the, the, the parents were professionals or, or teachers and or college educated or own their businesses. And it was just another social vehicle for you to meet people of your own age group. People who were interested in doing some of thin- same things that you did. I mean we I, I basically remember we went to parties, you know (laughter), nice parties.
Story_ID: 465828
Speaker 1: So in, in 1968 though, one year later after meeting Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you meet Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson], and how does that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I met Wade not, after 1968, '68 [1968] I was still in college. And at that time there were, I think thirty-five blacks at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and that was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how many were students in the whole school?
Speaker 2: Twenty-five hundred students. And that was, those were big populations because before then I think that out of the class that I came really increased the population. And before that maybe there were five, six or seven blacks totally within the undergraduate and graduate division. So, this was a period of social change for all the colleges across the, the country. And black studies was a big push at that time. And I was involved in a black students group on, on campus.
Speaker 1: How many students were in that group?
Speaker 2: I think almost ever- almost all of us.
Speaker 1: All thirty-five?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the whole thirty-five (laughter), there may have been, been a few that did not join. But, what had happened is there was a conscious to effort to recruit more blacks from urban areas to go to independent private liberal arts colleges. And colleges all over the country to make those, those opportunities available. And there was a program, a Special Educational Opportunities Program at, at Oberlin, of which I was not part, but there were a group students who had been transitioned into Oberlin over the summer. Again to prepare for them a little bit more for the, the college experience. And I think what happened was we were put in a situation without some of the supports to help you succeed. So, a lot of the students were having difficulties and it was highly academic and very rigorous academic climate for anybody who, who was there. And a number of the blacks were having problems. So we, sort of banded together like how can we help one and another. So, that was part of having a black student union and also the push to have more African American studies courses, on campus. So, we were in involved in that. Sixty-eight [1968] was the year, was the year that Martin Luther King was assassinated. I graduated from Oberlin in 1970 and met Wade in 1970, '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you met him after you'd graduated?
Speaker 2: After, yes um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, you went to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] just for add- additional studies?
Speaker 2: Right, after, after graduating, I wanted to figure out something to do I didn't want to go to grad school. A lot of people were going to, to grad school, or summer abroad or, or whatever. And I thought, oh books, publishing, here's this summer program, let me take a look at that and see if that's a career path that, that I could follow. And so I went to, to Radcliffe for the summer. And it was six, I think it was eight week program. And really found that in publishing I could combine my love of language and words and graphics and putting things together in, in a career path. So, I became I, I took a job right out of the, the program with Houghton Mifflin Company [Houghton Mifflin Harcourt]. And this was with the educational textbook division (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 465829
Speaker 1: But before we go onto your career, I want to go back to meeting Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and--because he was, he was so much more politically active than you were within the movement did you share his passion for it or look up to him for having that sort of passion? Or, did the two of you even talk about what he was doing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think we, we had some of the same interests. Because you know you read the newspaper the war was a big thing. I protested the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] when I was in school. So, I think that even though Wade was more directly active on a grassroots level, intellectually we were in pretty much the same space. So, that there was a compatibility there and interest in the same thing. I mean we talked politics, we talked art you know. We talked about music, 'cause he's a blues man (laughter) and I'm a little bit more of a jazz person. But, you know there, there are a wide range of, of things that, that we had in common.
Speaker 1: What were, what did you think about let's say the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]? Or, did you have any thoughts about it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I mean Huey, Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton] and, and--
Speaker 1: Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture]?
Speaker 2: Stokely, well Stokely was a Black Panther in the sense of the beginning of Black Panthers in, in Mississippi and, and in the South, the, the idea of a Black Panther party. I thought the Black Panthers had some really valuable things to contribute and had done that. I thought there was a lot violence, I mean, I'm, I'm from, and not violence from them but the whole period of time, and this was during the time of Watts riot, the Cleveland riots.
Speaker 1: There were riots in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Riots, there were in Cleveland, in Hough and Glenville section of, of Cleveland. And--
Speaker 1: Is Hough the wealthier section?
Speaker 2: No, Hough was a black neighborhood, yeah. So, all of this urban unrest was going on while I was in Ohio and close to Cleveland. So, you followed the news, you knew you followed what was happening with, with 'Soul on Ice' [Eldridge Cleaver] and you read the books, you read the literature. Not being, I mean Wade lived in, in Berkeley [California], so I think his firsthand experience may have been a lot--of course a lot more immediate. I, I didn't know any Black Panthers so I was a little bit more removed from that.
Story_ID: 465830
Speaker 1: What were you reading during your college years, you said you were--you loved books?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I read a lot of, I read Langston Hughes. I read, I, I ended up majoring in sociology at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio]. So, I read Fanon [Frantz Fanon], I read Ospinski [ph.], I, I did a private reading my senior year with a sponsor, so that I--after I finished my course work, I could reading anything that I wanted to. So, I would just go to 800s and just pick a book. I read journals, I'm trying to, I read in a survey resource research course that we did have at Oberlin, which was a very interesting kind of thing is the set up, with a professor and we did research projects to try to form a curriculum. I read the complete works of Frederick Douglass, I read 'Up from Slavery' [Booker T. Washington], I read Fire!!, I read--
Speaker 1: Fire!! is that James Baldwin or not Fire!! (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that's, that's a journal from that, Langston Hughes and a group of people, Zora Neale Hurston and couple of other people put together, was a one, a short lived journal. I read journals like Opportunity [Opportunity: A Journal of Negro Life], you know, just going to stacks, just reading those things from the '20s [1920s], from the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Now, now if you just, we're gonna jump to the future. I'm gonna ask you to look back to the things you were reading, which of those things do you think had the most impact on what would you later do?
Speaker 2: I think both the complete works of Frederick Douglass and I read another book by Amos Tutuola called 'My Life in the Bush of Ghosts,' it's a Nigerian writer and I'm just thinking about it now. But, that was such a revelation to me in terms of folk literature in a modernist format. It was a novel, but it was almost a stream of consciousness novel. And I think that melding both this completely fantastical tale. Also, Tutuola also he wrote 'The Palm-Wine Drinkard' [Amos Tutuola]. It was just so fantastic and so beautifully written and so different from anything else that I ever read. That I thought, wow I'd like to make books and somehow make them wonderful and different. And something that someone could pick up and say, wow this is an amazing piece of art it's a, it's amazing work. It, it was very organic, so I mean I think that you know sort of a epiphany you know a light bulb, ah books (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who turned you on to him? I never heard of him?
Speaker 2: Well, this was part of this research--
Speaker 1: That re- (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --course that we had, we read Douglass, we read 'Palm-Wine Drinkard,' we read Frantz Fanon. We read 'The Mark of Oppression' ['The Mark of Oppression: Explorations in the Personality of the American Negro,' Abram Kardiner and Lionel Ovesey] by Ospinski [sic.], we read 'Black Manhattan' [James Weldon Johnson], there were a very eclectic list of books by black and white writers. That just you know gave me an opportunity of looking at things in a, a different way.
Story_ID: 465831
Speaker 1: Why do you think all of the students felt that it was important to have, to, for the black studies department? To have one, you know to--you said you worked at Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] with the black students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --in the union, to create a black studies department. Why at that point did it you become aware that something like that was needed (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I think it's, I think it's, the, the same kind of awareness that you get, well when Oberlin had, I don't know how many millions of volumes in its library, an incredible library. I had never seen so many books before. It's just amazing that you could just walk in the stacks and there would be rows, and rows, and rows, and rows of popular books and books that were obscure right next to one and another. It was like and I (unclear) look at all the books there are in the world and why don't we know about it. And Langston Hughes, I mean we had maybe heard of Paul Laurence Dunbar and, "'Lias! 'Lias! Bless the Lord" ['In the Morning,' Paul Laurence Dunbar]. Or, or you know, "Little brown baby with the sparkling eyes" ['Little Brown Baby,' Paul Laurence Dunbar], there was such as wealth of information. And some much information that had come out of the Harlem Renaissance, out of the 1920s. And here it is 1960 and nobody's ever heard of this before. Why not have black studies? It just makes a lot of sense that there's knowledge and people should have access to it.
Speaker 1: Did you discuss it with your mother [Lillian Watson Willis], who was a black educator?
Speaker 2: You know it, it wasn't discussed per se, you know I mean, I, I think that it was, I think my going to Oberlin was probably harder on my mother (laughter) than it may have been on me. I mean first of all, here I am leaving Portsmouth, Virginia going out to Oberlin, Ohio. Not able to get home that frequently because of the distance and, and whatever. And all of the social change happening, the Vietnam War, Civil Rights Movement, getting an afro, all of these things.
Speaker 1: You had an afro as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah. All of these things were happening at a time where I think the expectations of my mother, may have been to go to college, get your degree, marry a nice lawyer or a doctor, settle down, have a family, have two kids.
Speaker 1: And keep your hair straight (laughter)?
Speaker 2: And keep my hair straight, sure. So, I mean there were a lot of radical changes in the way people were thinking about things and approaching issues. So, I think that, I, I think probably from my mother, she's saying these people are out here, what have I, what have let my child into? What, what's going on here, you know?
Speaker 1: Did you ever, when did your consciousness of being a woman--how did that--did I mean--was it awaken at the same time as being black or those two things that, one in the same?
Speaker 2: I think the problem, I think it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean or feminism never even came into play for you?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think, I think it's sort of a simultaneous thing and I never, I, I, prefer woman--that sort of Alice Walker's term a definition, I think that during--
Speaker 1: What is her, what is her term and definition?
Speaker 2: And, and I don't want to mis- misquote her but a, a woman is different from a female in the sense, in, in the same way that a man is different from a male. I mean one is gender and one is, is being. So, and I may not be quoting her directly, but that in terms, that, that's part of my definition and I think that, that being or evolving into an adult is probably more significant to me than either being a feminist or a womanist. I think that adults grow up and they make decisions and they make choices, and those choices are based on the knowledge that they have for their own persons. You know notwithstanding the world around you. So, I think becoming an adult was significant for me. I think black consciousness is, is very important. Because once you become to think about yourself in the relationship to your immediate family, your community and, and the world. You can, you can get an understanding through study and through exposure. And I think that we think of ourselves not terms, not just in terms of black consciousness, but in terms of an Pan-African or global community. And so feminism is something that, I mean I see as a part of I am a woman, I'm an independent woman that means that I can think for myself. I can think of myself as an African American living in America, living on the planet earth.
Story_ID: 465832
Speaker 1: So, back to your career.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: You get the job at William, what is it?
Speaker 2: Houghton Mifflin [Houghton Mifflin Company; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt]. I worked at Houghton Mifflin as an art editor, for really two years. And I, I became a senior designer there.
Speaker 1: What is the job of an art editor?
Speaker 2: At that time an art editor was a person who was really sort of in charge of the art program of a textbook. Sometimes they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were you--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a, if you have an, an, we were doing school books so the books would be about math or science or reading. And part of my job was if there were photographs in the book, I would have to get permissions to do the photographs, I'd have to size the photographs, I'd have to file the photographs. If there was a, a, an equation or some principle of mathematics that had to be illustrated, I would find an artist to illustrate that. So, part of my training as an art editor was really, really good there. Because I, I worked on social studies books, I worked on math books. I, I worked a little bit on, on reading books and I had an opportunity to m- to meet and look at portfolios of artist and photographers who came in to show their work.
Speaker 1: So, two years of doing that, you become the senior--
Speaker 2: A senior designer, I think that's what I was when I--
Speaker 1: And what do you do under that title?
Speaker 2: Some of the same thing but more working with the typography and actually putting the things together on the page. When I first starting work there it was more doing administrative kinds of things, collecting stuff, collection data, but, then I became more involved in actually doing the actual design of a, a story.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, how many African Americans were in that field doing thing?
Speaker 2: One (laughter) at Houghton Mifflin, I think there was one, there was one black editor that I knew of. I was in the art department for almost three years and when I left there was one other black person there. But, there were very few--that, that, the, the world of publishing has largely been all-white for a long time. And part of what that experience taught me in terms of working with textbooks, is that not only were the, the people who worked in personnel the editors the art people, not people of color but of course all of the textbooks were too. Because there were no, no black kids in the books, so that really started me on this, this whole path.
Speaker 1: Did you question anybody about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh absolutely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me, tell me about some of those conversations?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean I think during that period of time, there were questions coming from schools, and librarians too.
Speaker 1: As to why aren't there any black kids (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why aren't there any black kids in these books? And there was federal money for libraries and buying books. So, parents and people said, "Well if we're gonna have these books at least you have some people of color in them." So, there was a real push and this was 1970 to '73 [1973] and there was actually a committee that was formed to look at the both the stereotypes that were still being perpetuated in classroom materials.
Speaker 1: And which were the stereotypes that were still being perpetuated that you saw?
Speaker 2: Well, that all slaves were happy, you know the slaves. I mean you, you'd have to look back some of the books before 1970 to see the language or the wording that assumed that slavery may have been a benign institution. And people happen to be slaves and they were brought over here. But, nothing about racism or institutionalized racism or that this is forced labor or this is wrong. So, themes that were not included in social studies. Or no mention of African American musicians with the exception maybe of Nat King Cole or something. It was just a dearth of materials, it's like black people just didn't exist. If they--and people would say, if it's not in the book it's not true. And so, you know you've gotta really fight with the, the, the kind of powers that be to challenge putting more people of color in books.
Story_ID: 465833
Speaker 1: Continuing, before we move forward to put some context to your personal life with where we are now, you were married in '72 [1972]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you were still doing the design, I mean the first job?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was still an art editor at Houghton Mifflin [Houghton Mifflin Company; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Art editor. Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then we are two years later, you do the des- design?
Speaker 2: Right, after seven- '72 [1972], Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and I were married in June of '72, he was accepted in, at the film training school at Channel 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York] and in 1973 we moved to New Jersey. And when we moved to New Jersey, I then got a job at Macmillan Publishing Company and that was a textbook publishing company also, as senior designer. And I began to work on social studies books and readers, also doing layout and design for school text- textbooks.
Speaker 1: And this--in the '70s [1970s] is when all these questions started to arise about--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The textbooks themselves?
Speaker 2: Right, I mean up until that point, I mean Scott Foresman [Scott Foresman and Company], I don't know if you remember 'The Little Blue Schoolroom' [ph.] or 'The Mother and the Daddy' [ph.] and 'The Picket Fence' [ph.], but textbooks basically showed white families. And I believe it, in, in the mid-1960s it started to change with the growth of libraries and funding for libraries, and parents and teachers started saying where are all the, the children of color. One of my, the first things that I had to do as a art editor, even when I was at Houghton Mifflin, in, in Boston [Massachusetts], was to color in all the white characters with little grey screens so that they would appear to be people of color. Now, they were not redrawn these were little spirit duplicating masters or things that you use in work sheets and that was part of the job. So, that you could have you know 13 percent black, 5 percent Hispanic and 2 percent Native American and whatever. Working at Macmillan this intensified, Bank Street College of Education [New York, New York] offered a class that I took with a wonderful woman called Beryl Banfield who was a teacher at Bank Street and who had been a real activist in Harlem [New York, New York]. And--
Speaker 1: What was her name again?
Speaker 2: Beryl Banfield and she came in and did an evaluation of some of the textbooks in the Macmillan program. And it was scathing and the editors realized, "Oh we have real problem here with both the content and the images, and we've gotta to do something because these textbook committees are challenging us all around." So, we formed a committee. I can't remember the name of the, of the committee itself but there were several editors and myself on the committee and part of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you the only black person on the committee?
Speaker 2: Yes, and part of the, the job was to look at stereotypes or possible stereotypes in all of the books, whether it's math or social studies, subject areas, and then write guidelines for both writers and illustrators to follow in terms of correcting the wrongs that were en- endemic you know.
Story_ID: 465834
Speaker 1: Well I want to know what came out of the committee, but before I want to go inside of the committee and, and ask if you were picking up on stuff that seemed to, to be, that they were oblivious to?
Speaker 2: I think so, I mean there's always oblivion, I mean if you are a part of a power structure if you, you think everything is fine but, and, and you're not questioning is something wrong with this illustration? Does this, does this character have huge humongous lips because this is a stereotype or is that because black people look like that? Or if you're looking at an Asian person, are they drawn as caricatures with little slits for eyes. There are a lot of things that people were not thinking about consciously and part of the job of the, the committee was to point out some of the things that were blatant stereotypes and make recommendations as to how these could be avoided. Some of things could be avoided in terms of content just in terms of correction of, of facts and inclusion of African American studies or differences in Native Americans to have the information there. But on the illustration level--
Speaker 1: What guidelines did you put in place on the illustration level?
Speaker 2: Well, there were guidelines as to how, to look at, if you're an illustrator look at people be you draw them. I mean it's, it's a simple thing and also that all black people are not PMS 484 [sic.], which is a Pantone [Pantone Matching System] color, and all black people, if you have a black person in the book everyone of 'em is the same color. Black people come in a range of colors so there's a variety from very light skinned to very dark skinned. And some of it was just sensitivity to looking at things from the point of view of the person of color, if you're talking about Native Americans, are you talking about them as if they are animals or as if they are dead. As to opposed to people who are still alive and there are subtle uses of language that you will find in textbooks which shows a des- desensitivity to a variety of, of racial and ethnic groups.
Speaker 1: Well, what did, what do you think about like literature, like Mark Twain's writing? Does it offend you, does that, I mean how, how does that play into what we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, that what you have to, I mean Mark Twain was a, a humorist and he was a, someone who was really attuned with the culture of, of the times. And I don't think we should be involved in revisionist history. Huckleberry Finn and, and all those people existed that, that literature exists. And it was valuable, val- val- it has value in terms of the genre. I mean, you don't want to go around calling people by those names. And, and I'm a firm believer that, that literature should not be censured, in the sense that okay I don't have to agree with it, I don't want you to use necessarily in the classroom and if it's discussed it has to be discussed in context with some other writer of that same period. So, that you're not dealing with, what people will say these are the classics and this is the canon so therefore nothing else can be taught. You've, you've got to open the door to, to diversity.
Story_ID: 465835
Speaker 1: So, back to your career, the, you're in New York [New York] and you're working for--
Speaker 2: Macmillan [Macmillan Publishing Company], um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mac- Macmillan, how long do you stay in that job, after the guidelines come down you're working on the committee?
Speaker 2: Right, I, I worked there from 1973 through 1979, with a baby in between, our daughter [Katura J. Hudson] was born.
Speaker 1: You had two children in between?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Well, I, I worked in, our daughter was born in 1976, and our son [Stephan J. Hudson] was born in 1982. So, I worked at Macmillan with a brief period being out. And left there as a design manager, which meant that I worked with a number of other art editors and designers under me and supervised their work on, on the series. I'm not sure what, what the next question was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's good, but when did you become aware that you could--when did it become aware to you that there's a need for you in just, in the, in the form of Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.], that you gotta put your own stamp on these books?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that having worked at Macmillan and having all that background in school textbooks and who to put things together and knowing the mechanics of it. And then looking, when our daughter was born, you know looking for art work, looking for books to read to her. And seeing not only are textbooks devoid of people of color, but trade books are too. What do you have as a, a trade book, you go into a book store and all the kids are white. Now, 'Stevie' [John Steptoe] had come out, not in the '70s [1970s], that was John Steptoe, had done this landmark book called 'Stevie,' of an urban child, beautiful illustrations. And there were some illustrators who I had met, [HistoryMaker] Jerry Pinkney has illustrated wonderful, wonderful books, the poet Eloise Greenfield had published a book, I believe it was called 'Bubbles' [Eloise Greenfield], about a little baby and it was a self-publisher, it was by a small press. But, there weren't very many black writers that were being published and if you were they were just few and far in between. So, I thought, okay our daughter should have books with kids that look like her and it was very difficult to find those, so again that's in the trademark, at books that you buy in the bookstore. Books that are for pleasure rather than just textbooks, so the same things applied, there just weren't enough materials. And it was a gradual process, because I had been designing books for other people and for a while I, I worked, I worked at an encyclopedia company. I did freelance work. I worked for an illustrator who was very popular in children's books. I worked as his art di- as an art director for him. And Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and I had started collaborating on some ideas and materials. And really took them, started submitting them to publishers. You know, so this is a great idea, this is a great idea for a children's book. And we were just turned down again, and again and again, and a part of that is just the reject process. But, part of it also is the perception that why, why bother to do these books, there's no market for black children's books. Why, why would you bother to put a black child in a book and it, it just seems a ridiculous questions, but why not? So, beca- our company grew out of that frustration of not being able to find the kinds of books that we would want to share and read with our children. So, we started developing our own, and, and the 'AFRO-BETS' [Cheryl Willis Hudson] series was the first part of that, that process.
Story_ID: 465836
Speaker 1: And that book came out in?
Speaker 2: The 'AFRO-BETS ABC Book' [Cheryl Willis Hudson] came out in 1987.
Speaker 1: Wow (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, before that and right after my daughter [Katura J. Hudson] was, was born, I started doing, and other of my friends were having babies. So, as a shower gift, I would draw little illustrations sometimes and I would spell out the child's name, April [ph.] or Katura or whatever, and I made these little black characters and they would form letters and they would just spell out the name. So, that's where 'AFRO-BETS' came from originally. And after I did a whole bunch of them, I said, well I got like thirty of these little kids and I should really make an alphabet. So, I made an alphabet poster, so this was a couple of years before '87 [1987], but the, the book idea was actually published in 1987.
Speaker 1: And how did the publishing of that book come about? You, you have the alphabet and you put in a treatment or whatever to submit to publishers?
Speaker 2: Right, I made a dummy book, which you put it together and say, well I want to do an alphabet book from A to Z and here the 'AFRO-BETS' kids. A is for apple, alligator, and Africa and you do a couple of samples, whereas maybe you do A, B, C, D and you send it, say I've got a book idea and this is how I want it done, and da-da-da-da. And we didn't have any takers on it and it was rejected. A couple of people said, "Oh this is a good idea, but you know why don't you get, you know some celebrity--if you get some celebrity to endorse it, maybe we'll be interested in it." And then there was another kind of ah- an aha moment. Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which was?
Speaker 2: Well, we know what we're doing, you know, we've been working ten- I've been working in publishing for ten years, I know how to make books, why do I have to have somebody tell me that I don't, I don't know how to make a book and it doesn't work. And I think Wade's expertise in public relations, and also his eye for characterization and you know pulling together things from his, his, his point of view being a playwright, you know you got thirty characters, you can't have all of these guys running around  in a book, lets hone it down to six. And we talked about it and did little bit more work on it. And we just one night we said, "Why are we asking somebody else to do this? We can do these ourselves." And that's, we decided to self-publish. And we got the design together, I did the sketches, I hired an illustrator, 'cause I'm not an illustrator, I had the concept. I hired an illustrator to render the characters, we set the type, did the mechanicals, got it ready for the printer and sort of the rest is history. We, we didn't know what we were doing in terms of business, because you know it cost more to get it printed. I mean if we had thought about how much it was going cost and the color and all of that it might have been something that we would put on hold and say, we'll wait until we can get somebody else to pay for it. But, I think part of this whole thing about what we've done is we've built an institution [Just Us Books, Inc.]. And looking at and defining yourself, and coming out of the Black Power movement or nationalist ideology and th- you can define yourself. You can say what you want to do, I'm a publisher, I'm a writer, I can own my own institution and there's more power in that than getting somebody else to do it for you. So, it was an empowering kind of thing for us to self-publish, even though we didn't have a business plan. And we didn't know exactly how much it was going to cost. And I think the first printing it may have cost us you know three dollars a book to actually print it. So, we weren't making any profit off of it, but we learned how to build a company from that experience.
Speaker 1: And who bought those first five thousand books?
Speaker 2: We sold them to daycare centers, we sold them to churches, we sold them at street fairs, we sold them wherever people were. We had there a list of, a number of independent black bookstores, we sold them there, we sold them direct mail. I remember the money just coming through the mail, you know a check for five dollars a check for six dollars, sometimes people would send cash, it was just amazing. You know, "We published a book." So, it was a, we didn't have a, a big strategy, we were just mad you know, and determined or angry enough to do it ourselves. And once we figured how to do it and that we had done it, then we sort of took a step backward and so well you know this is a publishing business, this is not just a product that we do one time and see if we can get somebody else to do it the next time. The next time we do it, we'll do it ourselves.
Speaker 1: And how was that decision made? You and Wade simply saying we, we are enjoying this, we want to continue to do it ourselves as opposed to brining I don't know Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] or anyone else in to do it?
Speaker 2: We just decided I think it was, it was, we just decided to do it our- we can do this, if we don't do it, who else will. Or, if we do it and give it to somebody else how will it change? It won't be ours, we wanted ownership of it. And, we, we wer- I was working at that time, full time for a small press in White Plains [New York] as an art director. And so, we did it at night and on weekends and, and, until we were able to, to do it full-time.
Story_ID: 465837
Speaker 1: What made you think you could do it, if you hadn't seen it being done by another? Like, there are no one else publishing black children's books.  What do you think it is that made you think that the two of you could pull it off?
Speaker 2: Well, I you know, I think it was gradually thing, I don't think, I, I think that once--well, once we had printed the, the 'AFRO-BETS ABC Book' [Cheryl Willis Hudson], we started getting calls for more. We had to print more, I mean it was a flurry of activities I mean people wanted this book. Say well people of color, yeah, everybody wants this book. How many black people are there in the country, how many of them have kids that don't know their ABCs or want an alphabet book? So, I think we, we thought that there's a, a huge possibility. And then we started getting some more reinforcement from the few the people that we knew who were involved in, in publishing. We met with [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown who was our agent for a while. And she said, "Oh this is fantastic, this is, this is wonderful." We met with someone, she had worked with who is deceased now, Glenn Thompson, who had also started a publishing company, around that same time, Black Butterfly press [Black Butterfly Children's Books]. And he thought we were crazy, he said, "This is beautiful but how can you make any money," you know, but we got some reinforcement from people in the industry, and just started studying it a lot more systematically.
Speaker 1: What would Marie Brown, what could Marie Brown do for you, the agent? Why would you need an agent, if you're a publisher?
Speaker 2: Well, because we weren't a publisher at the time that we first knew Marie (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: We, we were looking to her, to say, "Well Marie here's some other ideas that we have, can you place them with publisher?" And she was one of the few black agents at that time, in, in New York [New York]. And she had all of the contacts too, of, of knowing people at Doubleday [Doubleday and Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Company] and all the other publishing houses. But, again when you're dealing with institutions who have not been doing this, they've not had a, a, a series of black characters, maybe there's one book with one black child in it. And if there's some resistance, like there's no market for it. Why would be there be any incentive for a Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] or anybody else to buy our book, if they don't think there's a market for it anyway. So, part of it is kind of informing the industry that there, yes there is a market for these books. But, in the meantime I can't wait for you to decide to make up your mind for somebody, for us to convince you of it. We sort of had to prove that the market was there and I think we did that, by getting so much positive feedback on both the 'AFRO-BETS ABC Book,' '123 Book' ['AFRO-BETS 123 Book,' Cheryl Willis Hudson], but also particularly Wade's [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] book with Valerie [Valerie Wilson Wesley], 'Book of Black Heroes from A to Z' ['Book of Black Heroes from A to Z: An Introduction to Important Black Achievers for Young Readers,' Wade Hudson and Valerie Wilson Wesley], which as a, a another again a different kind of book. Not a book just on George Washington Carver, but a book of black heroes. And we didn't call them, here's a biography of the African Americans, there's a difference between that and saying book of black heroes, because these people were heroes to us. So, their perspective was a little bit different. And so, the, they're subtleties that you will find in the difference in approach to, to publishing that we took verses maybe a more commercial publisher.
Story_ID: 465838
Speaker 1: So, after that first book, 'AFRO-BETS' ['AFRO-BETS ABC Book,' Cheryl Willis Hudson], and you do a second printing of it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How long does it take before you can do Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] full-time?
Speaker 2: I think full-time, I think it was about two years before it was full-time for both of us (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the turning point, to make it become full-time and even a business as opposed to just a, you know I'm, I'm, there's not something out there, I'm mad, I'm gonna put it out there?
Speaker 2: Right. Right.
Speaker 1: You know a real business?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that that took a while but it, it grew very fast because I mean there, there, these books were very, very popular. We, the first printing was five thousand, the second printing was five thousand, then we started getting calls. And then the next printing was like twenty thousand, so there were like I don't know how many thousands of copies, of, of the books in print over this period of time. There was a great demand for it and so we had to get things together so we could, could meet the demand, and the demand for, for more books.
Speaker 1: And so, the turning point became, meeting the demand for more books, to make it full-time?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that was part of it and also wanting to do it full-time and not wanting to do somebody else's books, you know, we wanted to do our books. And we knew that we could, we had we had a model. So, we just had to make a commitment to make it work.
Speaker 1: And you followed it up with which book?
Speaker 2: 'ABC,' '123' ['AFRO-BETS 123 Book,' Cheryl Willis Hudson], then the 'Book of Black Heroes from A to Z' ['Book of Black Heroes from A to Z: An Introduction to Important Black Achievers for Young Readers,' Wade Hudson and Valerie Wilson Wesley], then next book that we published was 'AFRO-BETS First Book about Africa' ['AFRO-BETS First Book about Africa: An Introduction for Young Readers,' Veronica Freeman Ellis]. After that we did 'Bright Eyes, Brown Skin' [Cheryl Willis Hudson and Bernette G. Ford], 'Jamal's Busy Day' [Wade Hudson] and I'd have to look at our list to see what, what comes next.
Story_ID: 465839
Speaker 1: Of those books, I'm sure they're all very special to you. Is there one that stands out for personal reasons over others?
Speaker 2: Well, they're all like your children you know, you can't really choose. I mean I have favorites depending on, on the day. 'Bright Eyes, Brown Skin' [Cheryl Willis Hudson and Bernette G. Ford] was a, a picture book, 'ABC' ['AFRO-BETS ABC Book,' Cheryl Willis Hudson], '123' ['AFRO-BETS 123 Book,' Cheryl Willis Hudson] books are concept books so they're only, there's words and images and, and shapes for a larger, smaller kids. 'Bright Eyes, Brown Skin' was the first picture book that we did that really told a story through the picture. And it was fully illustrated by George Ford, who's a fantastic illustrator, who really captured the feeling of these, these four little kids playing together. So, I like that because of the title and it seems to resonate with parents too. 'Bright Eyes, Brown Skin,' it's something, it's a feeling good kind of book. But then 'Jamal's Busy Day' [Wade Hudson] is a great book too, because it takes a little black boy who loves going to school. And teachers have told us that's a fantastic book because of the pacing and because of the, the way the parents are involved in the, the child's life and because of the positive portrayal of a black boy on a cover, which you don't see that often.
Speaker 1: And who was it that said to you we need more of that, like more black boys in central, as central characters to books.
Speaker 2: I think teachers and parents.
Speaker 1: And your response to that was?
Speaker 2: That's want we'll do, we did 'Jamal's Busy Day' as a picture book, but then we followed up a few years later with the 'Kid Caramel' series, and he's a private detective, Kid Caramel lives in Tanwood and he has a sidekick. And that's more for kids who are already reading on maybe a third grade level. And following up that with 'Ziggy and the Black Dinosaurs' [Sharon M. Draper], which is a series for, for kids who are probably fifth, sixth grade by Sharon Draper. And we've just made conscious effort to show boys on the cover. And if you look and we go do some private research you'll look at the books of for children and up to a certain point most of the, the covers have girls on them. So, there, there subtle messages about you know sex and gender and, and race that you'll, you'll find.
Speaker 1: So, any hopes of these books ever turning into films and to movies?
Speaker 2: That would be great (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ever thought, do you ever think about it?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it--
Speaker 1: Or even plays or characters like Dora the Explorer, you know Jamal being a larger than life character on stage, who has his, his own musical?
Speaker 2: That would be--right. It's, it's that's an idea we, we would hope, we would hope.
Speaker 1: Do you ever think about, these going beyond just books and other?
Speaker 2: Yes and when we, Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and I made, made a conscious effort to focus on books because that's what we, we kind a learned how to do. And the business things, I mean you go into merchandising when you start talking about plays and videos and cassettes and TV series and things like that. So, those options are there.
Story_ID: 465840
Speaker 1: What did the family think about what you were doing and what you built here, your mother [Lillian Watson Willis]?
Speaker 2: I, I think she's very proud of, of what we've built together, she's a, an avid reader, reads voraciously even now at age eighty-six. And part of our (background noise), part of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Your mother--start again?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother has always been very supportive of what Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and I have done and our, our children [Katura J. Hudson and Stephan J. Hudson] are involved in our publishing efforts as, as well. Because I think we have built an institution [Just Us Books, Inc.] and have really tried to be effective in, in leaving a, a legacy. And it's not something that's easy to do, you gotta, you know you gotta pay the rent, you gotta pay your employees, you gotta pay you know workman's compensation. You gotta pay your taxes. You know, you gotta print these books year after year you know. And, and printing, is, is expensive you gotta ship 'em, you gotta work with retailers, you've gotta work with changing personnel. But, my mother's been supportive of it and, and part of why--one of the reasons I think we have been supportive is that we've had support from organizations and groups in the black community. Her sorority, the Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] the chapter in Portsmouth [Virginia], sponsored our first book party. And they organized it and said, "You know you have these books we're gonna have a book party at the library. And we're gonna invite kids to come," and kids came and they bought books. And these kinds of events are kind of replicating and we've been doing a book fair with them I think for eighteen years now. Every, every spring we go in and have a book fair in Portsmouth and other organizations have sort of followed suit in, in some way. So, I think in terms of community our lives are different now because we don't necessarily a, a monolithic black community, but there are still organizations like the AKA's or The Links [The Links, Incorporated] or the Jack and Jills [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] or The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.] or whatever local organizations there are that support black businesses or creative efforts. And that's gonna be our lifeblood in terms of passing out legacy down to our children. And, and ensuring our children that yes, you can do something you can do it yourself, your parents can do it. You can pass it down to the next generation and you can start your own business too.
Speaker 2: What about, book- black bookstores have you seen those numbers rise since you and does that help you anyway?
Speaker 1: Well, unfortunately black bookstores and almost all independent bookstores have declined in years past because of the growth of superstores like Barnes and Noble [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.]. So, Barnes and Noble comes to town and they build a big superstore and you may have had your neighborhood bookstore that's been there for twenty years and that neighborhood bookstore now cannot compete with Barnes and Noble. Because, Barnes and Noble pricing de- you know discounts and they can get better deals. So, the independent black bookstore was has always been very support of us from the very being, but a number of them have closed, in the roughly twenty years that we've, we've been in business.
Story_ID: 465841
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about the milestones.
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): Okay.
Speaker 1: Some of the things you are doing to keep these books alive and to put them in the, in the hands of children who most need them. Who may not be able to afford to, to have them?
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): Okay.
Speaker 1: But, to start with the milestones?
Speaker 2: Well, we've, we're very proud of the fact that our books are award winners, we've won the BlackBoard Book of the Year, we've been--
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Twice.
Speaker 2: Twice.
Speaker 1: With which books?
Speaker 2: With the 'AFRO-BETS' [Cheryl Willis Hudson] series and also with 'Come By Here Lord' ['Come By Here Lord: Everyday Prayers for Children,' Cheryl Willis Hudson] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): (Simultaneous) The 'AFRO-BETS' series and 'Come By Here Lord.'
Speaker 2: Which is a book of, of prayers, for everyday prayers for children. We've won the Ben Franklin Award [Benjamin Franklin Awards]--
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Twice.
Speaker 2: Twice and that's with the Publishing Marketing Association [sic. Independent Book Publishers Association] once for, 'Bright Eyes, Brown Skin' [Cheryl Willis Hudson and Bernette G. Ford] was the first time, and that book was written by myself, Bernette Ford and illustrated by George Ford. The second time we won that award was with a book by Nikki Grimes and illustrated by Brenda Joysmith and the--
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): 'From A Child's Heart' [Nikki Grimes].
Speaker 2: That book is 'From A Child's Heart,' also a book of, of prayers and of course the normal reviews from Kirkus [Kirkus Reviews] and from Publishers Weekly. We're, we're, the nice thing about awards is that is give you cred [credibility] (laughter), it gives you credibility, but there's recognition from the industry as well. And, and last year Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and I were awarded the Publisher of the we- of the Year Award [Independent African American Publisher of the Year] by the African American Pavilion at the BEA Expo [BookExpo America], which is the largest trade industry organization in the country (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Congratulations.
Story_ID: 465842
Speaker 1: Mr. Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson], I'll ask you this question?
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): Sure.
Speaker 1: Mr. Hudson.
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): That's okay, I answer by both names (laughter).
Speaker 1: I will ask you to talk to me about the numbers? How the business has grown, some of the milestones in the numbers you've reached? Who are the biggest retail supporters or--
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah, well when we first started the company [Just Us Books, Inc.], we sort of built our company establishing a solid foundation that really comprised churches, sororities, fraternities, other social organizations in the black community. So, the black community was really our base, our foundation. And for about two years we really just worked that, that particular market, then we started to reach out for some of the mainstream, the, the major distributers like Ingram [Ingram Content Group] and Baker and Taylor and, and some of the others. And also, we recognize and I think we were one of the first black companies to really do this, that in order to get our books into the hands of as many black people as possible, that we had to go national with our efforts and reach out to large retailers like Kmart [Kmart Corporation], Toys "R" Us [Toys "R" Us, Inc.]. Because in many areas of the country were black folks live there aren't any black bookstores. So, black bookstores were not a source for them. So, our first major account was Toys "R" Us. And I think that we was, we were the first small independent company to really crack that, that market. And after that we picked up Kmart and, and Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] to a small extent, and some of the other retail outlets. And in fact, a few of the black publishing companies that had been in business before we even started sought us out and said, "Look man, you guys are really demonstrating how it should be done. Because we, we would have never thought of going national. We had accepted our market as being you know schools or universities and black bookstores but you guys are going national and you're showing us how to do it."
Speaker 1: And I think it was it was it in 1993 or 1995 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): (Simultaneous) And then we picked up, yeah then we picked up Toys "R" Us in '93 [1993], '94 [1994], right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When did you hit a million dollars in sales?
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): That, that was in '95 [1995], 'cause I think a year later we, we were chosen Small Entrepreneur of the Year [sic. Small Business Pioneer of the Year].
Speaker 2: Of the year, right.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): And--
Speaker 2: That was gross sales though.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah, gross sales, I, I guess we really need to explain that because it doesn't mean we had a million dollars in our pocket. And, and Essence did a really nice spread on us with photographs and all that. And they mentioned the fact that we had done a million dollars in sales. So, of course our friends and people who know us say, "Oh you all have a million dollars--."
Speaker 2: "You're millionaires."
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): But that was one of our big years. We obviously didn't, that wasn't the profit (laughter).  That was what we did in sales. But, as, as we were talking earlier, the industry is cyclical, you know you have your ups and downs, and there's some years when we do well, and other years when we, we struggle like most other publishing companies. And you have to make adjustments you have cut back, you know. And when you're doing well then you could increase your list of, of offerings and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 465843
Speaker 1: Well what can we expect from Just- Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we can expect continued production of good books. We're, we're not gonna scrimp on the quality of books, they're authentic stories from talented writers, talented illustrators. There's a good production value, the books last. We do books in hard cover and in paperback. We publish six to twelve books per year, depending on whether we're doing series or whether we're doing chapter books or picture books. We've established a not for profit organization, Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson] and myself, and with working with our, our children as well, called the Knowledge is Power Project. And what that organization is, is involved in and what it will help us to do as a 501(c)(3) organization is to really get books in the hands of children who need them most. We're always approached by people who say, "Can't you just give us the books?" And we love to give people books, but we're in business, so as Just Us Books part of our goal and what we have to do is produce books and make them available, but through the Knowledge is Power organization we can partner with other organization who want to get good books in to the hands of children. And Wade can talk a little bit more about that, and how that will work.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): I think you did a good job, but it's, it's the other part of this establishing the not for profit is that, early on we did give away books a lot, but I think that one of the problems is that in today's culture if people get something free they don't really value it as much. So, rather than just giving away books, what we're trying to do is establish a value, a monetary value as well as giving the books and helping kids get books who can't get them. 'Cause kids know they gotta buy sneakers, they gotta buy tee T-shirts or whatever they're gonna pay twenty-five or thirty bucks [dollars] for a sweatshirt. So, you know two you give away and you know a day or two later you see on the floor, because they got it for free, you know. If they pay for it or understand that it had to be paid for, then I think they will appreciate it and value it better.
Story_ID: 465844
Speaker 1: If I were to ask you guys to list some of the important black writers in the children's book genre, whose names would come to mind?
Speaker 2: I would say for young adults, [HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers is a major writer, a fantastic writer. Eloise Greenfield is a fabulous poet, there are people who are arising now, Sharon Flake [Sharon G. Flake] is a wonderful art- there's lot of artist who are growing, who have stories to tell.
Speaker 1: What about illustrators?
Speaker 2: Illustrators, I love Greg Christie's [HistoryMaker R. Gregory Christie] work, he's a painter, he's done a good body of work. There's Chris Myers [Christopher Myers], there's Pat Cummings, there's George Ford. There are a lot of wonderful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, Floyd Cooper.
Speaker 2: Floyd Cooper, a lot of wonderful illustrators. E.B. Lewis is another.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah, excellent, he's very good, yeah.
Speaker 2: Excellent illustrator.
Story_ID: 465845
Speaker 1: So when you look back, collectively together over you know of the history of Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.], what has been the greatest challenge and what has been the greatest amount of, of success?
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): I would think that the, the, the greatest challenge is really staying in business.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's still an issue today?
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Well it, it always is, it always, you know because so many things can happen, to, to put a company in jeopardy. I mean even the, the large corporations, many of them are folding you know, and they have you know hundred sometimes thousands on, on staff and budgets of multimillion dollars, and then they fold and go, go belly up. So that, that always is a challenge, and I think that the, the successes are what we really feel good about, about it's, it's being able for me and Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] can speak for herself, but, being able to produce these books and do it on a continuous basis. And I think the other major point that I would like to make is that we are a business, Just Us Books is a business, but we also see Just Us Books as an institution in the black community. So, in that sense we are more than a business and when we've had difficult times, you know in fact our account suggested once that we file for bankruptcy and we organize. But we felt that, if we were to do that, that we would signal to folks in the black community that we, we, we failed. And we rather- we would rather stick it out you know, come through it and still, you know because part of the, part of the, of the building of institutions is that you are gonna have struggle. You're gonna have challenges, but if you give up you know then you gotta start from scratch again. And sometimes it's, it is really about hanging on in there, grabbing the, the wheel and just holding on and you know maybe you get to the other side it, it will work out. And that's where the faith comes in I believe.
Speaker 2: I think that the faith is a major part and it is about longevity and legacy and passing it on. People are still asking us, "So you're still the only, where are the other black publishers of children's books." And we basically are the only ones and that's been over a period of twenty years. Why hasn't somebody else tried to do? It's not necessarily that no one else has tried to do it. But it is a challenge. It's very expensive to publish children's books. It takes a lot of time, you've got to do it over and over and over again. And there a lot of young people who might want to have things done very quickly. I'm, I'm gonna start my business, I'm gonna do it, here it is. But, it's something that you, it's not that you have to constantly reinvent yourself but every day, with every book it's another challenge, it's another, another opportunity. But, it's also another opportunity to bring a lot of joy to children. And you can't replicate that, the, the joy that a child feels when they first learn to read. That's a wonderful thing, because that opens up the whole world of communication to them. And if I can see just one child every now and then, having that wonder of experiencing the, I love this book. When kids come to us and say, "Oh I still," and it's like a twenty-three year old, "I still got my 'AFRO-BETS' [Cheryl Willis Hudson] book." That means something. Because that may have been the first time that they saw themselves in print and the first time that they can see themselves empowered, to do and to be what they want to be.
Story_ID: 465846
Speaker 1: Well, you spoke on legacy and I want to ask you what is it you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Personally I, I think it's, it think probably I've already said it you know, making beautiful bo- I love books, I love to see kids respond to them and I would like to leave that as a legacy, that we left something enduring that people will remember and, and that is a part of, of, of our gift.
Speaker 1: Do you think this will become a family business in the sense that your children will take it over when you no longer are, well when you retire?
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah, I'm, I'm sure that because our daughter is already in involved and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And our son as well.
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): And our son is involved as well. And I guess in terms of where we are going for the future, maybe Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] has already shared this but we, we recently set up another imprint in partnership with Kensington Publishing [Kensington Publishing Corporation] out in New York [New York]. To, to publish a line of books that deal, that are multicultural in nature and, and also that have morals and spiritual themes. Now these, these books will not compete with the books that Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] does. But, it gives us another avenue--
Speaker 1: Another opportunity.
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): Another, another, yeah. Another market that we can address and we didn't--the partnership is not between Just Us Books and Kensington. We created another entity to work--
Speaker 1: To work with them?
Speaker 2: (WADE HUDSON): That's right a limited liability, so Just Us Books is not involved?
Speaker 1: Hudson Publishing company [Hudson Publishing Group], yes.
Speaker 2: That's the way it should be.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah, yeah and our daughter and son are owners they own 25 percent each and Cheryl and I.
Speaker 2: And what roles do they play in Just Are Us [sic.], Just Us Books?
Speaker 1: Well, Katura [Katura J. Hudson] is marketing director, so she plays a, a huge role in getting the books to, to the audience and marketing them and with publicity. Stephan [Stephan J. Hudson] is a graphic artist, he designs a number of our covers, he designs our website and maintains that. So, both of them are very, very much involved.
Story_ID: 465847
Speaker 1: So the last question for the both of you, is what makes a great children's book?
Speaker 2: A great children's book has synergy, it has rhythm, it has an energy of its own. You've got a good marriage in a case of a picture book between the words and the images to, to create a whole, another entity in itself. A book is something that you can open, it's a gift, you can open it again and again. It's, it's something that opens the doors to wonders to a child's own imagination. So, while you give a child a physical object, that object, the book, is really a vehicle for the child to see himself and travel into other places. And open up his own mind to experiences. And so, that makes a good book. If a book can do that and if a child has the sense of wonder for a picture book that's what I think now.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah, and I, and I think yeah, I agree with you and also a great, or a good book for children is a book that offers words and images that will engage the child. That the child can connect and feel a part of and, and what a book does is it, it takes you on, the reader on a journey. And one--when that happens you're sort of suspended you know. And, and if a book can provide the words and the images that will enable that to happen, then it's a great book.
Story_ID: 465848
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I have to know, is there a book from your childhood that still stands out for you today, as it did when you were a child? Or you didn't have any black children's books, so (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No black children's books. No black children's books.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): No, no, no, no. But, I mean I read you know the classics you know.
Speaker 2: But, I, I meant like a see Jane run book ['Dick and Jane'] those, like a children's book?
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): No, no, no.
Speaker 2: I had a, I had a book that I found when I went home the last time, it was a book on ballet, you know I was telling you all, all little girls take ballet lessons. And I wanted to be a ballerina and it's a book about 'Swan Lake' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] or something. It's just a book about a little girl playing 'Swan Lake.'
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. It's just a nice book.
Speaker 1: (WADE HUDSON): I guess, because I wanted to be a baseball player, I read a lot of the sports magazines. And but, not a particular book. Now, as I said when I, I was in like middle school you know, 'Tom Sawyer' ['The Adventures of Tom Sawyer,' Mark Twain], 'Huck Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], I mean I enjoyed those, those books too.
Story_ID: 465849
Speaker 1: This gentleman is my [maternal] great-grandfather, Allen Watson, from Charlottesville, Virginia. I believe this was a, taken from a tintype around 1920.
Speaker 2: This is my [maternal] grandfather, Louis Carroll Watson [Louis Watson], in his uniform during the First World War [World War I, WWI]. I believe this was taken in 1918.
Speaker 1: This gentleman is my father's father, Milton Willis, Richmond, Virginia, after the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Was he a Mason, what, what (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was in a fraternal organization, it's not a Mason.
Speaker 2: The picture in the center my father and my mother on their wedding day, 1941. My mother's Lillian Watson Willis, my father Hayes Elijah Willis III [Hayes Willis III].
Speaker 1: These people are my maternal great-grandparents, Mary Horsey Carter [Mary Carter] and her husband, Jon Carter [Jon Carter, Jr.]. They lived in Charlottesville. I believe this picture was taken in 1928.
Speaker 2: This is their daughter, my [maternal] grandmother, Viola Carter Watson Brown [Viola Carter Brown]. She was born in 1898 and died in 1994.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father's mother, Isaleen Willis [Isaleen Spurlock Willis], and on either side of her are pictures, of the upper left, her mother, Elizabeth Spurlock, and on the right a picture of my grandmother in the early 1900s.
Speaker 2: For both of them?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, we'll, yeah go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is my [maternal] great-grandmother, Annie Scott Watson. She lived to be ninety-nine year old. This picture's taken on the front porch of her house, on 6 1/2 Street in Charlottesville, Virginia. And at that time she was in her nineties, the house was built by her husband, Allen Watson, who's the inset.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandmother her first name was Lena, Lena Isaleen Spurlock Willis, she lived to be ninety-nine. She was born 1876 and that's a picture of her around the turn of the century. She was born in Charles City, Virginia.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my great-grandmother, her name was Elizabeth Spurlock. She was from Charles City, Virginia, I don't know the date of her birth, but she lived until 1920.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, swing the stand, the you way a little bit, 'cause catch, yeah that's good. Hold, hold it there for a sec [second]. Okay. Thank you.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family, starting counter-clockwise with my grandmother seated on the sofa. That's Viola Carter Brown. Seated next to her is my older brother, Hayes Emil Willis [Hayes Willis], next to him is our daughter, Katura Jendi Hudson [Katura J. Hudson], she's sitting on the lap of my mother, Lillian Watson Willis. Next to my mother is Janise Freeman Willis [ph.], who was married to my second brother, Roderick Carter Willis [Roderick Willis]. Next to him is my youngest brother, Orion Watson Willis [Orion Willis]. I'm standing next to Orion, that's [HistoryMaker] Cheryl Willis Hudson, and next to me at the top left is my husband, Wade Hudson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson]. This picture was taken in 1979 I believe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next please.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Wade and myself on our wedding day, June 24, 1972, in the far left is our minister, H. Edward Whitaker, who also went to school at Crozer [Crozer Theological Seminary, Upland, Pennsylvania] with Dr. Martin Luther [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And behind us on the mantelpiece is a family portrait of the Willis family with my brothers, mother and father that was taken in 1958, the year before my father died.
Speaker 1: This is a Christmas card from the Willis family, 1955. My father's in the top right, Hayes Elijah Willis III, my mother, Lillian Watson Willis. In her lap is my baby brother, Orion Watson Willis. Next to him is Roderick Carter Willis. This is going counter-clockwise I'm the girl in the upper left and in the center is my older brother, Hayes Emil Willis.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in college, 1968 at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], Cheryl Willis.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my older brother and myself in front of the family car at our house, 14 Bedford Court, this was the Douglas Park section of Portsmouth, Virginia. And this picture was taken in 1950.
Speaker 2: This is the cover of my first picture book, published by Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] in 1992. 'Bright Eyes, Brown Skin' [Cheryl Willis Hudson and Bernette G. Ford] written by myself, Cheryl Willis Hudson, and Bernette G. Ford, illustrated by George Ford. This is a part of the feel good series and the first picture book published by Just Us Books.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a copy of the first edition of 'AFRO-BETS ABC Book' [Cheryl Willis Hudson], it's the first book published by our company, Just Us Books, and it's really is a primer, a concept book in literacy. A is for apple, alligator and Africa. And we thought it was so important to get children reading, with looking at themselves from the letters of the alphabet that build words and words build sentences, sentences build thoughts, paragraphs and books. So, this is our initial venture, 'AFRO-BETS ABC Book,' 1987.
