Story_ID: 111256
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Arnette, A-R-N-E-T-T-E, Hubbard, H-U-B-B-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Rhinehart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: All right.  R-H-I-N-E-H-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 11th.  Notice I haven't mentioned a year, we'll get to that, in Stephens, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  How do you spell Stephens, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: S-T-E-P-H-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm personally a judge of the Circuit Court of Cook County, sitting in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Wednesday, April 30, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: City-wise, we're in Chicago, Illinois, at the studio of [The] HistoryMakers.  Is that--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 111257
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: All right. Now before we get into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask.  They just require a short answer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 1: Greens.  My favorite food is greens.  When my son [Gregory Hubbard] was little, somebody asked him what do I like and he said, "me greens and old things."  They asked him, in that order, he said, "yes."  That's about right too.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 1: No, I don't.
Speaker 2: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: Whenever it's sunny, yes.
Speaker 2: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 1: None comes to mind, so I guess not.
Story_ID: 111258
Speaker 1: All right, well let me ask you what you know about your family background.  How far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: My grandparents.  Then I've heard tales of older ancestors, but basically kind of the folks who kind of tells you--you hear when family get together, so, my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well can you tell us some of those tales or a tale?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Well the one about my great-grandfather.  They claimed that when he was ninety-two, he regularly walked ten miles between two small towns in Arkansas.  And they described him as being very, very, very dark with blue eyes.  When I went to my grandmother's funeral last year, there were a lot of relatives, she was 105 when she died, and there was this guy who was very, very dark with blue eyes.  And I said he's gotta be somewhere in the family and he was, yes.
Speaker 1: That's unusual.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there any story about they got the blue eyes?
Speaker 2: Nobody could really account for it, it just was.  And when I first heard it, it sounded a little strange to me because people usually talk to him as looking--they said he looked strange.  And I asked what was strange, well they said different, and I said what's different, you know, child's mind.  And so that's where they'd end up.  And that combination was--it was interest--I think it's interesting to see because for me it was the first time, and I guess for a lot of people that was true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something, no, I've never seen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, are there any stories that are passed down from the slavery period or Reconstruction in your family?
Speaker 2: I didn't reflect on that in terms of slavery.  I don't remember hearing slave stories.  I heard that, for example, my grandmother told me about the ancestor on the Edwards' side which was my mother's [Madeline Edwards] maiden name, who was, she said an Irishman and her grandmother, whom she said was Native American.  But it seems that in any of the tales I've heard of, and I was reflecting as I sit here, so that's why I hesitate, I don't remember any tales of slavery in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so you can trace your family back to your grandparents, is that it?
Speaker 2: I think trace is probably an overstatement.  I've heard stories my grandmother's father and did not speculate about where these others came from or on my father's side.  His father's father we know about, he came from--the Rhineharts came from Oklahoma to Arkansas at some point.  And I'm told that my paternal grandmother did do some genealogical research, extensively, but nobody seems to know where those records are.
Story_ID: 111259
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, tell me about your father, can you give us his full name and spell it for us, his date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His name was George Rhinehart.  I don't know his birthday.  He died when I was about two.
Speaker 1: Do you have any sense of when it might be, I mean the time period?
Speaker 2: When he died?
Speaker 1: No, when he was born?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to probably speculate since--I know he and my mother [Madeline Edwards] were very young, so somewhere in the neighborhood of eighteen or less, I would guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in Stephens, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: That's my understanding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, he died when you were two, but can you tell us something about him, what was he like or what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Actually, they probably--and no I have--I feel strange that I never felt the need to ask, but both families is, his parents and my mother's, were farmers and so they lived on a farm and they did what farmers do basically.  I don't remember any discussion of outside employment for that age group, his mother's and mine.  So my father--my grandfather did do some work outside of the farm as well as my grandmother, who was for a time a schoolteacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, but in terms of your father, you know, are there any stories about him that are passed down that you remember?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So very little about him?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 111260
Speaker 1: All right.  So--can you tell us about your mother?  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Madeline, M-A-D-E-L-I-N-E, Edwards, E-D-W-A-R-D-S.  She always sounds so dry, does anybody care?
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: It sounds so dry, does anybody care?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Why don't I just write it?  I can just write it, they can look it up on the web or in the whatever, but okay.  And I suppose too I feel awkward because I don't have these things fresh in my mind, but okay, Madeline Edwards, also born in January, also born in Arkansas.  I don't know whether it was Stephens or Camden, one of those two.  Camden is C-A-M-D-E-N and that would have been in 1919.  I feel like I'm being interrogated.
Speaker 1: This is not an interrogation.
Speaker 2: All right, I understand.
Speaker 1: Now, what was she like, what was she like, what did she do?
Speaker 2: She actually was a dynamic person who was probably really advanced for her times.  Advanced in terms of--or maybe not.  We now think that women who have a sense of freedom about themselves and feel empowered to do what they choose and to have opinions and to decide how they dress or where they go or when they do those things and help shape family ties and responsibilities and visions and dreams, we think--we tend to think of those as some recent occurrences, but they probably weren't, it's just the way that it's presented.  Anyway, my mother was--and I brought a picture of her--5'9", very lovely, long legs, an upbeat spirit, very concerned about her family.  She had nine sisters and brothers eight of whom lived past infancy.  Actually, wrong ten, nine of whom lived past infancy, that would include herself in that nine.  She worked as a hotel maid, she sold Avon, she worked in a small movie theater, she--I don't know other occupations that she had in my youth, and later she was a housewife only.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she got married again later on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 111261
Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on your growing up and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, two places, one was the farm that my grandparents owned and the other one was in a small town not far from there, a town called El Dorado [Arkansas], where I went to public school.  So, those are my two recollections, summer in the country, school year in the city.  I have no real notion of how big the town was, largely unpaved streets, one large school that set on a hill, Washington High [School], where it was both an elementary and a high school.
Speaker 1: Is that where you went to school?
Speaker 2: That's where I went--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Part of my youthful years.  The first few grades I went to that school.  And during that time my mother was working, and a sister, her sister, and my really dear aunt, I don't know how that sentence was going to end.  But anyway, one of her sisters was also in school at the time I was, high school, she was in high school then.  So the town, the smells, summers I went barefoot, spent times playing games, climbing trees, riding bikes, jumping rope, playing hopscotch, playing chase, tag, wondering off the block, so to speak, I guess that's the way you would say it here.  I think the range was probably a little bit greater, you can go farther than the corner, this way or that, but I tended to venture off further than that even.  And so there were a lot of times when dark was coming or dusk was coming in and my mother was out calling me, and asking somebody where did you last see her because I'd start playing here and go here and go there.
Speaker 1: What did she call you, did she call you Arnette?
Speaker 2: By and large, that's what she called me.  So she would call me pet names from time to time, but my name was Arnette, that's all it ever was, even in high school and college when everybody had nicknames, I didn't have one, yeah.  I was an only child which was different it seems, I think I was the only person I knew who did not have either a sister or a brother.  And when my aunt came to live with us to go high school, she was like a sister to me and later she was like a sister and a mother and a friend.  She too is a really strong, wonderful woman.
Story_ID: 111262
Speaker 1: So you went to Washington High [School, El Dorado, Arkansas] first, right?  That was like a school that had both grade school and high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was right in Stephens [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: That was in El Dorado.
Speaker 1: El Dorado?
Speaker 2: Rado.
Speaker 1: Rado?
Speaker 2: El Dorado, it's a southern pronunciation.
Speaker 1: Not knowing where El Dorado is.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that's west.  Such as Cairo is in southern Illinois, but it's Cairo in Egypt.  That's the difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's El Dorado.  Okay, Washington High School, was it Booker T. Washington or George Washington?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just Washington, as far as I ever could recall.
Speaker 1: It is a black school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it was, right.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your grade school.  You were an only child going to school.  You said you had an aunt about your age too?
Speaker 2: No, older.
Speaker 1: Older, okay.  So your household consisted of your mother [Madeline Edwards], yourself and--
Speaker 2: My aunt.  Well by the time my aunt came to stay with us then my stepfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you lived in town during the wintertime too?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: The whole family did, and in the summer only I went to the country.
Speaker 1: To stay with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and uncles and aunts there.
Speaker 1: Now what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I actually enjoyed school.  Whatever they put out there I loved it.  I loved going to school, walking there with my friends and from there with my friends.  I loved being in school, I loved learning whatever it was they were teaching us, I loved recess, I loved to read, I liked to learn new things.  I don't remember a time I didn't actually like school.
Speaker 1: How far was El Dorado from Stephens?
Speaker 2: Thirty miles at the most.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You got a ride there?
Speaker 2: My grandfather always had a car.  I don't remember, at least as far as I can remember, he always had a car.  Otherwise, I do recall at some point when people wanted to go someplace, they would hire a neighbor as driver and car owner to take them places.  Of course there were buses and I remember my first train ride, too.  I was really, really excited.  And it was that short hop from El Dorado to Camden [Arkansas], which also probably no more than thirty miles, but it was a major thing for me.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Probably about six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I think we took the train because I just kept asking my mother to do that and she did.
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers who served as mentor in your school that took a special interest in Washington?
Speaker 2: I was a good student so teachers usually liked me and were helpful.  I don't remember being treated in any particularly special way as a grade school student, for example.  We did the same thing.  And while the classes were not combined as I've heard of in the one-room schoolhouse thing, there are always degrees of ability in any classroom setting, and I must have some sense of it since I mentioned it.  I remember the teachers giving individualized attention to students all through my elementary school years, and I thought that was wonderful.
Story_ID: 111263
Speaker 1: Often in the South, I know the caliber of teachers was high because a lot of people couldn't get any other kind of jobs, you know.  Was that true in--at Washington [High School, El Dorado, Arkansas], was there a high quality of teachers that have been to college outside of Arkansas?
Speaker 2: I have absolutely no idea what their training was.  I always enjoyed them, I found them wonderful.  I enjoyed school.  I thought they did a good job.  Whenever I was called upon to know something age appropriate or grade appropriate, I seemed to know it, so I must credit them with doing that.  I don't remember any particular training or instruction at home, so I learned what I learned, for the most part, at school, or from reading and from, ever since I learned to read, I always had the freedom to read anything that I could read.  Anything my skills let me read, I could read it.  That was my mother's [Madeline Edwards] view.
Speaker 1: Did you have access to a lot of reading material?
Speaker 2: Not a lot but when it was there, whatever books, magazines, whatever were around or that I could come in contact with in any fashion.  And when I was about seven, she subscribed to the newspaper, daily newspaper for me.  Of course I asked for it because I wanted the comics, but I'd end up reading the whole paper.  And well, I guess later on I started going to the public library, but in El Dorado, I don't remember there being one, though there must have been, I would think.
Speaker 1: So you went to another school other than Washington [High School, El Dorado, Arkansas], right?  You were saying earlier you went to Washington then to another school, another grade school?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade, seventh to eighth grades in Stephens [Arkansas], high school in East Saint Louis, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Stephens High School?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess so.  No, no.  I went to the seventh and eighth grade in Stephens.  The name of the school, I don't know.  So maybe it was just Stephens High, since I don't have any different recollection.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you went to high school in East Saint Louis?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111264
Speaker 1: --tell us who's in the photo from left to right and about what time it was taken?
Speaker 2: That photo, my left, when I'm looking at it?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That left.  Okay, I got it.  Okay, this picture was taken during Harold Washington's campaign.  The guy on the left is my son Gregory Hubbard and of course on the right is Mayor Harold Washington.  During this time--oh, you don't need any more, do you?
Speaker 1: Well, you can say what you want.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's all.  Anyway then I'll just tell you while you reset.
Speaker 1: Yes, 1993, center at the podium is myself giving the commencement address at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], my alma mater to the College of Liberal Arts and Science whose dean is not visible in that photo, yes he is, Dean Jackson.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: On the left is me, my son Gregory who is about eight-years-old there and Ernie Jenkins.  Ernie and I were getting awards at a banquet held in Chicago [Illinois] at the Palmer House, I think that's the Palmer House, Palmer House, yes, Hotel. Okay--
Speaker 2: In the center and with a lady on the right is then Congressman Charles Hayes, labor leader, during his term of office and the occasion is the awarding of congressional scholarships that he's awarded to the young people.  And on the far right is myself.  Jackie, next to Charles Hayes, was then president of Chicago Teachers Union.
Speaker 1: Oh, Jacqueline Vaughn?
Speaker 2: Vaughn, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She used to always wear those hats.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Being sworn in my first term as member--commissioner of Chicago Board of Elections.  On the left is John Stroger [HM John H. Stroger, Jr.], then finance Chair, and now president of the county board of Commissioners of Cook County [Cook County Board of Commissioners].  On the right is Judge Harry Comerford, who swore me in and who was head of county division in the court.
Speaker 2: That picture is there because I like the way I look in it.  Of course it's Judge Comerford who is holding my hand.  On the right is a former member of the Board of Elections, that's Judge Braden[ph.], Judge, I don't recall his name, Judge Braden, another judge.  I forgot you're recording this. I just realized I think I'm going to probably misname somebody.  That's Flidowski[ph.], that may not be, me, Judge Comerford, Judge Everett Braking [ph.], now retired and these other three judges, I don't remember their names at the moment.
Speaker 1: And that same occasion swearing in for our first term as commissioner for the board of elections.  Starting on the right is [HM Blanche] Manning, now a U.S. District Judge, and then on the appellate court, Lucia Thomas, judge, now deceased, [HM] Dr. Margaret Burroughs of the DuSable Museum, a founder and artist herself, as you know, then me, next to me, the tall young person is my cousin Perrietta Edwards who lives in Detroit [Michigan] and the last person to the left is Elvira Ross, past president of National Council of Negro Women.  No, well, a member of the National Council Member of Women and a member of the National Council of Colored Women's Clubs.  She was a member along with the mother [Gertrude Johnson Williams] of [HM] John [H.] Johnson and she was a friend.
Story_ID: 109115
Speaker 1: Only one name, this guy. You don't probably recognize him.  He's great big Que [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity].  He was the national president of the Que, he's a judge, smoked cigars, name starts with an M.
Speaker 2: Well, you can't get all of them.
Speaker 1: Well, we'll just go.  Okay.  Drew Days [III] (unclear) and later [U.S.] Solicitor General under [President Jimmy] Carter for, Drew Days [sic, U.S. Solicitor General under President Bill Clinton, Assistant Attorney General under Carter]--Wilson, appellate court. This is in 1981 in the Virgin Islands, that's me, Eileen [Petersen] who is now a judge, the first woman judge in Saint Croix, Virgin Islands.  Former presiding judge in Circuit Court of Cook County, now deceased, Russ Debow [Russell DeBow], one of the oldest judges in terms of both seniority and time on the bench.  This person showed up on every picture that was taken at that convention or that big conference and nobody knew who he was, I mean every.  Julius Wilson [ph.], the past president of the National Bar Association, he's from New Jersey.
Speaker 2: State Representative Barbara Flynn Currie, myself, candidate-then Harold Washington at a primary campaign public meeting--forum.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  I want to make a note.  The previous photo was 1983.  Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  So this one is the first year into the mayor's term, but it's in 1984, starting from the right, Marv Arrington [HM Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.], nickname "Bowlegs," was head of the City Council in Atlanta [Georgia], later had a run for the mayoral seat.  Of course Mayor Washington, myself and this is the deputy in the city council, Atlanta City Council, who traveled with Mr. Arrington.
Speaker 1: On the left is Melvonne [ph.] Smith, local city worker here and a staff person at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at that time Mayor Washington and myself.  This is 1984 in the Mayor's office at City Hall.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is at a reception at the Palmer House in honor of somebody, whose name I don't recall right now.  Mayor Eugene Washington--
Speaker 1: Eugene Sawyer.
Speaker 2: --Sawyer, wow.  Doctor Roland--Doctor Berlean Burris, Comptroller, [HM] Roland Burris, later attorney general. [HM] Wilson Frost, then in private practice, former city council person and ward committeeman, me and this guy's from the fifth ward, a former committeeman over there, [Marshall] Korshak.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  What year was this?
Speaker 1: Roland was comptroller so that makes it and--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Sawyer was Mayor.
Speaker 1: Probably '88 [1988], '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: --(Unclear) year.  1979 and I was president of Cook County Bar Association and that was my lovely fro.
Speaker 1: This is at a hotel in Atlanta [Georgia], a meeting of the National Bar Association.  I was then president-elect.  With me is Robert Johnson, founder of BET, entrepreneur, businessman and a speaker for that occasion.
Speaker 2: Actually nobody's face is showing there but the grey suit.  Suited female is me signing the oath of office when I was sworn in to the Board of Election Commissioners.  So that would have been 1989.
Speaker 1: That bundle of joy is my first grandchild, my granddaughter, Shelby Arnette Hubbard, born December, 1995.
Speaker 2: Sugar is her sister Sabrina Alexandria, born seventeen months ago.
Speaker 1: It's a picture taken in a book store in Johannesburg, South Africa.  That's me on the left and on the right is Meredith Carlson [Daly] whose father had just that month returned to South Africa for the first time in thirty years having been exiled for his role in fighting against apartheid.  She lives in New York.  And we chanced to meet in that bookstore.
Speaker 2: Okay in this photo I'm on the left, Mr. [Naguib Soby] Mankarious is next to me, moving to the right, the next person is Jewel Lafontant, Jewel Stradford Rogers Lafontant Mankarious [HM Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious] was a recipient of the Gertrude Rush Award.  An award given by the National Bar Association in which I established when I was president.  And next to Jewel is Perrietta Edwards, my cousin, whom you've seen in another photo, who's attending just as a guest.
Speaker 1: The first visible face on the right, I mean, facing the camera, okay that figure on the right, her name was Fatima.  She's a playwright. The location is Cape Town, South Africa.  This is back stage after a performance of a play written by Fatima, the person on the right.  Next to her is myself and the other two persons are members of the cast.  It's rather remarkable still for a woman to be a successful playwright in South Africa and she is.
Speaker 2: This is taken of one of the townships outside of Johannesburg in South Africa.  It is a small open area park dedicated to Hector Pieterson who was the schoolboy who was shot down in the '70s [1970s].  I don't remember the date--June, 1976 perhaps.  Anyway his murder helped fuel the student boycotts in South Africa.  That park is open, as you could see the fence is very low.  You won't find any graffiti anywhere and you won't find one plucked flower in that, though you'll find graffiti on buildings all around there, they never touch that one.
Speaker 1: In orange at the end of the table center is myself.  I'm presiding at a member of the Executive Committee of the Association of Elections Officials--Election Commission Officials of Illinois.  Can't get my own name right.  AECOI at a hotel out-of-town and it looks to me this is probably, it's either Rockford [Illinois] or Springfield [Illinois], I'd have to check, okay, and that would be 1993.
Speaker 2: I do remember for sure.  I was in the same year as that presidency also president of the alumni association at Southern Illinois [University, Carbondale, Illinois], I think it was '93 [1993].  Oh, that one.  How you say this word, shabeen?
Speaker 1: Shabeen, yeah.
Speaker 2: Shabeen in Johannesburg [South Africa].  I discovered that a Shabeen is a backyard that's maintained well and opened to the public and from the kitchen of the adjacent unit, they serve--sell drinks and food and so we just sat around.  And whoever comes just sits around and visits, which is how we came to be there, this is 1994.
Speaker 1: Seven-year-old Arnette, one of the school days pictures that was taken here at the school and so that means I was in the second grade.
Speaker 2: The other one is a five-year-old Arnette.  I'm sorry, seven-year-old Arnette in the third grade, five-year-old Arnette in the first grade.  And I look the same today.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  That gorgeous lady is my mother, Madeline [Edwards].  She's then twenty-something.
Speaker 1: That picture looks like you.  She does, she does.  I thought it was you.  I thought it was you at some point.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, I don't think I've ever been that pretty.  Pretty is only a part of how wonderful she was.  So if you were twenty-something, twenty--that would have been in the '40s [1940s], early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, ready?
Speaker 2: Well by now the person on the left you know is me and on the right is Charles E. Freeman [HM Charles Freeman], then chief judge of the Illinois Supreme Court.  He's swearing me in to my first term as judge, and he appointed me to that position.  As you know he also swore in Harold Washington to his first term as mayor.
Speaker 1: Two-year-old Gregory, yes indeed.  Proud that he can walk and talk and is in charge of the telephone.  And was never satisfied with a fake phone after he got--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's of course me on the left and a five-month-old Gregory, just learned to sit up.  And he'd already learned how to capture my heart.
Speaker 1: That's a good photo.
Speaker 2: Gregory was born in 1969 in Chicago, so since he's five--in June, so it's winter, and I guess that explains the Christmas-y sweater.
