Story_ID: 301129
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, and observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Sir could you state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Melvin Hart, M-E-L-V-I-N, H-A-R-T.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is January 7, 1952, St. Matthews and that's in Calhoun County, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am, I'm in management with a community newspaper, actually director of marketing, advertising for a weekly newspaper.
Speaker 1: Wh- what's the name of the paper?
Speaker 2: Black News, out of Columbia, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what's todays date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 14, 2005.
Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in, at the [America's] Black Holocaust Museum in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Story_ID: 301130
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  I don't know if I do, but I like all foods, all foods.  But if, if I were going to have my one last meal or if I could have any meal, I think it would probably be one of two, it would either be, fried chicken--being a southerner--macaroni and cheese, baked macaroni and cheese, collard greens, a little rice, and sweetened tea, cornbread of course would be included.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: And, if you're out of chicken, maybe baked turkey wings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: It would change depending upon whether it's dress, or casual or whatever, but my favorite color or whether it's for clothing or whatever the particular event or product is, but I would think that a blue, a navy blue or a grey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Early spring, early fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, there's so many places that I'd like to vacation in, but vacation what, what's a vacation (laughter)?  Are those things still around?  I think, I'd like to, I like traveling and going places but, I like also being close to home, home meaning in South Carolina, so anywhere in South Carolina would be a good vacation spot for me.  But I do like, do like going down to New Orleans [Louisiana], I like going into Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I like Chicago [Illinois] and this is my first time being in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and I've, although I've not had much opportunity to get into Milwaukee, I think it's a place that I would, I would seriously consider coming back to spend maybe three to five days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know, my close friends would probably say that, I don't know, there's this little corner store that I run into in the mornings to pick up a daily paper of some sort and usually a lot of my friends are there and I will always say to them, no, stay here until I get back.  So, so even when I'm walking in the evenings and there's only the clerk there, she will say well I'll stay here until you get back.  So, I guess maybe that's part of it.
Story_ID: 301131
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Furman Hart, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Cleola, and that's C-L-E-O-L-A, Kimpson, K-I-M-P-S-O-N, Hart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her, her date of birth was February 28, 1923, and she was born in St. Matthews, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace your mother's family?
Speaker 2: You know, not very far, although we are in the process of, of doing a family tree, trying to glean this information.  As a matter of fact, on the 23rd of this month, a week, two weeks from now we'll be having a family reunion in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] on my mother's side of the family, the Kimpson side of the family.  I didn't, unfortunately I did not know my, any of my grandparents, I don't have any memory of my mother's father or mother.  My mother had, you know, many sisters and there were two boys in the family so there were, oh gosh, six or seven sisters and two boys, but one thing about them, they were them, the, at least of my aunts, they were all great cooks, excellent cooks, and especially baked goods.  My mother lived in St. Matthews all of her life and as did two of her brothers, but her sisters they all moved, some to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], others most of 'em in New York [New York].  So they spent their adult life in New York and, but my mother never did live for the--outside of the state of South Carolina and all of it was really in St. Matthews.
Speaker 1: Now, are, are there stories that your mother's told you about your, about your grandparents, or about what your ancestors were doing?  You know.
Speaker 2: Well, the stories are that they were all, you know, hardworking people, they were honest people and people of, that their word meant something if, if they say it you could believe.  And so, she and my f- my daddy really instilled the same thing in us that, you know, we came from a family that their word meant something before they were born and we can't mess up the family name by not letting our word mean something.  They were, they were God fearing people, none of my grandparents were ministers but, they were all very active in their church and in their communities.
Speaker 1: Okay, what church did they, where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Second Mount, well at, originally with the First Mount Beulah Baptist Church and eventually became the Second Mount Beulah Baptist Church [St. Matthews, South Carolina].
Story_ID: 301132
Speaker 1: Are there any stories?  Now South Carolina has such a rich history of, you know, of activities before slavery was over, Reconstruction and, I mean there was so much activity going on in South Carolina in ter- terms of that, it's one of the, the key places for the Civil War.  Are there any stories in your family about those days?
Speaker 2: Not, not that I'm aware of in terms of the Civil War or immediately after but obviously there were involvement.  I know my dad [Furman Hart, Sr.], even at eighty-three years old, he's still very much involved in the civic affairs and, and the cultural kinds of affairs that have taken place even to this day in the county.  And my dad grew up in St. Matthews [South Carolina] also, did not grow up far from where my mother [Cleola Kimpson Hart] did, they married when they were young and, and, and for years my dad--St. Matthews were we grew up is a small town, small--
Speaker 1: Where is it near?  Is it near, is it a?
Speaker 2: --St. Matthews is in the exact center of the State of South Carolina and that's the exact center.  One set of demographers, I understand placed the geographical center of the state in a small town of Fort Motte [South Carolina] which is about nine miles northeast of St. Matthews, another set of demographers said well no, it's in the little town up north of Woodford [South Carolina] which is about eight or nine miles somewhat northwest of St. Matthews.  So, I'm surmising, if both demographers is correct, that means that St. Matthews being in the center of those two locations, but St. Matthews is small, small community of, of just over 6500 people, the county has about fifteen thousand people, but we are situated sixty-five miles north of Charleston [South Carolina], northeast of Charleston and about thirty-five miles south of Columbia [South Carolina], just outside of Orangeburg, South Carolina, ten, fifteen miles from Orangeburg, South Carolina, so geographically we're in the exact center of the State of South Carolina.
Story_ID: 301133
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Furman, F-U-R-M-A-N, Hart, H-A-R-T.  Now if you came to St. Matthews [South Carolina], or the area and said I'm looking for a Furman Hart, they would say, well, we don't know who that is.  But, and they would quickly say, but I know Mr. Toot Hart, that would, could tell you who that is and my dad, most folk called him, his nickname is T-O-O-T, but his name is Furman, but those that know him well call him Toot and, and it's a name, I--we don't know where it came from or whatever but, you know, that's Furman and Toot is the same person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His, he was born in St. Matthews also and his date of birth is December 24, 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do, do you know much about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Not much either, probably even a little less on my father's side.  His, my grandfather's name is Ben, Ben Hart and his mother's name was Ollie, O-L-L-I-E, Guinyard, G-U-I-N-Y-A-R-D.  His mother died when he was relatively young, three or four years old and my granddaddy never remarried, my brother and my daddy is the youngest of three, he has two brothers, or had two brothers, and a sister, his sister died very young, so my grandfather raised both, in addition to my dad two older brothers also.  So, my Uncle Bennie [Hart] and my Uncle John [Hart], Uncle Bosie, we called him and, and my dad, so, so, and I did not know my daddy's daddy either, they were all deceased by the time that I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay are there any stories passed down from that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, not many regrettably, and even as we speak, there's some, some of my daddy's aunts and cousins that helped raise him I guess because it was traditional that, you know, if there wasn't a mother or a father, kinfolk would kind of come in and help out and, the Guinyard family reunion which is my m- my daddy's mother's side of the family has a fairly active family reunion.  And, you know, young folk, don't participate as readily or as quickly with family reunions seemingly as the older folks.  I'm getting in that age group now where I'm looking to go forward to going to family reunions, whereas before, I was not looking to go but, we do have a family reunion on my dad's momma's side of the family.  This year it will also be on a cruise ship, regrettably I won't be able to make that trip, like I will be with my momma's daddy's side of the family.  But, and we are close to tracing at least my daddy's momma's side of the family a little further back now.
Story_ID: 301134
Speaker 1: But can you tell us anything about what they were doing?  I mean, were they farmers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were farmers.
Speaker 1: Were they?
Speaker 2: They were farmers and, and both my mother's [Cleola Kimpson Hart] side of the family parents and my daddy's [Furman Hart, Sr.] side of the family parents [Ollie Guinyard Hart and Ben Hart] were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, were they sharecroppers?  Did they own their own land or?
Speaker 2: They sharecropped for a very little time, but then they were not in the true sense of sharecroppers they basically had their own land that they lived on but they worked for other, for some of the farmers in the area so it was not as if they were just sharecropping, farming and then at the end of the season or whatever, they, no but they were primarily small, small truck farmers in essence.  As a matter of fact although my dad never really actively worked as a farmer or in farming, his, his older brother my Uncle Bennie [Hart] worked farming and, and I remember he would, he would go down to Florida and work with the fruit farm and then, then later he would come back to South Carolina and do some farming, working for others.  His, the middle boy, Uncle Bosie [John Hart], he did farming, his own farm, a vegetable farmer and both my, my Uncle Bosie and my dad they would plant some cotton and we got an opportunity, not so--not so much a welcomed opportunity but we got a chance to pick some cotton and do some other things.  But my dad was never actively engaged in farming, my dad was a, is a World War II [WWII] veteran, when he got out of the army he worked with the, the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps] camp  I think it's called, they were--
Speaker 1: You mean the Conservation Corps?
Speaker 2: --Corps, yeah he, he wor- he, he did some work with that and in the late '40s [1940s], when the government was building DuPont [E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company], that they, what they called, was referred to as the bomb plant [Savannah River Site] over in South Carolina, Aiken, just outside of Aiken in the Aiken, Augusta, Georgia area, my dad and couple of my mother's brothers they worked in construction in the actual building of the plant over there in the late '40s [1940s] mid to late '40s [1940s].  And once they completed construction, my dad and as many of the others that have worked in construction, they went to work in the plant, as they referred to it and, and my dad actually worked over there for almost twenty-five years and commuted from St. Matthews [South Carolina] there which is probably 65-70 miles one way and that was before the days of interstate so it was all backwards rural travel.  And he did retire, took early retirement from them, DuPont, which was the contracting group then, but my, one of my uncles actually worked over there thirty-five almost forty years, commuting from, you know, that distance and, you know we'd said to my daddy and my uncle, say well, "Why didn't you guys just move closer there?"  And they say, "Well you know we, we really didn't think we'd be there that long" but it was in the day, I guess a good job or a good paying job and it was considered I guess, somewhat of a government job or whatever so, so my dad never really worked for--in farming or in a sharecropping kind of posture.
Story_ID: 301135
Speaker 1: St. Matthews [South Carolina] is a small town?
Speaker 2: Small town.
Speaker 1: So, I guess your mother [Cleola Kimpson Hart] and father [Furman Hart, Sr.] knew each and didn't have to meet (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's right, the--they kind of lived on the same, you know, same general area, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so when did they get married?
Speaker 2: In the early four--I don't know the exact date they got married, I'm gonna have to go back and check and--
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they started courting and so forth?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think he was, you know, getting ready to go to the war [World War II, WWII] and she was this, you know, good looking, you know, young lady and I guess he was, considered himself a dapper young man and, so you know, his church was on one side of the town and hers was on the other side, you know, so, you know, they would, I'm sure meet at church and those kinds of things.  He grew up in the Emancipation Baptist Church [St. Matthews, South Carolina] which was really a lot closer to where my mother lived than, than my mother's home church but--
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that?  Because I, I haven't heard of an Emancipation Baptist Church yet and?
Speaker 2: I don't know the history of that church although, I, I don't really know the history of that church but it, it, it's been around for many, many years.
Speaker 1: It sounds like since emancipation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, absolutely, I, I think it has been, yes.
Speaker 1: So there's no story about how they named it or why they named it that?
Speaker 2: No, but when I get back, I'm gonna find that out, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like, it sounds like it's got a big story there.  So, now wh--what are your, did your parents talk much about growing up there?  What it was like to grow up, to grow up in St. Matthews?
Speaker 2: Well you know, they all had to walk ten miles to school in three feet of snow in the summertime and all of that.  But, aside from that, you know, they, they lived not a life of luxury or lavishness but they, they lived a life living off the land, they, neither of my parents say they can remember really ever being hungry, hungry, the hungry and not having anything to eat, they were able to provide, you know, there families were able to provide for them, may--maybe not the best of everything but they remember walking to school, they remember having to put cardboard in their shoes to keep the water out, you know, because the soles had gone down, they remember having just a baked potato for, for lunch when they went to school.  My mother did graduate from high school, my dad has, I think third or fourth grade was as far as he went to school in terms of formal education.  His dad [Ben Hart] saw, or at least had the need for the boys to help on the farm and around the home and things of that nature so his education, formal education was not as extensive as my mom's and she had, you know, did graduate high school.  But, they placed a great value on not just formal education but educating yourself or being able to have yourself in a position to provide for yourself and your family and to assist not just family members but friends and others that need help.
Story_ID: 301136
Speaker 1: Can you describe their personalities for us and tell us who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  Mom, my mom [Cleola Kimpson Hart] was a very, very patient but stern kind of person, you know, very loving, loving patient person, always with a smile, but she was stern, didn't say a whole lot, didn't talk a whole lot but, when she had something to say, you know, she wasn't going to stop until she had had her say.  My dad [Furman Hart, Sr.] on the other hand was, you know, he was a, is a thoughtful deliberative kind of person and--but can be somewhat of a jokester at times himself.  I guess friends of mine say that I, maybe look more like my mom but I probably act a lot like my dad, you know.
Story_ID: 301137
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I think part of my earliest memory is around four or five years old and that was going to kindergarten to school and I remember you had to be six, five or six, I think to go to kindergarten, but the neighborhood that I grew up in, you know, there were, my, friends my age and the kindergarten teacher lived maybe two blocks away, she would come by and the library, at the time, the colored library at the time was a few houses, a few doors from where I grew up.  So, the kindergarten teacher, Ms. Parker [ph.], was also the librarian for the public library, so in the afternoons after she left school, kin--school, she would run the colored library, so we would go to the library and things as a little kid.  Well, my best friend at the time, that lived across the street, Donald Benjamin [ph.], was going to kindergarten, Donald's a year older than I am, he was old enough to be in kindergarten so, she would come by to pick him up and take him to kindergarten.  Well, that was my friend so now he's getting, he's able to get in the car and go wherever. I had no idea of where he was going, all I knew he was, everyday going somewhere, this car would come back and pick him up and he'd and then here I am having to be there by myself in essence, not by myself because my brothers and sisters were there but, I wanted to go with Donald but, I wasn't old enough.  Well, the library was popular, you know, so well, and my mom [Cleola Kimpson Hart] would try to explain, well you're not old enough, you know, next year, you know, Ms. Parker says, "Well, just bring this boy on, I'll take him on to kindergarten, you know."  So why, you know, so I ended up going to kindergarten about two or three years, you know, I--and my friends tease me to this day that I flunked kindergarten but, I actually went, and, and that was an early history, remembrance of my childhood.  Then, you know, some other, you know, moving on up, I remember going, you know, to elementary school [Guinyard Elementary School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] and, and elementary school was two blocks away, two, three blocks away from me so we just walked past the library another few blocks and the elementary school was there.  There were some of my early, early teachers and--.
Story_ID: 301138
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Guinyard Elementary [Guinyard Elementary School, St. Matthews, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was not named after my, my daddy's [Furman Hart, Sr.] people, but they were, it was named after a distant relative of my, of my daddy mama [Ollie Guinyard Hart], you know.  And, and we grew up and my dad lives to this day in the same house and across the street from my dad's house was the high school, the black high school as it was referred to, John Ford High School [St. Matthews, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: John Ford?
Speaker 2: John Ford, F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: High school and although we, I, we grew up right across the street from it, I did not attend John Ford when I was in the eighth grade I was part of a group of students, black students that integrated the school system in, in Calhoun County [South Carolina].  So, I actually was, when we integrated the school, the middle of the eighth grade, I left Guinyard Elementary School which was grades one through eight and transferred to Saint Matthews High [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] which was referred to as the white high school.  And, and so, what kept from going to the elementary, white elementary school was that, the eighth grade, the high school started at eighth grade at the white school, so from eighth grade through high school graduation, you know.  But, those were, you know, early on years.
Story_ID: 301139
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Can you describe your neighborhood for us and tell us what some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up were?
Speaker 2: It was a, we were considered town people because we lived in the incorporated town limits.  But, because the schools were, I guess, the focal point of the community, they were in town so our friends were a mix of town and country folk as was referred to.  Our neighborhood was probably a, would be considered at the time a middle class neighborhood, middle upper middle class neighborhood.  It was just a few blocks from downtown, the business district of downtown, St. Matthews [South Carolina] the town, but we had in the neighborhood, in the block, the physical block that I grew up in, we had our little recreation area all made up by the young, the children.  Incidentally, we grew up cutting firewood for a living, so my chores in the afternoon would be to cut firewood and, not just for our use but for, for resale to people in the community and all of that so, that's how we supplemented my daddy's [Furman Hart, Sr.] income because my mom [Cleola Kimpson Hart] actually was a housewife, did not work at all until after all of us had gotten in school.  But in our neighborhood there were four or five amazingly, Miss, Miss Geneva Floyd's grocery store, Ms. Pearl, I can say grocery store, little mom and pop store, Miss Pearl Jacobs' store, Miss Phil Schuler's [ph.]--Mister Phil Schuler's store, Miss Nettie Shoemate [ph.], and Mr. Freddie Mitchell [ph.].  So, we had five little stores right there and some of 'em were right next door, you know, right, I mean, not any spacing between the two.
Speaker 1: Now what did they sell, I mean what kind of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, they had the traditional meats, little meats for the family, they had the soft drinks, they had the apples and the little cookies and candies.  Now, one of them did have a little gas for a while, auto gas, but other than that, you know, they sold kerosene, but just a little mom and pop I guess.  The forerunner to today's little, I guess, 7-Eleven, or whatever and we think, basically how in the world did five little stores manage to survive then and none of them are in, in the neighborhood now, you know?  But, so I remember those days when you're walking up and you go buy whatever item you wanted or your, your mom or dad would send, your mom would send you to the store and get this from the store and, and, in, in hindsight, I think, you know you get it and you pay them on the weekend or every two weeks when you got the money or whatever, you know?
Story_ID: 301140
Speaker 1: But we had, as young people tend to do, back then, more so than now, because there was a vacant lot or two between my parents' [Cleola Kimpson Hart and Furman Hart, Sr.] house and the Murphy's [ph.] and Reverend Olmer [ph.], and his family, we had turned it into what we considered our athletic complex, so we during the football season, we'd run in one direction as the football field, baseball, summertime, we would have the baseball diamond that we did from the other direction, then we had, you know, basketball goals setup so we would play basketball.  So, so our friends, you know, from the country and from other place would come up on Calhoun Road [St. Matthews, South Carolina], that was the main street and that's where we would play because we were close to home, would not have to be up at the school, because that meant we had to walk a little further, but we have just as much fun and, you know, none of this stuff was regulation size now, it was just, but we, we didn't know, we didn't know anything about the regulation size, we were just, just playing, you know?  And I remember making toys, you know, rolling automobile tires, you know, and it was interesting, I have this print of individual rolling tires and I think I picked this thing up ten years ago probably at a convention in Los Angeles [California] and someone thought I had maybe a, I don't know what they thought I had, and when I showed them what it was, they said, "What is this?"  I said, "This is a tire," we rolling tires then, and I could remember those days.  We'd get used automobile tires, and we'd just roll them through the neighborhood and we had what was known as packers and, he's say what in the world is a packer, well we would get used oil cans when oil, most young people don't remember the days when oil came in cans, aluminum cans, where, where we would fill 'em with sand and put a little water, well first we'd put a hold through both ends and we'd run a clothes hanger, wire hanger between them and connect them and actually put another hanger as a pulley and we'd pack 'em sand and we'd just pull 'em, it was a car.  Now because my, because we cut firewood and so we did some business with the guy at the local service station, well then we knew him, we would always talk him into saying, listen when you get the big, you know, instead of the quart size, when you get the gallon oil can, let us have those so then we had the big packers as we would call it and making your own bow and arrows and slingshots.
Speaker 2: So a packer was a car, I mean or what was it?
Speaker 1: It was just a oil can and we, I don't know what it, what we were really simulating, it's the old whatever that string toy that you see now a days, well not so much now, but that forward pull, the little--
Speaker 2: Oh, so you just pull the cans down the street (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it, it was fun, I mean we, we had nothing else to do, we--either that or, or work.  Because when, you just couldn't be idol not doing anything not around my folks' house, they see, you know, if you, they'd always find something for you to do if you look like you didn't have anything to do, you know, go pick up some chips, fire--you know, bark from the woods or something like that.
Story_ID: 301141
Speaker 1: Any other sights or sounds from the neighborhood or smells (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we would all one of the things, we would sit on the street and, on the porch and our house was on one of the connecting streets from the main, from Calhoun [Calhoun Road, St. Matthews, South Carolina], the main artery and we would, I remember vividly, we'd be sitting on the porch and you'd hear cars vehicles coming down the street and we would, just from the sound of it, try to determine or guess what kind of car it was, that was a big thing, you know, back, back then.  At night time, the area, lightening bulb, bugs, the bug, you know the, that light up and it, it was so interesting, we don't see much of that now because we've put in street lights and this and that and I've brought a lot of other environmental kinds of things.  But I was up visiting a friend some time ago and I recently really and we walked outside one night and I said, what is, you know, it was so amazing because I saw all these lightening bugs, you know?  They were just lit up and I and had not seen those things in years.  I remember that and then I also remember, you know, the, the, the rains, the summer rains were, the showers that would come up and how the, the smell that was left after a summer rain and just playing in the ra- in the rain as it, in the waters as it ran down the streets from, because of the elevation of the land.  But, and I also remembered once, not so much as a youngster, but going, when I became an adult, just hearing the, you know, in another city, I think it might have been New York [New York], or somewhere and just hearing the sounds of sirens and, you know, that was just, just different to me because I did not grow up hearing those sounds.  Now the only time we would hear a siren or something would be if there was a fire in town and we lived just a few blocks from the fire station, we would hear that.  But every Wednesday, at one o'clock there was this sound of a siren going off and I remember the merchants in town closing at one o'clock on Wednesdays afternoons for the rest of the day and I understand that the sirens were a way to signal those that were working on the farms and other places that okay, it's, it's one o'clock, it's time to get off and, but that's just some of the sounds that I remember.
Story_ID: 301142
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid?  What were you like and what were you, what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: As most typical kids, I liked to be outside as much as I could and as long as I could, tried to maybe dodge work as much as I could but was not successful at that.  I remember as a kid, growing up saying I can't wait until I get old enough so I won't have to go to church, that didn't work.  When I got what I thought was old enough to not have to go to church, I still found myself going to church probably as much or as often as I did when I was that young.  But we grew up, you know, playing all the sports, all the baseball, basketball, the, you know, football, but we worked after school and sometimes before school, we had, we had as I indicated, my family we cut firewood to subsi- supplement our income and, and because my closest neighborhood friends were at the high school [John Ford High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] across the street from where I lived, I would see them in the afternoons or, you know, but sometimes we would cut a load of wood before we went to school so that we'd be able to play, have a little more time to play in the afternoons with that.  And you know, we would, Sunday afternoons we'd go for walks, Saturday afternoons after we got off from work, you know, we would, a group of us we'd get together and we'd just walk downtown or whatever we, what we did walk and every once in a while we were able to get the family car and we would drive over to Orangeburg [South Carolina], maybe, you know, Orangeburg being fifteen miles away, didn't go to, to the big City of Columbia [South Carolina] much because there was, it just took too long, you know, it was an hour at least an hour to get to Columbia and an hour back.  So that's two hours of your curfew time and we had to be home, you know, at ten o'clock and later when we got in high school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] eleven o'clock, but you know, after you, you been to church all day Sunday, didn't get out of morning church services until two, three o'clock and then Mama [Cleola Kimpson Hart] would want to go back to church at six o'clock, that Sunday evening so we had to take her to church and, you know, so it wasn't a lot of time to go to Columbia so, but we would go to Orangeburg, with our friends.  I remember three or four of our friends, we'd get together, we'd go over to Orangeburg, talk to the young ladies and, you know, then on, once you're there an hour, so it's getting close to your curfew time, you got to come on back.
Speaker 1: Now, now was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Somewh- somewhat but not really.  I remember us listening, we did have a TV, we had a telephone and, but we had this radio that if you turned it at the right angle and there was a radio station out of Nashville, Tennessee, I believe, I think it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Out by (unclear).
Speaker 2: --WLAC [WLAC Radio, Nashville, Tennessee]--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --with John R. [John Richbourg], we could get that station at night and sometimes we could get a radio station, WOIC [WOIC Radio] out of Columbia with Big Foot Saul [Big Saul; Charles Green]--
Speaker 1: They play the blues and rhythm and blues?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  But, but we didn't have, we had a stereo phonograph, or whatever it was called.  But we didn't listen to a whole lot of music, my momma just didn't think that this, what we considered this rhythm and blues or this stuff was something we needed to be listening to much but, but outside of that we didn't listen to a lot of music, music in the house and didn't watch a lot of TV much.  And especially we just didn't walk in and change the channels, we watched whatever the TV was on, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, whatever your parents were listening to or were watching?
Speaker 2: Yes, basically.
Story_ID: 301143
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I have a lot of good memories of school, and I was a pretty good student.  I, I liked competing, I did  not like, didn't like the girls outdoing me in school so we had some guy friends, we would always try to make sure we had better grades than some of the girls in our class, so we would do that.  Then I like the fact that if some of the other classmates couldn't do something, did not understand something that we could help them with it and so, because you were able to that, sometime the teacher would leave you in charge when she went to the principal's office of something, you know.  But I, I enjoyed school and even after we, the--there were I think about fifteen blacks in my high school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina], and there were five blacks in my graduating, high school graduating class, but then it was a small class, we had about sixty students in our, my, maybe seventy-five, less than a one hundred in my high school graduating class.
Speaker 1: N- now was that, I mean, how did you feel about you know, integrating the white high school?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time we had no real thoughts on it, you know, the, it's, my dad [Furman Hart, Sr.] felt that he wanted us to have like a better education than he was afforded.
Speaker 1: Now, wh- I, I didn't ask you about the big (unclear), did you like the, I mean, what was the atmosphere of the black grade school [Guinyard Elementary School, St. Matthews, South Carolina], was it a pretty good school or?
Speaker 2: But, it, it was a good school, it had good teachers, good caring teachers, the teachers knew our parents, and as a matter of fact my first grade teacher had taught almost everyone in my family, taught my mama [Cleola Kimpson Hart], she taught my daddy, and my oldest sister and my older, two older brothers so, a--a--as did most of the teachers so they knew that when I got there that even if I wanted to play around in school, they knew from history that my parents didn't let my older siblings, you know, play around, so then, and they would say, you know, you can do this work because your brother could do it or your sister could do it.  And, you know, there was a lot encouragement, you know, from that through up, throughout the, my elementary school years, and they would visit my parents, you know, they would visit the house, although as a child, whenever you see your teacher coming by, you're thinking oh my gosh, they saw me doing this, or what did I do or, or try to figure out, so will I, how am I going to explain this.  But, but usually they were coming by not to bring a bad report or, but just coming by just to see how, you know, my parents were doing, those kinds of things.  And primarily how my, you know, my mother because, as I indicated, my dad worked sixty-five, seventy miles away and he would leave for work six o'clock in the mornings, would not return until six o'clock in the afternoons and, you know, and he didn't miss days from work.
Story_ID: 300827
Speaker 1: Did you have teachers in grade school, they really are special to you that are?
Speaker 2: Well all of my teachers were, but I was especially fond of, at the time, Miss Blanche, Eva Mae Blanche and she was one of my, you know, favorite grade school teachers and she was a kind of small lady in stature.  Miss Ford was a good teacher although I didn't, at the time I didn't think, so she was, she was mean, and I mean she lived a couple of, not ma- not far from us and she walked to work and she just would not, she didn't tolerate anything but your best so, and she did not play.  But, in looking back, she was probably one of the most influential teachers that I had and, you know, and even Doctor Hopkins [ph.] and just, I, I you know, all of my elementary teachers were really, really good, Miss Howell [ph.] and you know, just a lot of really fond memories of, of my elementary school days [at Guinyard Elementary School, St. Matthew, South Carolina].  And even my high school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina], you know, and I did not have all of my elementary school teachers were black, I did not have a white high school teacher, as a matter of fact, there weren't any, the staff was not integrated when we took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think you may have misspoken, you sa- you didn't have any white grade school teachers, right?
Speaker 2: No white grade school teachers.
Speaker 1: But in high school they were?
Speaker 2: All of my teachers in high school were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, there weren't any black teachers in high school, high school.
Speaker 1: So they integrated the students, but not the staff?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 300828
Speaker 1: Now was Mrs. Ford, who taught you related to the Ford that the high school [John Ford High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] was named after?
Speaker 2: That, the Ford that the high school is named after was her dad.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So she was following in the tradition of--
Speaker 2: Of her, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about John Ford and who he was and how, how he founded the school?
Speaker 2: He was one of the professors at the school and, and one of the earlier professors when we had actually formalized education in the county [Calhoun County, South Carolina] and at one time the schooling stopped right around seventh or eighth grade for blacks in the county and that was somewhat typical of blacks in schools in South Carolina.  A lot of the schools, students only attend half of the school term because South Carolina being a farming area, so when, one season you're planting, the next season you're harvesting the crops, so, it was a very short time frame, you know, so.  But, Professor Ford understand, you know, was somewhat of a pioneer of education and one of the first male teachers in, in the county, you know, whereas, before most of the teachers were females, but he, you know, sure.
Story_ID: 300829
Speaker 1: Were you happy about going to this ne- to, to a white high school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina]?  Or did you know how to feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well, well had no real feelings at that time, you know, your parents felt it was something good or, and I knew I was going to school somewhere and didn't know it was just a completely different experience.  Didn't have much interaction with white kids prior to that, you know, we knew some of them, those that lived just on the edge of our communities, you would see them from time to time but really didn't know them so not having really worked on a farm for white farmers or anything so it didn't really have that real interaction with them also.  But, we knew that we were prepared academically to, to compete and, and you know, so when we started it was a different kind of experience.
Speaker 1: But, so were you, wh- were they ahead of you or were you the same at the same level or what when you, when you started?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or were you ahead of them, you might could have?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think that we were, I don't think that we were that far behind, if in fact, we could maintain our own, obviously some of the science equipment and things was a little different, some equipment that we had not seen before, but we were able to maintain our own.  You know, but the key thing I think was that it was, I'm talking 'bout the mid '60s [1960s], this was not some long time ago, we were '65 [1965], as a matter of fact, this was shortly after Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination and in the middle of Kennedy's, President Kennedy's assassination, and in the middle of, of King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, you know, during the time frame that I'm talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Between those--
Speaker 2: Being that--
Speaker 1: --two?
Speaker 2: In, in between those two--
Speaker 1: Between '63 [1963], and '68 [19684]?
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and, as a matter of fact, I was graduated from high school in 1970, so I was a sophomore when King, you know, was assassinated and, and was in, when, when President Kennedy was shot I was at the all-black elementary school [Guinyard Elementary School, St. Matthews, South Carolina].  So, so but, folk weren't, classmates weren't as friendly or as cordial, some were, I guess trying to show us how mean spirited they could be and others that probably did not want to, no one just welcomed us there with open arms because they felt we were, you know, taking away something that, something from them whereas we didn't view as taking anything from them, we just wanted, you know, to be there for the same reasons they should or wanted to be there, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the administration didn't really welcome you either, they kind of--?
Speaker 2: The administration, I think they tolerated, but I don't think they really, they didn't go out of their way to show meanness or whatever, I think, they said well, you know, they're here, we'll go ahead and accept them because they're here, if we had our wishes they would not be there.
Story_ID: 300830
Speaker 1: And it was a struggle even for us getting there [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina], when my dad [Furman Hart, Sr.] for, before we integrated the school, he talked with the superintendent, now we, remember we talking about dual school districts.  We had the county board of education and then we had the St. Matthews [South Carolina] school board and we had the colored school boards and, you know the superintendent said, well, you know, did everything to discourage my dad and I'm sure some of the others, "You don't wanna send your kids there, why you wanna send 'em there?  You live right across the street [from John Ford High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina], we've got a new school and you've got water," and this and that and it got to the point where even our state senator, who happened to live in, in the town, you know, he'd even spoke to my dad, "Well, Furman, I don't think you want to do that, it's not, won't be a good idea."  And the senator even, at the time, from the s--, from the floor of the senate [South Carolina State Senate], the state senate and it came well before, you know, black kids and white kids would go to school together, blood will run down the streets like water, you know, I mean, it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was a white man, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you know and, and you know my dad's well, you know, we, you know, we--we're not looking for trouble, you know, well, but you're making a big deal out of it, you know?  My dad's well, no, I don't think we're making a big deal out of it, I, you all are making much, you know if the schools are the same, and it wouldn't matter here or there, you all are making a much bigger deal out of it than we are, so, obviously it's a bigger deal than you all are saying, you know.  But the ironic thing was that, arguably probably the most influential legislator in state government at the time was the senator from our home town and he had made this statement, and when my dad said, "Well, you know, you do what you need to do but, after the Christmas holidays, my boys, two boys," myself and a younger brother of mine at the time, "I'll be taking them down to the white school, enrolling them."  And, you know, the senator who knew my dad, you know, they, and knowing my dad was a no nonsense kind of person, he just said, well okay, I guess he's just hell bent on doing this and as some other family members in the community were, they got to the place, we did not have that public outrage that everybody was suspecting we would have because the senator had already said before, this happen, not just in St. Matthews, but the State of South Carolina, blood would run down the streets like water.  And it never happened, but in other areas of the state, we had some rioting and turning over buses and all, later we found out the senator said, "Well you know, it's coming, I don't want any violence or trouble in my county," so he talked, I guess to his good white folk, if you will, yes.
Speaker 2: So what, wh- what senator was this?
Speaker 1: This was Senator Marion Gressette, Senator L. Marion Gressette [Lawrence Marion Gressette].
Speaker 2: And, wh--how, how do you spell his last name?
Speaker 1: G-R-E-S-S-E-T-T-E.
Story_ID: 300831
Speaker 1: Now was your father [Furman Hart, Sr.] involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or some?
Speaker 2: My dad started the, was one of the founding members of the local branch, had been a member of the NAACP ever since he was in the [U.S.] Army which they had to hide having membership in the NAACP back then.
Speaker 1: So that was considered subversive to be a member of the?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, it was, and before we got an NAACP membership chapter in our county, it was the Calhoun County Improvement League which was a group of citizens just wanting to do some things to improve the lot, and life of black folk.  And my dad has always been very active with voter registration, board of education, with the VEP Projects [Voter Education Project], as in the early '60s [1960s], when freedom fighters, when white students were coming from across the country into the southern states trying to get folk registered to vote, they would come to my, and you know, most of them s- if they, those that didn't stay with us, they were using our house as, as their headquarters and we had them living throughout the counties and throughout the county.  My dad was involved with a lot of the meetings with, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr] would come into South Carolina, down at the Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] and I remember as a youngster and I guess, why folks, I take on the personality of my dad.  Remember he's leaving home at six o'clock in the mornings, not getting back until six o'clock in the afternoons, it's still some good sunlight in the summertime but, wintertime, it's dark, he's leaving in the dark, getting home in the dark.  But we would go all over the State of South Carolina, primarily down, you know, to Columbia, Orangeburg, even at Forest [Carolina Forest, South Carolina], into Frogmore [South Carolina] at the time where the Penn Center was located, you know, meeting with Dr. King, or Miss Septima [P.] Clark or Victoria Delee and some of the other folk in terms of strategizing, working on plans for voter registration, voter education and how we're going to engage people in doing those things.  So, as a youngster, I would go with him and some of his friends either to just help drive or just to be along, you know, so that's how my involvement came about at an early age and I've been actively engaged since.  And, and I guess with him, my dad being one that didn't work for one of the white farmers or something, there was no fear of reprisals in terms of losing your job or whatever, you know.  He recognized that he worked for the, you know government, that I would imagine or the quasi-governmental entity, but he was of the mindset that, I work for you all from eight o'clock to four o'clock or whatever time his working hours were, what I do after I'm off from work or before I get to work as long as it's not involving any of these sensitive things that I'm doing as a job, in terms of my job performance, I will do and that's what he did and even to this day he's still, you know, he'd like to say he's active, he's a little more active than I'd like to see him at times but, but he's been doing it so long, we can't stop him from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when you first started traveling with you father (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was twelve, thirteen years old, well probably even a little younger than that, but my memories are from my eighth grade on up, you know?
Story_ID: 300832
Speaker 1: Now if I'm not mistaken, I think SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was founded in South Carolina right, at a meeting?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of the m- SNCC was, a lot of the members with SNCC and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], you know, that were Georgia and South Carolina because of, and Alabama, because Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would come, actually come over to the Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina], which is down in the lower part around Beaufort, South Carolina, because the Penn Center was the first, where they had the first schools for freed blacks so they had this campus like setting, so it was a retreat area where folk could come and be, you know, undisturbed if, if you would in terms of strategizing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do, do you remember being, when SNCC was formed or, or any of the information about that?
Speaker 2: Not, I was never really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not really?
Speaker 2: --a part of SNCC or that, but I, I, I remember some of the discussions of folk were talking about, well, we could join SNCC and, or the--there's this group of folk, you know, with, with SNCC and all that, but that was actually, SNCC was primarily a young college group and I was in high school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] at the time so they were a little too fast for me, I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, now did you, to see your father [Furman Hart, Sr.], he was a real activist it sounds like and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did, did he get a, did, did a lot of newspapers come to your house?  Did you get a chance to see a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, he, well we read The Philadelphia Tribune, The Philadelphia Tribune, we did the Afro-Amer--the Afro paper [Afro-American Company; Afro-American Newspapers] and Jet was primarily what we looked at.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And I remember Grit, there was a paper (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) right.
Speaker 2: --Grit.  And I think I sold Grit a time or two and trying to g- trying to win a knife, you know you sold so much you got a knife.  But it wouldn't, I didn't, I didn't sell enough to get a knife and probably a good thing because my momma [Cleola Kimpson Hart] wouldn't have let me have it.
Story_ID: 300833
Speaker 1: How did you do in, in this new high school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina]?  Did you do pretty good?
Speaker 2: I was a, this is me telling it now, I'm saying, (laughter), no, I, I was a good, good student, fairly good student academically, I'm sure I could have done better but, I was about a good C plus, B student.  I did not have much problems from a, an intimidation, racial intimidation standpoint although a lot of my classmates did, you know, schoolmates I should say did.  But I was an athlete so, I was a three sport athlete and I was, some say I was a pretty good athlete.
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: I played baseball, I'm second baseman, baseball, I played football I, and in the small school, I played both ways, I played quarterback, I was a linebacker, didn't have the kind weight, the size I am now and--
Speaker 1: So you played quarterback?
Speaker 2: I played quarterback, well remember we're a small school and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but this is like a white school, you know?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And you know how it is now, black quarterbacks are just now breaking--
Speaker 2: Well, and, that was it, I was a, I was a second string quarterback and I played linebacker and, and it so happened, I think even my teammates acknowledged that I was, probably should have been the starting quarterback, but that wasn't about to happen.  But because I was considered the star basketball player, you know, my, in the high school, basketball coach was the football coach also and his justification to it was, "Well, Melvin [HistoryMaker Melvin Hart], I don't want to start you at quarterback and run the risk of getting you hurt because we could need you come basketball season."  Well, you know, you know, but I, you know, you go out, when you get a chance to play you, you go out and you perform to the best of your ability.  But I got a chance to start at linebacker and all of that, you know, but--
Speaker 1: He wasn't concerned about you getting hurt as linebacker?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't concerned about that, you know, we, we, I've seen my high school coach from time to time and, and I, you know, at the time it didn't really dawn on me about, you know, wait a minute, why is this guy not playing quarterback?  Or what'd happen if I let him play quarterback so I talk to my high school coach from time to time, and I said, I still think that I was the better quarterback.  He said, "Well, you know, I don't know," but he said, "But you are probably in the top ten, the best basketball players I've coached at high school," and he said, "If I were picking a team, you would make the first, starting five."  But they've had some outstanding basketball players, so I think he was just trying to make me feel good, you know, but, but, you know, we were a typical high school.  You see, how folk do things, you know, you, you get a chance to reflect on your life and say, hmmm, this is why this was happening or I wonder did this have anything to do with that, you know, and, and you may never really know, but it just gives you something to think about and talk about later.
Story_ID: 300834
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds like, correct me if I'm wrong, it, it wasn't real, it wasn't as mean of an experience as it could have been, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --with all the rhetoric, about bloody--
Speaker 2: --well it was, it was mean, but it wasn't as vicious and as violent.  Remember now, the only blacks that were employed at the school [Saint Matthews High School, St. Matthews, South Carolina] were the cooks and the janitor, not a secretary, not a teachers aid, nothing.  So, there were just black kids, you know, thrust there and you had the, you know, schoolmates, you know, they were calling you niggas trying to intimidate you, trying to make you scared and nervous, you know, and, you know, I would not say that there weren't times we were a little timid about some things, but, you know, we were taught, you know, you don't fearful of any, any person or don't, don't start anything, but then, you know, don't let folk just run over you either, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, wh- was there ever a time that you really thought that you had to defend yourself?  Or thought you, you were really frightened by, by what's was going on?
Speaker 2: You, you know it's interesting, it was and, but I've on--I was on, you know, only one physical altercation, and, and I'm not sure that the person that got the brunt of the physical altercation is the one that should have gotten it.  But he just happened to be the one that was closest to me at the time and when I thought that, in my mind that the other white kids were going to join in and assist them, they just stood back and allowed him to be beaten.  And I think after that moment, they said well, either this [HistoryMaker] Melvin Hart is crazy or man, let's just don't mess with him or that kind of situation.  But then we did have a situation where, you know, the intimidation factor with some of the other schoolmates, one, one of our schoolmates ran when they were intimidating him and for, every day for a couple of weeks, they would do the same thing to him, so it got to the point where he actually transferred back, transferred out of the school back to his previous school and that kind of situation.
