Story_ID: 622421
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Andrew, A-N-D-R-E-W, Irwin, I-R-W-I-N, Heidelberg, H-E-I-D-E-L-B-E-R-G [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg].
Speaker 1: All right, and I'm gonna ask you about the origin of the Heidelberg--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a little later.  But can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born November 6th, 1943, in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now I'm retired, but I do quite a bit on the speaking, speaker's bureau tour.  I do speaking to high schools, middle schools, elementary schools, colleges, churches on the areas of desegregation and public schools and, and sports.
Speaker 1: And you were an original member of the Norfolk 17, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.
Speaker 1: And had a career in banking--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as an executive--
Speaker 2: Yep, eighteen years in, in banking with Barclays Bank [Barclays Bank of New York, New York, New York].  Fleet [Fleet National Bank], was Industrial National Bank at that time, but it's Fleet Bank now, and now it's actually Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] and Banco de Ponce, which was the largest Spanish bank out of Puerto Rico in New York [New York].  And I was the vice president and corporate manager, making commercial loans to basically large borrowers.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 10th of--what month is this?  Oh, May, (laughter) 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're now in my home in Hampton, Virginia, in the Phoebus area of Hampton.
Speaker 1: The Phoebus area?
Speaker 2: Area.  It's called Phoebus.
Speaker 1: P--P-H-O (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P-H-O-E-B-U-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, which is about, you're about a mile and a half from the Atlantic Ocean.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 622422
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and they're kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Yes.  I'm a seafood lover, so I, so I got to put them all in there.  I'm a seafood lover. Snails, shrimps, you know, clams on the half shell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Things like that, that's my, that's my favorite.
Speaker 1: This, this, this is the place for it too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, no question.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite color?  Now this is gonna be interesting--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) 'Cause I'm colorblind, but my favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite.
Speaker 1: So you can see blue and--
Speaker 2: Sometimes I can see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, sometimes I, I, I call it purple, but people correct me.  They say oh, that's not--I've never seen purple because they all, I guess they look the same to me.  But blue would be my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Ah, that's a tough one.  I think living in mo- a substantial part of my life in the New England area made me like all of the seasons.  I love the snow.  I love the summer.  You know, in the summer I like the snow better, and in the snow I like the summer better.  But I imagine if it was a day like today where it's rather cool, like in the upper 60s [degrees], so the fall might then probably be my best, best time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess one of my favorite places has always been Bermuda.  I've always loved that.  I love the sands.  I love the, the water.  And the people were fantastically friendly to me in Bermuda.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I've, I've never forgotten that.
Speaker 1: All right, now the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase or saying?  I'm, I probably stick more with the five Ps, which has always been in my life: prior planning prevents poor performance, every time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Prior planning prevents poor performance, okay.
Story_ID: 622423
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I'm gonna ask about your father's [Colonal M. Heidelberg] side and your mother's side, but we'll, we'll, we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lena, L-E-N-A, King, which is her maiden name, Heidelberg, but she uses Lena King Heidelberg as her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was February 25, 1924, in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  Are there any interesting stories?  And how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: I, I know about the King family, because I think most of the time you, you, you--the, the baby follows the mother, and the mother follows her own family more than the father's family.  So, I know quite a bit about my mother's five, five sisters and two brothers and their mother, which was my fa- my, my mother's father was Clarence and Georgia King.  Georgia was my grandmother, and my mother tells me that she was half Indian [Native American].  I don't, I can't remember the tribe, but she was half Indian.  And I could always see that in a couple of the, of, of my mother's sisters, who had long black hair and, and very a very beautiful complexion.  But that's as far my fa- and her father was Clarence King.  Clarence King, he was a janitor.  She always tells me about that.  He was a janitor in the banks downtown in Norfolk. Tall man, sort of like, you know, he about 6'2", and which she says I get my tallness from.  But he was, did cleaning in banking, and he was very good.  And, and my mother always thought it was ironic that he cleaned banks, and I grew up to be a banker (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's progress--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --at least, yeah.  So, are there any, any stories about the origin of the Kings and going back to the 19th century or way back--
Speaker 2: No, not really, because I think that one of the things that as probably--like I never knew I was poor.  But one of the things that poor people, I found out that we don't do is we don't really talk about history no further than maybe your grandmother or grandfather, at least in my family.  And I'm not saying that for every family.  But basically, when you're living day to day and doing--dealing with the struggles, the primary things are, are really immediate, your immediate vicinity, which is, would, would go no further than maybe your grandparents.  I never knew my, my grandparents more than maybe a year or two.  My mother's mother died at the age of thirty-nine from cancer, so I never knew her at all.  But, and her father died much later, but I only remember him from, as being just a tall man.  That's, that's the most I remember.  So, the, the legacy and the heritage coming from parents who both never completed high school was, you know, it wasn't passed on I think like in maybe a lot of families.
Story_ID: 622424
Speaker 1: Now, is there, is there a history of farm life, you know, working on farms, or, or were they always in an urban setting?
Speaker 2: I, only thing I've known is the urban there because most of them, most of all of them were born in Norfolk, in Virginia, Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: This is a ship building town, shipping?
Speaker 2: It's a ship building town, yeah.
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Navy town, right?
Speaker 2: Well, Newport News is more of the ship building town, Newport News, Virginia.  But most of the things at that time for blacks revolved around the [U.S.] military, the naval bases, and probably the United States post offices [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, did, did you, you get a sense from your mother [Lena King Heidelberg] what, what it was like to grow up in Norfolk in, in her time?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know.  We were, we were a close knit family as we've always been.  And, and the basic thing that I knew was just about my family, you know, never knew--I mean my mother, my mother and her sisters worked in, in, in the, a black air met--black area of Norfolk, which was right along Church [Street] and Brambleton [Avenue] streets in Norfolk.  And my mother worked in the movie theaters for the Jewish man who owned like all of the black theaters.  My--all her sisters worked in those theaters.  That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're telling us something now that's, that's historic--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause that--you--
Speaker 2: Okay, oh, oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I mean that, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --don't take this stuff for granted 'cause--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --when--you're, you're telling us something very important, that the black--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --theater is owned by Jewish--
Speaker 2: Right, Jewish man.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And he liked one of my mother's sisters enough to make her like the manager of, of one of his movies.  And of course, she therefore brought in all the other sisters who worked at the other various movies.  My dad [Colonal M. Heidelberg]--you're still dealing on the mother's side now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll, we'll--
Speaker 2: And then that's how--
Speaker 1: Well let's--
Speaker 2: --and that's, that's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --where--that's as much as I knew about what my mother's and her sisters did.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother and her sisters have a chance to go to school in a black community?
Speaker 2: I don't think any of them graduated from high school, because they all had children at a very young age.  Like, my mother had her first child when she was fifteen, and I think it ran through the family the same way.  My--her sisters had babies when they were sixteen or seventeen, max, you know.  So, most of them left school at early ages.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So the tradition wasn't that they would finish in this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so that's--yeah.
Speaker 2: --right.  They would get immediately into the workforce.  I mean, my mother did--I always think of the song I was listening to the other day called, "I'll always love my mother.  She's my favorite girl.  She taught me little things like saying hello and thank you please while scrubbing floors on bended knees" ['I'll Always Love My Mama'].  Now people today probably can't relate to that, but that was really my mother 'cause she did domestic work all her life is what she did, cleaning floors and cleaning up for, for whites.  That was, that was her whole thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that's, that's, that's as much as I really know about, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my family from my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, she had mostly sisters, right and--
Speaker 2: She had five sisters--
Speaker 1: Five sisters.
Speaker 2: --and two brothers.
Speaker 1: Two brothers, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, one of, one of her brothers, who passed away a few years back, he, he was in the military.  He was a, I think he was a sergeant, first sergeant.
Speaker 1: Was he in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: He was in the Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He stayed in the military for like thirty years I think.
Speaker 1: Now he's like World War II [WWII] age?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  He passed away.  He would have probably at this day be like about--my, my mother's eighty-six.  He was, he was the baby, so he would have been about eighty-four now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he spent all of his (unclear) life in the military.
Story_ID: 622425
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name--he has an odd name.  His name is Colonal.  That's his is name, C-O-L-O-N-A-L, Colonal McKennie [Colonal M. Heidelberg].  He say it's, sometimes it's McKennle, M-C-K-E-N-N-I-E.  And when I looked at--but he says McKennle, but when I looked it up in, on his birth certificate, I, I noticed that the I-E could have also been L-E, could such--that's he always said McKennle--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --versus McKennie.  But I always wondered, this is my--he never said--why they called him his nickname was Kennie, that everybody knows my daddy as Kennie Heidelberg.  So, I surmised that the Kennie came from the name McKennie, McKennie, McKennie, rather, M-C-K-I-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And his last name is--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Heidelberg.  Now, I have to, to be fortunate enough to meet my grandfather, whose name was Colonal, also, Nathaniel Heidelberg [Colonal N. Heidelberg], and they called him Nat.  And he grew up in--he was born in, my, my grandfather was born in not over here in the country.  My father was born in Newport News, Virginia.  My grandfather--
Speaker 1: What, what, what's your father's birth date?
Speaker 2: My father's birth date is September the 14th, 1923.
Speaker 1: In, in, in New (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Newport News, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Newport News, okay.
Story_ID: 622426
Speaker 1: And your, your grandfather [Colonal N. Heidelberg], he was born--
Speaker 2: He was--now when I met him, he explained the story to me, that when he came, he, he, he told me--this is the first thing he told me, he--I met him--the first time I met him, I was playing a football game in Massachusetts, Lowell, Massachusetts.  I'll never forget it.  And I finished the game, and I was walking across the field.  And a voice said to me, "Andy!" [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg].  And I looked up, and I saw this man, and I said oh, that's my grandfather.  That was the first time I had seen him in my life, ever, in person.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're a grown man basically.
Speaker 2: Grown man.  Yeah, I was twenty, about twenty-two or twenty-three years old.  And so, after--
Speaker 1: Did he live up there, or did--
Speaker 2: He lived in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, he lived up in Worcester, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Now, now what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know when he was born.
Speaker 1: You were starting to tell me where.
Speaker 2: Here, here, here's what he explained to me.  He said to me, 'cause after we, we sat down, he said to me, he said, "I want you to know first of all, your name Heidelberg is not a slave name."  He said, "When I came to this country, my name was Heidelberg."  I said, "Oh."  I said, "I didn't know that."  I said, "Well--." He says, he say, here's what happen: his father, he said, was from Ethiopia.  And I, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm just sad that I never even asked him what was his Ethiopian name, you know.  And he married a German lady whose name was Heidelberg.  So when he said, it was--he had five--he had four brothers.  He said it was five of them that came to America.  They worked on a ship.  And the five of them came over working.  But when they, the shipped docked in New York [New York], the captain of the ship tried to sell them.  He says and all five of the brothers jumped off the ship and ran.  And he says, "We heard shots, and we all scattered," he says, "and two of our brothers we never saw again.  We don't know what happened to them."
Speaker 1: So this--okay, to put this in perspective then, he came over here on a ship--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at a time when a captain could sell you?
Speaker 2: I, I--yeah, I guess so, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he, he, and, and where was this?  In--
Speaker 2: New York.
Speaker 1: It's in New York, so this had to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they came from Germany, ship came from Germany.
Speaker 1: So this has to be prior to 1833, 'cause New York outlawed slavery I think in 1833 or so.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: I'm not exact, but whoever's watching this can look it up exactly.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: It was around 1833 or so when New York outlawed slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but whenever they came, he said the five brothers now, they were working the ship, so I don't know how old they were.
Speaker 1: So this is his father's story he's telling?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: He said? Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't, I don't really know that part.  There is an aunt of mine who supposedly has the Heidelberg history, but I--she lives--
Speaker 1: So, but, but they took the name of a German woman rather than--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, they--yeah.  They used their mother's name.  They, their mother's name was Heidelberg.  Now, to be clear, I don't know whether he said his father was married to this German woman or not.  But when they came here to New York on a ship, their name was Heidelberg--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --right.  Okay, now, when the left, the three of them, he said, he went to New York; one of his brothers went to Mississippi; and the oth- other one might have gone down to Mississippi away too, just because this is where I've heard some of the Heidelbergs that most recently have been talking to me now on Facebook, they, they, a lot of them are from Heidelberg--I mean from Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that, that figures.  I, I know some in, some black Heidelbergs and Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Chicago--
Speaker 2: Is very close to Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Is a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's like Mississippi North.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, okay.  I just haven't delved into the history probably as much as I should.
Speaker 1: It's, it's an interesting story--
Speaker 2: Oh, it is, it is.
Speaker 1: --interesting story.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Ethiopia, you know, could mean, in those days it could mean like the actual country we know as Ethiopia or a black person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: It's a black person.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't know, right.
Speaker 1: So we're not, not even sure, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, was Ethiopia a man or a country (laughter)?
Speaker 1: But, but he, he was saying that he, his--your grandfather was, was he raised in, in New York or new or--
Speaker 2: He grew up in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 622427
Speaker 1: Okay, so he [Heidelberg's paternal grandfather, Colonal N. Heidelberg] grew up in New York City [New York, New York].  And is there a story about how your fa- he met your father's mother [Laura Heidelberg] and how your father got to Virginia, you know?
Speaker 2: My, my father [Colonal M. Heidelberg]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is your, your grand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandfather.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so, so how did your father get to Virgin- I mean, you know, I mean does--
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: --your grandmother--
Speaker 2: That's a part of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who is your grandmother--
Speaker 2: --the history that my father doesn't talk about a lot, and I know it's because of some things that happened.  But, no, he doesn't, he didn't discuss that with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's all on the coast, so I guess presumably--
Speaker 2: Right.  I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) 'cause he's--
Speaker 2: --know that my dad used to--my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] tells me stories about how my dad used to, even though he lived in, in, in Norfolk [Virginia], he used to go back and forth to New York a lot to--with his father.  And he was--my father could always dance.  He was a dancer.  And she says that he used to--they used to always have contests to see whenever--she said they used to come to her house and wake them up early in the morning for him to go and show that he could out dance some person that they had gotten together and made a bet on (unclear) that's--my dad used to always win.  And that, that used to really always amaze me 'cause my, after my dad became a preacher, a minister, sometimes, you know, like when we, me and my brothers [Kenneth Heidelberg and Melvin Heidelberg], were sitting around playing music, he would come into the room, and he would do some dances that like--and you look at him as a preacher.  And say, "How do you know that?"  He could tap.  He could do all of the dances, all of the dancing.  He, he was just like, he was, he was, he was--he grew up a street guy.  That's what made me always feel that ministers, you gotta be from the streets, 'cause yeah, and he--and I remember once at the, just at the (unclear) one minute, he--this song came out.  I, I guess I was like about twelve or thirteen, and it was called--it went, (scats), -'Blue Moon.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Blue Moon,' right.
Speaker 2: 'Blue Moon,' remember?  So I was singing that song, (singing) "Blue moon, you saw me standing alone."  I said, "Oh, daddy you got to hear this song.  This the baddest song I ever heard."  He said, "What song?"  He said, "Oh, it--," I said, "It just came out.  This is 'Blue Moon.'  This is bad."  So I started singing.  He said, "(Makes sound) That song is old as the hills."  I said, "No, not this song.  This is 'Blue Moon.'"  He said, "Does it go like, (singing) 'Blue moon, you saw me standing alone'?"  I said, "Yeah, how you know?" (Laughter)  He said, "I used to sing that when I was a kid" (laughter).  I was so amazed.  Man, he amazed me with that, right.  That was, that was--but he, he knew a lot about the streets, and his dad knew a lot about the streets.  He was bro- brought- born--he was raised in New York City.  He was, he was, he was a hipster.
Story_ID: 622428
Speaker 1: Okay, so he, he spent a lot of time in New York [New York] then your (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But you don't know--do you know anything about his mother at all?
Speaker 2: My dad's [Colonal M. Heidelberg] mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --nothing about his parents at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, just his father, your grandfather [Colonal N. Heidelberg]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just your--
Speaker 2: --yeah, what he told him about--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --his grandfather, yeah--about his father.
Speaker 1: Well, you met his grand--his, his--
Speaker 2: His father, yeah--
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: --but what, just what he told me--
Speaker 1: He didn't, he didn't--
Speaker 2: --about the trip coming over, yeah.
Speaker 1: --say anything about his mother?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't go into that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting that, you know, as you said, most people are closer to their mother's side of the family and know more about--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --their mother.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he didn't--you, you don't know anything about his mother.
Speaker 2: No, he didn't tell--oh, my dad?
Speaker 1: Yeah, your dad.
Speaker 2: No.  Only thing, I know her name.  Her, her name was Laura [Laura Heidelberg].  Yeah, I know a lot about my dad's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I was asking--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, because most of his relatives, again, like we said, the family goes with the mother.  My dad--my grandmother [sic. great-grandmother], who is, whose name was Hattie Garrison [ph.], she lived to be 106, she was--she had I think five daughters--four daughters--and my dad's mother was one of them.  It was so funny, 'cause my, my mother and father, they were all really dark-skinned people, pretty, but dark, dark, dark.  And when my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] used to get mad or joke my dad, you know, how you talk and you play the dozens, and she would (laughter), she would say stuff like--he'd say something, he'd say (makes sound) something something something.  She say, she say, "Black Laura" (laughter).  He would say, "Don't talk about my mother" (laughter).  He used to all--he's--she, she used to always joke him about that.  But all of her citizen- in fact--all of her sisters, his mother's sisters, lived in New York.  They were from New York.  This is now, oh yeah, that's probably why he, he hung in New York, because all of his, his wife's sisters lived in New York, you know.  And they, 'cause they used to always come down sometimes.  I never knew them that well, but they always came down from, from New York City.  And yeah, that's, that's an interesting side of the family because it was so funny that my grandmother, who was--his, his grandmother, who was my great-grandmother, was the one that had the, the daughters.
Speaker 1: That's Hattie.
Speaker 2: Hattie, Hattie Garrison.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we have a--I, I have a uncle named Uncle Johnny, who is Hattie Garrison's--he's, he is related to my dad's--this was funny--he's related to my dad's mother.  He's my dad's, he's my dad's mother's brother.  However, his name was Johnny Garri--is Johnny Garrison [ph.].  He's still alive.  His father was a white man.  I mean his fa- his mother was a white woman.  My aunt [sic.], Hattie Garrison's husband had a child by a white lady.  Johnny is his name.  So he was technically their sis- their brother, but he was so much young--he, he was younger than all of them.  And he's, 'cause he, and he used to tell me about it.  He, he used to go to visit his white--his father's--'cause he had brothers and sisters that were white.  He used to go and visit them, but he--and they used to always give him a hard time and look at him strange, but his father was--'cause his father was black.  But their father wasn't black; their father was white.  And he--so that was a, that was a, that was kind of a strange relationship.  But he knew my grandmother, which is my daddy's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Hat--
Speaker 2: He--yeah, Hattie.
Speaker 1: --Hattie.  And she lived to be a hundred and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  He knew Laura.
Speaker 1: Laura, okay, Laura.
Speaker 2: Laura, yeah, because even though Hattie was Laura's mother, Hattie's husband was his father.  Is that confusing for you?  You got it?
Speaker 1: No.  We--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was interesting.
Story_ID: 622429
Speaker 1: Is there a, a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, they always tell me the story, 'cause my daddy [Colonal M. Heidelberg] was like I said, the street type guy.  And of course, he used to hang around, 'cause all of the sisters, my mother's [Lena King Heidelberg] sisters, knew him.  They called him Kennie because my grandfather's name was Kennie.  When he had my dad, he, he went by the name of Kennie, so people--he called my dad Kennie from the name McKennie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My dad thought his name was Kennie, so he named my brother Kenneth [Kenneth Heidelberg] (laughter), know what saying?  That was, that was always so funny, but it had nothing to do with his name being--
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe I should stop--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --go, go back a minute before I--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --ask about your, the story about how they met--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but, and ask about Colonal.  Now, is it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where--how, how did the Colonal get in the name now?
Speaker 2: That part, I don't know who named that, 'cause I always used to think that they, they were on a plantation where it was a, it was a military man or something named Colonel.  But he said that his name was Colonal Nathaniel [Colonal N. Heidelberg] when he came to this country, Colonal Nathaniel, and they called him Nat.  Obviously, he didn't like the name.
Speaker 1: Now where did he come to this country from?  Where, where did he--
Speaker 2: From Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They came from Germany.
Speaker 1: --he came, he came, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know.  He never did tell me how he got the name Colonal because they used to, they used to call him Nat.  All his brothers and sisters called him Nat.  So I didn't really know that his name was, it was C. Nat Heidelberg, but his name was Colonal, 'cause my dad never went by the name Colonal.  They called him Kennie, see.  So you really didn't know what their names were or where they came from, 'cause I used to always think it was funny 'cause, you know, the kids used to joke me all the time: "You better get on home before Colonal get you."  You know they (laughter), they--
Speaker 1: Well, that's, there's, in the black community often, that sounds--you know, there is a, there are ball players--now there's a guy named Lawyer Tillman that played for the Browns [Cleveland Browns].  There's a, there are people there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Colonal--there's a General Larry [Larry Platt]--what's his name that just came up with this song, 'Pants on the Ground'?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His name is General.
Speaker 2: Yeah?  Oh that--it was?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, General (laughter).  He wasn't a general really.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's a--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that happens a lot.  You see--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see--
Speaker 1: --with the name of the--
Speaker 2: I, I thought--
Speaker 1: --title.
Speaker 2: --I thought Col--see, but Colonel is spelled with an E-L like in the military, C-O-L-O-N-E-L (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so they spelled theirs, they spelled theirs--
Speaker 2: His is, his is A-L--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Colonal, like, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That's--so I don't know if that's a different or just the way they pronounce it or just the way they spelled it.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's still Colonal (pronunciation).  It comes out Colonal.
Story_ID: 622430
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to mention that the chronology we get may not--I mean some, some of the incidents in the chronology may not match up right and 'cause of the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the thing about being sold in slavery, your, your grandfather's [Colonal N. Heidelberg] story.  But it, it is a family story that's handed down, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in it is something that, you know, that we can, you know, rely on.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it, you know, it's, it is like, raises a lot of questions--
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) raises a lot of questions.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but we do know your father [Colonal M. Heidelberg] went back, back, back and forth to New York [New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and had a very street wise, urban--
Speaker 2: All street wise.
Speaker 1: --kind of--
Speaker 2: I, sometimes I don't know whether I, I like--I don't mind talking about my grandfather's life, I guess 'cause it's my grandfather, but I don't mind.  See, my grandfather went to prison for twenty years, Attica [Attica Correctional Facility, Attica, New York].  And I guess I can tell it now because my, my father's not here.  I think I, a lot of times I didn't, I didn't talk about it to other people because my fa- I think my father suffered a lot from, from why my grandfather went to prison. Which he, he went to prison because they say he killed his wife [Laura Heidelberg], okay.  And I think that my dad was the one that found, as my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] tells me, my dad was the one that found--
Speaker 1: His--
Speaker 2: --his mother.
Speaker 1: --it was his mother, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And this was in New York.  And so when all the time my grandfather was in prison in Attica, I could never go see him because I was always under age.  They didn't let you, a certain age, go to the prison.  So my dad used to go up there every once in a while, like every three or four years, 'cause he served twenty years.  So, that--like I told you, when I first, the first time I laid eyes on my grandfather was the time when I finished the football game, and I was playing in Lowell, Massachusetts.  He lived in Worcester [Massachusetts].  And now I'm--that's how he--I don't know how he knew about the game, but that's how he, he tracked me down.  But what happened was I, being the inquisitive kid that I was, I asked him.  I said, "Well, you, can you tell me," 'cause the relatives don't talk about it, you know?  So he said to me, he says, "I did not kill your grandmother."  I said, "Well, what happened?"  He said, "I was a guy that stayed out in the streets all the time.  I made my money in the streets."  (Laughter) He was a character.  He says, "I did not kill your grandmother."  He said now--(laughter) it's not funny.  He said, "I did kill a couple of people."  So I said--you know, I was in shock.  I said, "You did?"  He said, "Yes."  He said, "I, I had come in one night from the streets, and I had about five or six thousand dollars."  He said, "I gave it to your grandmother.  I went back out."  He said, "So, I came back maybe two or three days later."  He said, "Now it was only a couple of people that knew that I had given her some money."  He said, "So when I came home, I found her.  Somebody had cut her throat.  The money was gone."  He said, "I knew who I had--who, who knew that I had the money."  He said so--but he said it so easy.  He said, "I, I found--I went to them, and I killed both of them, man and a lady."  But they convicted him, not of those two, of being the one that killed my grandmother.  So, I mean, he served his twenty years in Attica.  And that's when he began to tell me about, "When I came to this country, my name was Heidelberg.  That ain't no slave name."  He said, "I want you to always know that.  That is no slave name.  That's my name."  I said, "Oh, okay, grandpa."  And he was, he, he was, he was, like I say, he was from the streets.  He was--and I, I thought about that, to serve twenty years in Attica, that at that time.  And he came out and got married again to a lady in Worcester.  I mean, he did, had a home (snap fingers) just like that.  He was, you know--so that was, at that time, I think was good enough for me, that at--because I--that--
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story, about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that was, that was, that was a tough one.  I think that affect my, my father before he passed away.  Never, has never said anything to any of us about that.  And my mother say it's because, she says, "I think it is because he found, he was the one that found, that found her."
Speaker 1: Yeah, it had to be traumatic, all that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: He never, he never in all the years that I knew him ever mentioned it, and he loved his dad.  He loved him.  And when we went to his dad's funeral, the whole nine, I mean.  When his dad got out of prison he was--he were--he--it was just like he never left, just like he never left.  That's why I kind of felt like what, whatever it was, he didn't, he didn't think that his dad had done it, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: It's a tragic story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: It's, it's a tough one.  I always, often thought about going back and trying to find out how the story was written up in New York.  That would be, that would be interesting, but I just, you know.
Speaker 1: More than likely it's in the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, something like that, yeah.
Story_ID: 622431
Speaker 1: Well, tell us, how did your parents meet?  You were getting ready to tell us that story.
Speaker 2: My dad [Colonal M. Heidelberg] knew all of the sisters.  And like I said, my dad was like, kind of like a street guy, playboy type guy.  And my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] was a quiet, you know, shy type.  And he knew all of her sisters.  And he used to, you know, he used to come around and try to talk to her.  That's basically how he said, you know.  I guess he met her when she was about fifteen.  He would have been about sixteen.  I got some pictures of my dad when, when they, when they got married, when they (laughter) at that age.  I look at him now.  He had on--it's funny--he had on the baggy pants, just like the kids wear today. He had the cigarette--
Speaker 1: Like a zoot, a zoot suit and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in his hand.  Zoot, zoot, zooted down, yep, yep, and the beautiful pictures of him, of him and my, my mother.  But that's basically all I knew about how, how he met her, you know.  I imagine, I, I guess it goes along the story like a guy meets the young girl, and, and they eventually have sex, and she gets pregnant, which she did.  My father always tells me how--so they got a place together when she had my older brother [Kenneth Heidelberg].  And he said he used to sell shoes in Mark Shoe Store [ph.] on Church Street, again, right near the theaters where my mother used to work.  This is a Jewish guy that owned the, the shoe store.  And he was a good salesman.  Like I said, he could talk.  He was rapper (laughter).  He, he could, he could lay it.  So he sold shoes, and he was one, probably one of their better salesmen.  But he always tells me the story about how one, one month he didn't have the money to pay the rent, and he went to ask my mother's father, who was Clarence King, the, the bank janitor.  He says, "And he took me in the room, and he says, 'So what you're gonna use the money for?'"  And he asked him the question, he said, he says, "Okay, you married my daughter."  He says, "A man doesn't borrow money."  He says, "I'm gonna loan you this money this time, but I don't ever want you to come back here and borrow no money from me to take care of my daughter again."  And my daddy say he never did.  I, I na- I'll never forget that, because my dad thought that that was so, that, that impacted him so much.  And, and from that day forward, you know, like, my daddy's always been a hustler, man.  He, whatever he had to do, he had to do.
Story_ID: 622432
Speaker 1: Did he [Heidelberg's father, Colonal M. Heidelberg] do one thing?  Is any occupation he did primarily, or did he just ride--
Speaker 2: Well, af- once, once he left the shoe store [Mark Shoe Store (ph.)], he got a job at the naval base [Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia].  So, that's where he, that's really where he retired from, from the naval base.  He was a stevedore, whatever the stevedores do.  I don't, I don't know what they do.  I guess they work the docks and, and keep the warehouses or something.  So he did that--
Speaker 1: That's at the U.S. Naval base--
Speaker 2: --until he became--yep.
Speaker 1: --in, in, in, in Norfolk [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is there a name for that base?
Speaker 2: NOB, Nave--NOB, Nat, Nat--they called it at that time the naval officer's base [sic. Naval Operating Base].  I guess it was the NOB they called it.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I remember NOB, 'cause some of them worked at NAS and NOB.  One was Naval Air Station [Naval Station Norfolk Chambers Field, Norfolk, Virginia]; one was Naval Officer's Base.  I never really knew exactly which one.  I thought it was--we just called it the naval base.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked at the naval base.
Story_ID: 622433
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this: now, when you think about your, your parents' personalities, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --their talents, and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  I, I, I probably got a, a mixture of both of them.  It's, it's funny how your dad [Colonal M. Heidelberg] always impresses you as cool.  My dad was cool.  He could dress really nice, which is what I've always liked to do.  I've just been inhibited 'cause I'm colorblind (laughter).  My, my dad could dress.  He could, he could, he could put together outfits, which I--that always impressed me about it.  My dad didn't do no athle- at- athletics, none.  I think the athletics come from my mother's [Lena King Heidelberg] side.  My mother could run fast, and all of her sisters could run.  And all of her sisters' children are either runners, football players, or something; they all, all of my cousins.  I mean we--that was a fierce rivalry just in the family, because we all had boys, and when we played in the recreation league, all of us played against each other.  And they knew the Kings, that was all the Kings; they knew the Heidelbergs; they knew the Crenshaws [ph.]; they knew the Boles [ph.]; and they knew Kings, Crenshaw, Boles.  They, they're her sisters, yeah, the Kings, yeah, the Kings, yeah, 'cause two of her sons--two of her brothers were name work- was King.  And the ones that had married the sisters was--one sister didn't have any kids, so but the other sisters had boys, so there were three sets of boys, the Oles, the Kings--I mean the Boles, the Kings, the Crenshaws, and the Heidelbergs.  They were all--so I--my mother had this driving force.  I think she always planned.  I mean, no matter what she had, she planned herself, and it, and it worked.  She was, she was, she was good at that, so, she had this stick to itness; she had this never say die type, no matter what the situation was.  I mean, she, she did what she had to do.  And I think a lot of that I, I take from my mother, so.  And, and the way that they both insisted that I go to school was, that was funny, 'cause I, I, I, I imagined, I always wondered how they did that and they never went no higher than the ninth grade.  But they evidently knew the value of the education and wanted to make sure that, that I took advantage of it, I was educated, yep.
Story_ID: 622434
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I got a lot of--the one thing that's, that I like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about the earliest--
Speaker 2: --about me is--
Speaker 1: --like what the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I got a lot of early childhood memories.  About what?  Like what?  I--
Speaker 1: What, what's the first thing you remember?  I mean the first--
Speaker 2: The first--
Speaker 1: --very first one.
Speaker 2: Very first thing I remember is my brothers and I were--see, I was born in Norfolk in a project called, they called it Oakleaf Park.  And my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] used to always say, "I never have no problem wondering whether my children are my children because they were all born in the house," 1740 Greenleaf Drive, in Norfolk, Virginia.  We were all born in the house.  So she said, "I know who my kids are.  There ain't no mixing up the babies or nothing."  But I remember 'cause my mother used to do, like I said, domestic work, did that all of her life.  And my brothers and I were in the house playing firemen, never forget this.  And we had a, a rollaway bed, if you know what a rollaway bed is, folded up with wheels on it?  Okay, so what my brother [Kenneth Heidelberg] did was he took the wooden chair out of the kitchen, put it--folding the bed up, put the wooden chair up on top, and he put my middle brother, Melvin [Melvin Heidelberg], up to be the driver (laughter).  And he and I, 'cause I couldn't--didn't have much strength--I was the baby--pushed the rollaway through the house, and we go (makes sound) (laughter).  And we came around the corner from the bedroom into the living room, and we took a turn.  And that chair leaned, and my brother came down off the top, and he fell.  He hit his head.  You know, we had in the living, they had stoves with a grate, a big iron grate, that you turn to let the ashes down.  His head hit that grate and broke his arm, man, and like, and then my brother, you know, he was the oldest, so he was responsible for everything.  So I'll never forget that.  He would, he, so he took us and we had to go over to this lady's house.  I don't know what she was, but she was like the lady in the neighborhood that could do what--everything.  And I--
Speaker 1: Like a healer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and, and I remember all three of us walking down the street crying.  And, and we got over to this lady's house, and she, she didn't--he didn't--she didn't go to the hospital.  She, she put his arm or something, right, and she did something with his head, and she put him in the bed.  Now, why I remember this, because my brother was light skinned.  Me and my other brother and I were dark skinned.  I had never really thought about it until she put him that bed with them white sheets (laughter), right.  And, and light skinned people when they're dirty, boy, la--they're dirty.  You can see the dirt (laughter).  And he was laying up there in those white sheets, and I'm looking at him.  I said, "Oh, my god, he's dirty" (laughter), and he was laying down.  And that's how I remember that story.  That's the first story that I remember about really being a, an infant, a young kid.
Story_ID: 622435
Speaker 1: What you said here raises a ca- a question about being born at home and then, you know, your brother [Melvin Heidelberg] being hurt and being taken to a lady's house--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for treatment.  Was there not medical care available for black people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but I don't know--
Speaker 1: --in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This, this is the '40s [1940s], the mid-'40s [1940s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's in the '40s [1940s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you know, is there a reason why your mother [Lena King Heidelberg] had all the children--I, I guess they were--she was--was her family used to having the children at home?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They, they had--the, the midwifes were like big time for the blacks--
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that, that's--
Speaker 2: --in that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The midwifes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really made a transition--
Speaker 2: Yeah, couldn't--
Speaker 1: --to going up--
Speaker 2: --afford to go to no hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they didn't even think about it.  All of us were born in that house.
Speaker 1: So there's no--I would take it, if there was medical services available for them, they would have taken advantage of it.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well, my mother was at work, so I know I wouldn't think that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that the midwife would do anything un--I don't know whether after my mother came she took me to the hospital.  I don't remember that or none of that.  Maybe she could have, you know, so.
Speaker 1: But people were used to taking care of themselves--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --on some level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I remember once my mother told me that when I, I--this is before my brother got his arm broke.  I, I went to sleep one day, and she could not wake me up when she came home from work.  And she said she stuck pins in me, and I wouldn't wake up.  And she shook me, so she kind of panicked.  Now, you probably don't know where--how the distance is, but she went, it had to be from where we lived to where she went had to be two and half miles maybe, to the, to, from that project to the downtown at the hospital to where the doctor's office was.  She, she picked me up, and she said, "I ran with you.  I'll never forget that, boy."  And she says, "I couldn't wake you up."  So she took me to the, whoever it was.  And the doctor office that wherever she took me to, she said he could not understand why she couldn't wake me up.  He didn't know what to do, so she, she grabbed and took--ran me down, down to which is now Sentara Norfolk General Hospital [Norfolk General Hospital; Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, Norfolk, Virginia], which is maybe another, that's gotta be like about a mile and a half, another mile and a half.  And, and she said when she got me there, the doctor had given me some, gave me something.  And she said, "If, if you had of waited five more minutes, he would have slipped into a coma, and he, he probably would have died."  I, I, yeah, I never forgot that.  Yeah, that's, that, that is, I don't remember, I'm saying.  But when she told me, I said, "You ran all of that far?"  She said, "I had to run.  It was nobody that couldn't get," you know--
Speaker 1: Did she have--
Speaker 2: --couldn't get no ride.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about what that might have been, the, the--
Speaker 2: The doctor thought that I had rheumatic fever or whatever, rheumatic fever, whatever that could have been.  And, and she didn't tell me what--I gotta ask her what did she--now, she's still alive.  I'm gonna ask her what, what did she say, what did she say. Because he said he would, he would--he says, "Your son will probably never run."  That's ironic too.  He'll never be able to run.  And she said she rubbed my legs every day with alcohol, and, and you know, every day and said she always thinks about that when I played football.  She used to think about what the doctor had said, "He'll never run," and she was so happy to see me, that I could really run, yeah.
Story_ID: 622436
Speaker 1: Can you describe the Oakleaf projects and, and you know, about how big they were and how--you know, what, what size.  And, and, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, Oakleaf Park [Norfolk, Virginia], it was, was, was a small--I think it, it originally had been like military barracks.  This is what they usually gave to the blacks, that the military would stay in them.  They, they always started out as temporary military housing and which were like--I, I don't even remember how many rooms we had, maybe a small living room and a kitchen and a bedroom.  That was, that was, that was during most of the time, and the most things that I remember from that experience was really the one where my brother [Melvin Heidelberg] broke his arm.  When we move, we moved then to a place closer into Norfolk [Virginia], and I remember that because we didn't have a bathroom in the house.  This was on Olney Road, and--
Speaker 1: About how, how old were you all moved there?
Speaker 2: I was probably then about maybe five, four or five.
Speaker 1: It was Oney--well, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Oakleaf--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or Olney, O-L-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: O-L-N-E--okay, Olney--
Speaker 2: Olney.
Speaker 1: --Road, okay.
Speaker 2: Olney Road.
Speaker 1: And that's in Hampton [Virginia], right--in, in--
Speaker 2: No.  That's in Norfolk (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Norfolk, right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's in Norfolk.  And we didn't have any--we had a bucket.  I always remember that 'cause it was--we only had two rooms, and there were five of us, 'cause me, my brother, my two brothers and I slept in the kitchen, and my father [Colonal M. Heidelberg] slept and my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] slept in the living room.  And yeah, we had a little backyard, 'cause I remember my dad used to always once in a while buy a couple of chickens (laughter).  It's funny.  And--(laughter) he would raise them in the backyard.  And my mother would never want to eat them because she knew the chicken then (laughter), but that was funny.  That, that, those, those, those, that, that was the beginning of probably my understanding about--you know, we had iceboxes then, you know, where the iceman comes and you put the ice in the box.  And that, that was fun.  That was an ice box.  You didn't have no refrigerator.
Story_ID: 622437
Speaker 1: But that's where I think my--I started developing my work ethic, because a man next door had a shoe shop, and he used to al- also sell coal and wood, like the little twelve inch pieces of wood wrapped up in--and then coal by the bag.  And he used to let me sell the, the wood and the coal.  And the next job I got was with the iceman on, on his--you know, the iceman had a horse and a buggy (laughter).  And I used to go with him to help sell the ice.  I liked to be with him because I liked the horse.  But I was always doing things like that to try to find a way to make ten cents.  I think they gave me like a dime or a quarter for working with them.  But that was, that, that's was kind of how my childhood went.
Story_ID: 622438
Speaker 1: I also probably found out one of my bad qualities, that I liked to show off in front of girls (laughter).  I always think about that.  I laugh because I remember I was standing out in front of the, my house one day, and this guy and I, we were jumping.  And I, I used to tell him how, how, how I could out jump him.  You know how they, they had the, the pavement with the lines between it, so we would jump from one line to the other.  So, this girl came along, and I said, "I'm gonna really show her how far I can jump."  I'll never forget stuff like this.  This is how my memory--and man, I, I tried to jump as far as I could.  And when I jumped and landed, my foot slipped, right, and I fell on my coccyx bone, right on my butt.  Man, I started crying (laughter).  I'll never forget that, man.  And my, and my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] came outside and said, "See, if you wasn't trying to show off" (laughter) and the girl walked on down the street.  I said, "Oh," you--I mean my butt was sore for a long time.  And I--and you know, those kind of things I, I remember, you know.
Story_ID: 622439
Speaker 1: And so, I remember growing up in elementary school, you know, 'cause my mother [Lena King Heidelberg]--my brothers [Kenneth Heidelberg and Melvin Heidelberg] and them went to--I was, I was, when I was in the first grade, six years old, I went to what--we'll talk about that later; I know we are, pri- what they call a private school, 'cause it was black lady that taught school in the basement of a church.
Speaker 2: Now this is your first school?
Speaker 1: The first school I ever went to.
Speaker 2: And, and what was it called?  Did have a name for it?
Speaker 1: It was called Ms. Williams' school [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bank Street Baptist Church [Bank Street Memorial Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Bank Street Baptist.
Speaker 1: And Ms. Williams was the teacher.  Yeah, she taught--
Speaker 2: Now was there a public school for black children?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: There was, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but this was close--this was like about--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a block and a half from where we lived.  And my brothers and them went to the regular elementary school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know why my mother sent me there.  But anyway, I, I guess--and, and this was, this was like, it, it was so good for me.  This teacher, she probably to this day was one of the best teachers that I ever had in my life.  And it was only maybe about fifteen or twenty kids in the class, and we were all--because some of them are still my friends today.  I still remember those days.  And I went there for three years, from the, from six to I was eight years old.  And this is where I, I think I learned--I became competitive in math.  I loved math.  I, I loved everything.  I, I just liked learning.  It was just, I don't know, for a number of reasons.  First of all, it made the girls like me (laughter).  I never forgot that.  And I always liked to show off in front of the girls.  And one of the best ways to show I always thought was your knowledge, know something.
Speaker 2: Now, it's interesting, today as we sit here, there's a common idea that if you're too smart, you're not cool--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you ain't cool (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in the black--
Speaker 1: Yeah, isn't that amazing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah that is amazing.
Speaker 2: It's crazy.
Speaker 1: I never--yeah, I always knew that worked with girls, and that was my, that was my first--you know.  Whether--'cause at that time I guess I didn't think about sports, so to speak.  I mean I liked running around or shooting marbles and stuff like that.  But I didn't think about like football, 'cause we didn't, we didn't have those kinds of things, you know.  They were not priority, and none of them, and ne- none of my brothers were, were doing that in, in those schools because there were, there wasn't really a lot of grass around there.  So, so--
Speaker 2: So the, the, the, the ground was just kind of worn down to dirt--
Speaker 1: Yeah, to hard dirt.  It was hard dirt.  That's exactly what it was.  I'm glad you reminded me.  It was hard dirt.  And, because I remember when, when, when we moved from that house that didn't have a bathroom, we moved into another project called Chesapeake Manor [Norfolk, Virginia].  This is when I was eight years old.  And I remember because the last year with Ms., Ms. Williams' group, I was in the third grade.  And she says, "What I'm gonna do is I'm gonna skip you to the fifth grade because that's the level that you read and your math scores are on."  So she passed me to the fifth grade, and I was eight years old.
Speaker 2: Now, what, what, what, what, what school is this now?
Speaker 1: This was the Bank Street.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Bank Street--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Baptist Church basement, Ms. Williams' school.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, but you said in the public school they skipped you ahead.
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: Oh, they, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in her school.
Speaker 2: --they skipped you ahead in her school, okay.
Speaker 1: In her school.
Speaker 2: All right, all right.
Speaker 1: She skipped me the last year that I was there.  She passed me from the third to the fifth grade.
Story_ID: 622440
Speaker 1: And then my parents [Lena King Heidelberg and Colonal M. Heidelberg] moved.  We moved out to Chesapeake Manor [Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: (Pause) So you're like eight years old.
Speaker 1: Eight years old.
Speaker 2: And you moved to Chesapeake Manor.
Speaker 1: Manor, which was a project.  But it was like (makes sound)--now this was a different project, because a lot of school teachers, postmen, and you know, people who were, I consider now, looking back, were middle class people.  There were some poorer ones, you know, 'cause my dad worked there at the base [Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia].  And, and it was, it was like, it was the best house I had lived in, in my life.  It was four rooms.  All the buildings were made out of concrete, they were pretty, like a, like tans and yellow, soft--what they call those colors, you know?
Speaker 2: Pastel?
Speaker 1: Pastel colors.  They, they was nice.  The grounds were green, you know, and they had the--each, each section of houses had a warehouse for you to store stuff.  And it was just, it was beautiful.  It was, it was, and it was brand new; it was new.
Speaker 2: Now these are the projects that--
Speaker 1: Pra- yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, we often interview people.  The talk about the whole spirit of the projects in those days was for people to, to move up, right, to, to--
Speaker 1: Right, right, it was--yeah, it was, it was elevating (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was federally assisted housing--
Speaker 1: Housing.
Speaker 2: --really was, the aim was for you to move up.
Speaker 1: Now I don't think this was federally assisted though.  This was owned by private, 'cause I never get--'cause the name of the company was Goodman Segar and Hogan [Goodman Segar Hogan Hoffler LP].  They owned it.  But it was, it was like a development, because what had happened was--
Speaker 2: Okay, so it wasn't the projects.  It was like a housing--
Speaker 1: It was a project (laughter).  You call it what you want.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your housing development.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was subsidized hou- what it was--
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't subsidized (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it was not subsidized so--
Speaker 1: --not subsidized.
Speaker 2: Yeah, typically, a project is subsidized, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, no, okay, then.
Speaker 2: --so this is a development--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --low income development--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that, that some private (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because what had happened, right adjacent to this development, the first group was homes.  The homes were like about twelve thousand dollars, and it was may, may, maybe two hundred and something.  These were the first black development out there for, for blacks.  And after they, after they finished those, then they built--they, this developer, he didn't build the homes, but he came along and built maybe just like three hundred unit, you know, I call it projects 'cause the houses were connected, you know, like it was--and then they had one level of four apartments connected like a row.  And then they would have an apartment building, which had like sixteen units, and that was scattered throughout this particular area.  But it, it was just so nice.  The rent was forty-eight dollars--never forget that either--forty-eight dollars a month, and gave us, you know, all the floors were hard tile and concrete walls, I mean, yeah, cinderblock walls.  But it was like, it was, that was living.  I mean, you could sleep with your door open at night.  It was funny, man--and never, ever thought about anything like that.  And it was just a community.  And when I went to the elementary school, the lady [Ms. Williams (ph.)] had closed the school.  And I gave them my report card, and she had closed the school.  They couldn't get in touch with--they wouldn't get in touch with her--and they would not let me go to the fifth grade because I was only eight years old.
Story_ID: 622441
Speaker 1: --Name of the elementary school you, you started at (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Oakwood Elementary School [Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Oakwood, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I was in the third grade.  And that's when I think the, the, the mischievous aspect of what I was doing came into play, because going to Oakwood, and they put me in the third grade, and, and I thought just the things that they were doing in the classroom were so elementary.  I mean, they--I, I, I don't forget because they were spelling the months of the year.  And I'm saying, "My god, is that as far as y'all come in the third grade?  You're just (laughter) spelling?"  And they had--I, I remember 'cause nobody could spell August.  They couldn't spell August (laughter), so I had--and that was so funny to me.  I said, what is--August and February they couldn't spell.  You know what I'm saying?  And I'm saying, "Dog," and this is the third grade.  Well, they began to give me assignments, and when we did our work, I finished my work quickly, so I had nothing to do.  So I would be sitting there, you know, and I might make a face at somebody (laughter), start bugging, you know, which was not the right thing to do, but that's, you know, you, that's what you start doing.  So then, after, the kids started taking to me because they thought I was smart.  You know what I'm saying?  So, you know, you go to the third, fourth, and fifth grade, and the kids began to, to, to know how you stand out in the classroom.  And they started coming to me and asking me questions, 'cause the teacher didn't always explain it to them, and the teacher started getting angry with me.  I said, "Well, I'm not--they're coming to me asking me."  "Well, you don't let--you don't answer; you tell them to go to the teacher," you know.  And that's when the, the rift started with the teachers.  Man, it was like, it was really funny; it was really funny.  And, because the principal of the school was--I, I'll never forget that, because the principal loved me because I was an example for him.  He used to take me to all the classes, Mr. Hughes, never forget him; he used to take me around to all the classes and tell them how good a student I was.  And, and every year when they, when they elect a student principal for the day, I was always the student.  And you know, it was, was just, it was, it was, it--I, I think learning to me, even though I was in a black school, I think the nurture and, and the way that the black teachers treated you too, whites don't know this.  They, they, they, they had better equipment, better books, more up-to-date books.  But as far as like the nurture and development of the child, the, the white school could not touch, come, come nowhere near the, the, the interest and the care.  I mean, people talk about--I hear a lot of people talk about it now, you know, the, the cliche it takes a village to--man, this was real in those days.  You know, you, if you did something on the way home, by the time you got home, your parents knew.  Somebody had let them know.  And if, if they, if, if your parents thought you thought about saying something out of the way to a, a person older than you, you were, you were in big problems, big trouble.  And you never were right when it came to an adult; you were wrong.  People don't like that now, but it was something that was instilled in you about respect.  And, and you know, sometimes like, you know, I think about now, it wasn't fair to the child, but it taught him a, a, a sincere lesson that he needs to learn.  And that's what that, that, that respect thing, you know, where you, you don't, you don't dispute or talk back or--to an, an adult.  You know what I'm saying?  And I learned, I learned, I had been taught well and understood that, you know, I, I could never think of saying, "No," or, "yes," to an adult.  It was, "No sir," or, "yes sir."  And you na- you, you know, you didn't, you didn't second-guess yourself.
Story_ID: 622442
Speaker 1: And so, though, so in that environment, I began to want to excel.  You know, I remember that when I was in the fifth grade [at Oakwood Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia], fifth grade--no, that was, had to be the fourth grade.  Fifth grade was Ms. Bridges [ph.].  Sixth grade was Miss Brown [ph.]. Had Miss Brown's class.  I was in the sixth grade, and the principal [Mr. Hughes] brought this young man around to the class.  You're talking about my memory, man, I got, I got a serious memory.  He brought this young boy around to the class.  He was like ten or eleven years old.  So he went to the board, the principal did, and wrote a number on there and had like, (makes sound) maybe nine zeroes, maybe fifteen zeroes behind it.  He told the young boy to read it, and the guy read it.  And I was like, "Whoa" (laughter), you know, like--I went home that night; I said, "Oh no, I ain't gonna let this go," and like, and I, I, and, and I just thought about it.  And, and 'til this day I still think about that, thousands, hundreds, millions, billions, trillions, quadrillion, quintillion, sextillion, septillion, octillion, nonillion, decillion, duodecillion, tredecillion, quattuordecillion, quindecillion, sexdecillion, octodecillion, nondecillion [sic. novemdecillion], vigintillion.  That's as high as you can go.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and I wanted to learn that.  I said, "Oh no, he'll never come in here again and do that to me."  I mean, I was like, you know, and I still remember those, those numbers.  You think about that.  You know what I'm saying?  And--
Speaker 2: So I noticed you didn't say gazillion, which is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, yeah, ain't no gazillion, yeah.
Speaker 2: --what a lot of kids say now after--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a gazillion, a gazillion.
Speaker 2: --a hundred thousand (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --a gazillion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, vigintillion is as high as you can go.  I ain't never heard that before.  But I went home and practiced that, 'cause I, I didn't like the fact that he came to my classroom, man, and the principal was showing him off.  See, that, and that was like, was like a, a good kind of comp- competition things, you know; it wasn't just in math or science.  I mean, I know there was a lot of kids that were still smarter than me, 'cause I had a friend name Dwight Rawls [ph.] who was in my class.  He was the best math guy.  I mean, I just could not--he couldn't write (laughter), he couldn't write, you know, but when it come to those numbers, he knew the math.
Story_ID: 622443
Speaker 1: And teachers encouraged that stuff.  I, I, I think about my elementary school [Oakwood Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] 'cause I don't remember any black children that were actually flunking.  There were some that was bad, either had no parent, or they were in an orphanage.  You know what I'm saying?  And you, you had to deal with that 'cause they had a different attitude, you know, about things.  But there was always only maybe one or two, only, not in your class, in the whole school that was like--because when you did stuff that was disrespectful of people or, or you get into fights and stuff, that was bad, real bad.  And you didn't, you didn't--
Speaker 2: That was the exception.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the exception to the rule. Yeah.  And it, it was amazing, man, because--and I think about how, how that base--because the foundation is very important to the way, you know, the way you, you, the rest of your life goes.  That, that was just, it was, it was just too much, too many people that were watching you for you to, for you to actually fail.  Yeah, if you fail it was 'cause you wanted to fail, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it seems that today, as we sit here, classroom order and discipline is the number one problem at the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --public schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's what it's all about.
Speaker 2: --in the inner city--
Speaker 1: You can't teach them lessons.  You're too busy to- disciplining them, you know.  So, that was, that, that was what, you know, my, my childhood was like until, 'til the integration thing came along.
Story_ID: 622444
Speaker 1: In your book ['The Norfolk 17: A Personal Narrative on Desegregation in Norfolk, Virginia in 1958 - 1962,' Andrew I. Heidelberg] you state that you came, were coming home late.  I guess you were in the eighth grade, and you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were coming home late.  And you were trying to figure out what you were gonna say, and there was a meeting at your house, right?
Speaker 2: What, what--my dad got out from the base [Naval Station Norfolk, Norfolk, Virginia]; he got home about--he got off at 5:00.  He got home about 5:30.  And, and there was a standing rule.  We eat dinner together every day, no matter what it is, you know, what I'm saying?  We ate dinner at 5:30 when my dad got home, and he did not play.  When he got there, he was hungry, and my dad loves to eat, and he didn't want to wait.  He didn't play that.  And so, the rule was you gotta be home when your dad get here.  It was, that was cool in the wintertime 'cause it got dark.  You know what I'm saying?  But in the summertime, the sun stays up 'til like 8:30.  In the South, you, you know, at 8:30 it's still bright outside.  And you're apt to forget, playing, you know, because I was like a kid that played everything.  I played football, baseball, basketball, marbles; you name it, I played.  I even played bob jacks against the girls, bolo bat.  I had a bolo bat.  I'm not joking.  I mean, I, I, I won more marbles than any kid in the entire neighborhood.  I beat them all.  I had a--my dad had a, a bowl that was like, had to be like this big and like this deep, and it was full of marbles.  I mean they, they were serious matches, like, just like (laughter), you know, like Super Bowls.  I mean, I played against guys from across town.  They were, they were sending them out there to play me.
Speaker 1: And they were for all the marbles.
Speaker 2: All the marbles, it was for all the marbles.  Man, I had my shooters.  You know what I'm saying?  And don't touch my shooters, man, you know.  And we used to play the games, man, and it was like, that's what I did.  So, but no matter what I was doing, I had to be home at 5:30.  So, and I would, I would be late like maybe--let me see--like once or, I'm gonna say may- maybe three times in a month, so I got three months, maybe ten times during the summer.  But in the ten times during the summer, depended on what mood my dad was in if--because you could get a beating.  It weren't a, it weren't about you disobey me.  You, you got a beating 'cause you first--it ain't about--it's about "You disobeyed me.  I told you to be home at 5:30.  I don't want to hear the reason why you're not there.  You disobeyed me."  Okay. So that was, that was critical that you be there.  And of course, I was always like this close to being late, you know.  And that's the way I learned how to pray (laughter).  You learn that quick, you know; I'd be praying.  And I noticed--I tell people this, they laugh.  Whenever I played a game and I knew it was near 5:30 and I just kept playing, say okay, let me just play this, a couple more plays, I always got a beating, always.  Now if I was ever playing a game, and I was so involved in the game that I just forgot about it, when I prayed I never ever got beating.  Isn't that amazing?  But when I--
Speaker 1: So your intention was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, it was all based on my intention.  So this particular day I was playing, and I remember my boy said to me, say, "Berg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], what time is it?"  I said, "Oh no," so I asked my friend.  I said, "What time?"  He said, "Oh, man, Colonal [Colonal M. Heidelberg] gonna be waiting for your butt today."  So I said, "Oh, Lord."  He said, "It's a quarter to six."  I said, "Oh, Lord."  I just, I had like--and, and didn't any time to say goodbye; (makes sound) I was gone, you know.  And so I had to run maybe about a little over a quarter mile from the, from the playground to my home, and boy, I could smoke it.  I mean, you be cutting through the house, through the apartments; I be running.  And so that day I, you know, I, it was unintentional.  So I'm praying, "Lord, please, Lord."  'Cause my daddy, see, we--people don't understand that my daddy would beat you.  He didn't play with beatings.  I mean he beat you like, minute, two minutes, but baby, he tore your butt up.
Speaker 1: Would he use a belt or his--
Speaker 2: A belt, he used a belt.  And you know what he'd say?  "Take my clothes off.  I'm not gonna beat up my clothes" (laughter).  He wanted them legs (laughter); he wanted them legs, man.  So, it, it was serious.  You know, you, you didn't want a beating, 'cause he, he didn't play that.
Story_ID: 622445
Speaker 1: So, I'm praying all the way, and I get home.  But the first thing I noticed was there was three cars in front of my apartment at the curb.  Now in, in the projects, there wasn't a--you knew everybody who had a car.  Yeah, that's how it was, so I knew something was going on.  So now, I slowed down and I got to the door.  And, and I opened the door and there was these three people in there, was a man and two ladies.  And the minute--my immediate thing was to give thanks, "Thank you, Lord" (laughter), 'cause you know that you're not gonna get a beating if--in front of nobody.  My daddy [Colonal M. Heidelberg] didn't--unless you were just, did something terrible in front of--you won't get no beatings in front of people.  So, in my mind it was cool; I'm, I'm, I'm safe.  So, and they--and my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] said, "Well, here's my son," you know, "talk to him."  So the lady from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] started saying, "Well, son, you, you've heard about the, the, the situation going on in Little Rock, Arkansas, with the, the, the colored children integrating the schools."  And, and I said, "Well, yeah, you know, I've heard something like that on TV; I saw it," you know.  So she said, "Well, the [U.S.] Supreme Court has passed this law that, you know, that, that all the schools must desegregate.  Separate and equal is not--," so, you know, whatever she was saying.  So I said, "Yeah," well, you know, I heard about it.  I didn't really know about it, you know.  So she said, "Well, what we've done is we are, we're going around to all of the, the, the black neighborhoods to, to try to get children to sign up so that we can test the law here in Virginia."  So I said, "Yeah, yeah."  She said, "And we were wondering if you would like to sign up and be one of the kids to, you know, to integrate the school."  I said, "Well," I'm thinking.  I never was really dumb.  I said, now, I done got out of this beating.  I can say yes (laughter), and my parents were--I know out of the beat- I'm out of the beating, right.  Or, I could say no and maybe not look so good in front of my parents, and I still might get that beating.  You know what I'm saying?  So I said this gotta be a win-win.  I say, I'm gonna say yes, because first of all, see--and, and I think people forget stuff like that.  In the days when I grew up as a black kid in a black neighborhood, there was no such thing as black kids going to school with white kids.  I don't care what you tell me.  I don't care what's happening in Little Rock.  This is Norfolk [Virginia]. (Shakes head) Black kids do not go to school with white kids, period.  So, I feel, like I said, that was a win-win.  I said, "Sure," said it just like that, "I'll be glad to go" (laughter).  And the--you should have seen the smile come on (laughter) my mother and father's face, like they were so proud.  So they say, the people say, "Oh, thank you so much," and the, the people were elated, right.  Because I don't know what kind of responses they had been getting from, from children, you know.  So they said, "Well, okay, well, thank you so much; we'll get, we'll get back to you."  So, you know, I walked.  I said, "All right, thank you," and I went on back to my room.  I got in the room, I go, yes (laughter), you know, like, I'm not even really thinking about what I said, and, and it didn't matter to me.  And so, you know, but, you know, after the people left, you know, my mom come in there and she goes, "That was so nice; you made me so proud."  And you know, want to hug, and I'm going, "Whoa, mama, come on" (laughter), you know, like, you know how you do.  She said, "That was good.  Do you realize you're gonna be a hero?"  I said, "Yeah, yes, ma'am, okay, okay."  And I--it really didn't mean squat to me.  The only thing I'm thinking about was that beating.  That's the only thing (laughter) was on my mind.
Story_ID: 622446
Speaker 1: And I really like, forgot about it.  And I think like it was like, I mean, months later, you know, when my mom [Lena King Heidelberg] came to me and said, "Well--," 'cause they were fighting I guess legal battles here still in Norfolk, you know.  And it hadn't gotten to people, hadn't got them all or whatever they wanted.  But, anyway, they came back and said, "Well, you know, what we're gonna have to do is--," this is the following year in '58 [1958].  They had signed up like 151 students.  So, they said, "You gotta take these tests."  I said--so my mama came to me and said, "Well, you know you signed up, and I called--Ms. Vivien Butts [sic.] called and said that y'all got to go downtown and take some tests."  I said, "Take some tests for what?"  She said, "You, don't you remember you signed up to go to the white school?"  I said, "Me?" (Laughter) She say, "You, boy."  I said, "That was last year" (laughter).  She said, "Yeah."  She said, "Well, now they say they are ready to go, and they, they want do--test all the kids that signed up."
Speaker 2: Now, now who is Ms. Vivien Butts?  Who is she?
Speaker 1: She was one of the neighborhood ladies that, you know, like, just like you said when the people--what's his name, Johns--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Virgil Johns [sic. Vernon Johns] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) got--yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people like that.  She just worked in the neighborhood.  She was, she was a local lady.
Speaker 2: So she was a local activist--
Speaker 1: Activist, that's right--
Speaker 2: --with--
Speaker 1: --that's right--
Speaker 2: Was she with--
Speaker 1: --local--
Speaker 2: --the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --or was she--
Speaker 1: --with the NAACP--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah.  In fact, they got a street over there named after her in that section now called Vivien Butts Street--Road [sic. Evelyn T. Butts Avenue].
Speaker 2: So it's Butts, B-U-T-T-S (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) T-T-S.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Evelyn Butts [Evelyn T. Butts].  Did I say Vivien?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Evelyn.
Speaker 2: It's Evelyn, Evelyn Butts.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Evelyn Butts.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because she did something with respect to getting rid of the poll tax later in Norfolk, Virginia, that's why they named the street after her.  She was just a pure activist, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: So, you know, and my--
Speaker 2: So that, at that point in your life though, I'm just thinking, so, you're a kid; you're not really--you know something about the desegregation that's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --going on, but you're not really focused on that that much.
Speaker 1: At all.  I--
Speaker 2: And you didn't think it would ever happen in--
Speaker 1: I knew it wouldn't happen (laughter).  And I think I wouldn't have played the card if I thought it was gonna happen.  I knew that it wouldn't happen, yes.
Speaker 2: And the, the story of Barbara Johns we just mentioned--
Speaker 1: I never knew about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Barbara Johns--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was just like a pioneer in--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --was in Farmville [Virginia], right?
Speaker 1: She was in Farmville.
Speaker 2: And she--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --tried to integrate the schools as a student.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't, I don't think she tried so much to integrate the schools, that she was fighting for better conditions--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the black schools--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --see I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That, that was the thing that she was fighting for.  She did not--she, she, she led the protest to not go to school until they fixed the conditions, you know, in the school.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. It, it was a strike.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, yeah, it was a strike--
Speaker 2: Now that I remember--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was a strike.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a strike.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and that's some of the things that we talk about, which we'll probably talk about later now, just let you know what, how I think about some of those things.
Story_ID: 622447
Speaker 1: At that time was when I began to think about white people, because like I said, I, I never--I mean I lived out there in that section [of Norfolk, Virginia].  And, and see, one of the things that I think whites used to think, and I'm, and I could be wrong, but this is what I used to think, I used to think that whites thought that that was really the only thing on blacks' mind was how they could mix with whites.  I never thought about white people.  You know, I went to a black school, lived in a black neighborhood.  When, now the movie theater, which was like about eight miles on the other side of town, when I had to go to the movie, I got on the bus or thumbed a ride, got to the white section, went to the movie, thumbed back, and it was a black movie.  So, I never at all thought about white people.  I guess we lived, we lived within the boundaries of, of, of what segregation allowed us to live in.   But, I don't know about my, what my parents [Lena King Heidelberg and Colonal M. Heidelberg] were thinking, but I was as much a normal kid as I thought that was normal life.  You know, you had your restrictions, but that was normal, so you didn't step outside of it.  The, the, the only times that I thought about whites was like, there was a street that came through Chesapeake Manor [Norfolk, Virginia] called Sewells Point Road.  It was a main strip, and it went all the way out to the ocean.  And whenever the white kids came through, they used to throw pee on us, you know.  They would take a bag or a cup, and you, you go by, you'd be walking down the street, they'd go, "Hey, nigger," and they'd throw the pee at you or throw it on you, you know, or throw rocks at you, but they, see, they keep going.  And, and, and so sometimes you, you were lucky to have a rock at the time they came through, and you would throw the rock.  You know, but they were not gonna get out of the car, because they were in a black neighborhood, even though that main street went through.  So that was really the only time white people came to my mind at all, you know.  They had also built another shopping center.  This is the first time when shopping centers came about.  I think that was in 19--could have been '60 [1960] or '59 [1959] or something that we got a shopping center. It was an outdoor shopping center.  They didn't have malls; they're outdoor shopping centers.  And we couldn't go over into the shopping center.  We had so much trouble.  You know, when we go over there, we go over there and when--and first of all, none of the merchants wanted you in their stores.  And you usually end up running back 'cause some white guys, teenagers, would come through there and chase you back, you know, so.  But we lived right across the street, so we could run across the street, and we were into like a wooded area, and they wouldn't come there.  So there was no, you know, we never thought about white people.  But I think--
Speaker 2: Except in this adversarial--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --antagonistic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's the only time--
Speaker 2: --thing on the fringe of this.
Speaker 1: Exactly, that's the only time I thought about it.
Story_ID: 622448
Speaker 1: They made us take all these tests.  I mean, I think we take like three or four tests or you know, and, and it was ridiculous, man.  I'm saying, "Why do they--," 'cause I remember asking my mother [Lena King Heidelberg], "Why are we taking all these tests?"  Well, you know, she said, "Well, they want to see if you're good enough to go to school with the white kids."  I said, "What do you mean if I'm good enough to go to," you know.  But, that's the way it was, so we took the tests.  And that whole summer, you know, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--I guess the first time that we took the tests, 151 of us, they rejected--this is amazing.  Virginia rejected every single one of us.
Speaker 2: These are the black students that applied--
Speaker 1: Black students that applied (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for admission?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  So then when they came back, the judge said because the [U.S.] Supreme Court had said, "You got to desegregate.  I don't care; you, that's not your choice; you have to do it."  So the judge said to them, said, told the white school board and the governor and all them, "You can go back, you have to go back now, but you need to come up with some names of some people that passed," right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is almost like the voter registration tests.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So they--you gotta pass a test before you can--
Speaker 1: Pass test, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --go to school--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --at a white school or--
Speaker 1: I'm gonna show you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because we had to do an interview too.  I'm gonna show you the interview.  I got a copy of the original interview that I did with the school board [School Board of the City of Norfolk], okay.  But the thing about it was, after we took the test, after, after we did not, none of us qualified, they came back and said, "Okay, we have seventeen kids that qualified."  That's, that's a lot. Now, that, that's what like blew me away.  I said, "Seventeen, seventeen out of 150?"  And see, the point--at that point, I knew--I mean I didn't know all of the 151 kids 'cause they were from all over the city, but there was at least twenty or thirty that were from my area, right.  Even though I didn't know them, I had seen them in class, and you know how you know certain things.  They were, some of them were smart.  Look, some of them were smarter than me, I could tell you; some of them were smarter than a whole lot of the seventeen of us; some of them were just as smart.  And out of all of that, out of the hundred and, out of 151 you come up with us?  I said--that didn't sound right to me even then.  And, and people used to laugh at me because I said I could tell you exactly how they picked the seventeen.  They took all the kids with the funny names. Heidelberg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I said to people, how many Heidelbergs do you actually know? Said--I mean, you were like that.  Say, you were the first person.  You might--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --you might know, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I only know one, one other or two other black families I've ever heard--
Speaker 1: That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: --named Heidelberg.
Speaker 1: And there was Patricia Godbolt [Patricia Godbolt White]; that was her name.  Godbolt, I ain't even ever heard that name before.  There was two sisters, Claudia [Claudia Wellington] and Carol Wellington.  I don't know no other Wellingtons.  There was Louis Cousins.  Cousins?  There was a Olivia Driver [Olivia Driver Lindsay].  There was Lolita Portis [Lolita Portis Jones], right.  There was Reginald Young.  That's a nice Jewish name for Young, Reginald Young or Chinese name, you know, Young.  Then they did give us a few--no, then there was, I'd tell people, Johnnie Rouse.  That was a girl.  (Laughter) That wasn't a guy; that was a girl, Johnnie Rouse.  And then there was the girl, Betty Jean Reed [Betty Jean Reed Kea].  Now, like I tell people, I don't know any black girls named Betty Jean, but I know a whole lot of white girls named Betty Jean.  I had never--when I--I said, "Betty Jean?"  You know, that sounds like Billy Jean, you know, like, those, those were typical to me white names.  Then they, they threw in a few that I consider normal, like there was Delores Johnson [Delores Johnson Brown], and that to me was like that could be a black person.  And there was [HistoryMaker] Patricia Turner and her, and her brother, Skip, whose name was James Turner [James Turner, Jr.].  You know what I'm saying? Because the other girl LaVera Forbes--
Speaker 2: What's the name that starts with a G that's a really strange--
Speaker 1: Gonsouland.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Alvarez Gonsouland, who was one of my best friends.  And he had a brother that was also one of us, but his name was Jordan, Eddie Jordan [Edward Jordan].  That was cool, so, you know.  And then we had this young lady named Geraldine Talley [Geraldine Talley Hobby], you know.  So, all of the names were odd.  But even more than that to me, when I look at the cover of my book, there was only like about four people who were dark complexion like me.  All the rest of us were like light skinned.
Speaker 2: So color was a consideration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I, that's what I thought.  So, I didn't know what the intent was, other than to give the impression to the world and to pictures that might be taken that there are no colored students. You know, like, really, I mean that we don't have any black kids in our school.  I mean, why else would it come out like that?  I mean that was just so strange.
Speaker 2: So at the record level of looking at the list of names in school, nobody could recognize which ones--
Speaker 1: No, you couldn't, you couldn't tell, not by, the names you couldn't tell; you could not tell.
Story_ID: 622449
Speaker 1: And that was that, you know--and all of the things that, I mean the, the types of tests that they took.  Remember when I was telling you about how I used to like--the things I used to do in elementary school [Oakwood Elementary School, Norfolk, Virginia] in front of teachers?  Now I really never knew that they kept records on kids like that in, in elementary school until when they said that we had to have the personal interview with the school board [School Board of the City of Norfolk] first.  That was the last thing they'd do, was the interview.  And, and, and the, the, the, whoever was in--the gentleman that was leading--it was like about five men in a room.  I don't remember who they were, but they were all on the school board.  And that guy says, "I'm reading here on your record" (laughter)--so my record, I said, "I'd never been to jail, right?" I'm thinking.  He said, "When you were in the fifth grade and Miss Brown [ph.], your teacher--." I said, "Oh, Lord." "Says that you like to be first in everything you do, and would always want to win."  I said, "My god, why (laughter), what is this all about?"  So, he said, "Well, I just want to tell you now, when you get to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], you're not gonna be first, and, and I would suggest that you don't win all the time.  You let the white kids win if you want to have some friends."  I said, "Whoa!"
Story_ID: 622450
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard some bad white counselor stories, but this is the, probably the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) worst I've ever heard.  Before you could get started they tell you you're not, you don't succeed--
Speaker 2: Yeah, don't even think about it.
Speaker 1: --and stay back a little bit, don't, don't try to out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --outdo anybody.
Speaker 2: "If you want to have friends, let them win."  You know, and the, the, the, the, the ending to the story was after we finished interviewing, we got outside and so we were walking across the street.  So my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] turned to me and said, "Let me tell you one thing, boy, if I ever hear of you letting anybody beat you doing anything up there [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], I'll beat your hind parts myself."  (Laughter) I said, "Yes, ma'am" (laughter).  That was, that was all I needed.  You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay, so we had--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --different--
Speaker 2: Yeah, different, yeah.  She, I mean, you know, my mother was, she was like that.
Story_ID: 622451
Speaker 1: So, you know, they did all of these things.  And, and after they did the testing, and, and what came, came about was, so the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] said, "Okay, we got them ready to go to school."  So, now the summer is just about over, and we're ready to go to school in September.  And we get ready to go to school and then all of a sudden it comes, you're not going to school.  The governor [J. Lindsay Almond] closed the schools.  Look, I turned to my mother [Lena King Heidelberg].  I said, "See, what I tell you?  Black people don't go to school with white people.  Y'all could say what y'all want to say.  I told y'all that they didn't" (laughter).  She said, "Boy, shut up" (laughter), you know, say--I said, "I'm telling you, this is Virginia.  Black people don't--," now I says, "I know."  I mean, it was just, it was, it was as farfetched say- saying that as it was at that particular time: "Look, Larry [Larry Crowe], meet me tomorrow on the moon, and, and we're gonna have some coffee."  You know what I'm saying?  All right, yeah, okay (laughter), I'll meet you on the moon.  That's what it sound like when you said go to school with white kids.  I mean, it, it just didn't happen.  There was no such thing.  So, I really didn't know, so I thought that was my out.  I thought that was my break.  Oh, boy, now I can go back to the black school.  'Cause I had already dream, always dreamed of going to, to Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia], you know, and, and I was gonna be this great football player.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And I was gonna have all these girls.
Speaker 2: Now was--how, how, how, how many black high schools were, were there in Norfolk [Virginia]?
Speaker 1: One.
Speaker 2: One, okay.
Speaker 1: Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's where my brother [Kenneth Heidelberg] went, my mother went, and her mother [Georgia King] went (laughter), see?
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: So that was a tradition.  All, all--every child, you know, thought about going, black child, thought about going to Booker T.  There was only--and all of the neighborhoods that were surrounding us, with Portsmouth [Virginia] was right across the tunnel, they had one black school, which was I.C. Norcom [I.C. Norcom High School].  Newport News [Virginia] had Huntington [Collis P. Huntington High School].
Speaker 2: Right, that's the one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Huntington High School--
Speaker 2: I have to tell you about that during the break.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Hampton [Virginia] had Phoebus, not Phoebus.  What was their school?  Phenix [George P. Phenix High School], they had Phenix and Carver [George Washington Carver High School].  Carver was in Newport News too.  It had Carver, Newport News, and a Carver--I mean and Huntington, was, was there.  And so, so, I think they had one in Suffolk [Virginia], or might have been John Yeates [John Yeates High School; John Yeates Middle School, Suffolk, Virginia] or something like that.  I mean, all, all of the area cities had one black high school.  Now the whites, like in Norview--in Norfolk, there were three:  it was Norview [Norview High School]; there was Granby [Granby High School, Norfolk, Virginia]; and there was Maury [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  They had three high schools.  So, all my dreams were, had been crushed.  So I'm thinking we gonna go back to, to black school, and I remember asking my mother, "Well, why can't we go back to the, to the black school since, you know, they closed it down?"  Now, and people don't realize they closed, they--to prevent seventeen black students from going to the schools, they closed up three--I mean six schools in Norfolk that kept ten thousand students out of school.
Speaker 2: That's, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna show you somebody--
Speaker 2: --that's unbelievable.
Speaker 1: I got to the tapes--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: --from, from, from, from some of the--when you listen to what some of the parents said.  "My son is not in school, but if he has to do that to preserve the tradition of the South, then so well; let him, let him suffer that out."
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) those are--this is the, where Southern tradition begins--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Right around here.  This is the--
Speaker 1: This is it.
Speaker 2: This is it.
Speaker 1: This is the place.  So they, they didn't want to change.  They didn't want to change that at all.  But what amazed me at that time was how--because the, the NAACP told us, "Well, you know, you guys cannot go and register in the black schools, because if you do that, then the white schools will reopen, and they will not let you transfer.  And they will have complied with the law."  You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Okay, so they were forced to accept you, but to keep from you going to school, the governor closed the school.
Speaker 1: He closed them down.
Speaker 2: So you were officially accepted, but you couldn't go because of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, officially accepted.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 622452
Speaker 1: So that's when I--and, and you can also tell the difference between the time, because I'm still in awe as to how quickly the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] got together and opened a school for the blacks.  Man, it was like, before--I think it took them like two weeks, about two weeks.  They had set up a school for us in the basement of First Baptist Church, Bute Street [Norfolk, Virginia], right.  And, and we had teachers; we had a principal, a superintendent (laughter) of schools.  This, this stuff freaks me out still today.  We had a superintendent of the schools; we had a principal, and we had like seven or eight teachers all in place.  And I'm saying--and I remember the first day that we went, 'cause I, you know, you don't--you're trying to imagine what it, what, what is really going on here?  This is what I was thinking: what--I'm going over here, which was, the, the school was about eight miles from where we lived too.  That was like cross, cross town too, in the black area.  And, and the first day that I went in there, you know, and I'll never forget 'cause I was late.  (Laughter) I was late getting there.  All the other sixteen kids were there.  And, and as I came in the door, the, the, Mrs. Vivian Carter Mason said, "Well, and here's Mr. Heidelberg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]" (laughter).  She says, "I certainly hope that he's not gonna be late when he gets to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]" (laughter).  And so, I mean, they were introducing--and then, and, and, and I didn't know whether this was really real or whether it's--what kind of--what is this?  What is this all about, school?  And, and so we spent that day talking, and, and, and she was telling us about what was happening with the law and what, why they set up the school and what they're gonna do, and you know, all of the grades 'cause you know--
Speaker 2: Now, now, was there an attempt to prepare the seventeen for desegregation even before they closed the school? 'Cause did the NAACP like, sit you all down and try to give you some--
Speaker 1: No, well, we--
Speaker 2: --guidelines (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) we had had some meetings about what kind of conduct they expected us to exhibit, you know, like, well, you know, "We really don't want you to fight; you know, we like for you to try to avoid hostile people 'cause they're gonna call you names, and, and you just keep your head and eyes forward and, and, and just don't give in to it," and you know.  But I don't know if that was really that good.  I mean, I, I think from their perspective, they were doing what they thought, you know, should be done.  But I don't know if, if we were--well, I cannot, can't speak for the rest of the children; I can only speak for myself.  I don't know if I was really listening.  I'm, I'm--my mind reflected back on Emmett Till.  Emmett Till was big in my mind because he was the same age as me when they killed him '55 [1955].  I, I never, ever forget that.  And I saw the picture of him in the Jet magazine, and I kept saying to myself, I mean, I--first of all, I didn't even recognize his head as being anything human.  And I'm saying to myself, you mean they did this to this guy, my age, because he said, Hey, baby," or he whistled?  I don't know what he did, whistled or said, "Hey, baby."  This is what they did to him?  I mean, to me that was like, whoa; that was a message, which I think was what they were trying to do.  Well, the message got through to me, because that was all I could think of, was this is what they're gonna do to me, all right.  And so, what the NAACP was saying to me didn't make since.  See, I don't know how the other sixteen felt.  See, I was not a Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] type of guy.  I was a Malcolm X man.  I don't want to hear nothing about, "Don't fight back."  You hit me, I'm gonna hit you back.  And, and that Martin--I'm serious--that, that Martin Luther King stuff didn't go to first base with me.  In fact, I didn't like Martin Luther King.  I can tell you straight out I didn't like him because I thought he did not exhibit--and I think that's how it is with every younger generation.  There is no wait for a while, you know; it's we want it now.  And I, and I always thought that, that, that kind of stuff does not get you--if you want it now, that, that's not gonna get it for you now.  I mean, I can look back now and say Martin Luther King's way was the best.  It, it, ain't no, ain't no question about it.  It's au- it is without a doubt the best way to go.  However, you must realize the only bad aspect of it is it takes time; it doesn't happen today.
Story_ID: 622453
Speaker 1: Now, you have a trepidation about going because of what happened to Emmett Till.  Did, did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] make any guarantees to you or your parents about your safety [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]?  Were, were they, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they would say things like, you know, "We're gonna do everything that we can to make sure you are safe."  You know what I'm saying?  But I'm, you know, I'm thinking about, you know, just like the way that my dad [Colonal M. Heidelberg] took it and my mother [Lena King Heidelberg].  I, I don't think inside they took it as casual as they, as the way they talked to us about it because I don't think they wanted us to fear.  You know, they wanted us to, to kind of look at it, I think, as: if you're doing the right thing, and God is with you--you know 'cause my people were God fearing--nothing's gonna happen to you.  And I, and I, I understand that now (laughter).  I didn't understand that then.  You know what I'm saying?  You know, 'cause when it, when it comes to young people to me, I think the way that I grew up, God is only as big as my mother and father.  I mean, now you might be talking something that you know (laughter), you know.  I only know God as big as my mother and father, and which was good.  But I also knew that they were human, that something could happen to me before they get to me.  This is the way I always looked at it, when you--when they tell me, "Don't worry, you go up there and don't worry."  Well, hell, by the time you get me I could be dead.  You know, I know you'll come for me, you know.  And that's basically the way that I looked at it.  So the fear, you know, it, it, it was like, it was, it was much like I think young men do like--I always felt like when I grew up in the time that I grew up, you could always fight for what you wanted, lose and come back another day and fight again.  That's why it makes sent- it made sense to me.  That's, that's how life made sense to me.  But, but this was a situation where, like when I look at Emmett, (shakes head) you can't come back another day--you know what I'm saying--as they way like I compare it to today.  You can't teach your kid to fight now, because that fight might be his last fight, even if it's with black people.  It don't have to be with somebody who's, you know.  You know, it could be 'cause you stepped on somebody's shoes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is profound what you're talk, talking like, 'cause that, that is a difference between the social--
Speaker 2: It's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) life--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --then and now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when we grew up we could fight.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I mean your father taught you--
Speaker 1: --fight.
Speaker 2: --to fight. Stand up, you know what I'm saying?  Your only way to get by a bully is to fight him back.  He doesn't want to fight every day he see you, but if you fight him--you know, see, you can't do that now, 'cause you'll die.  They don't even want to hear it (laughter), you what I'm saying?  So, so, that aspect of it made sense to me.  And, and as a young man, I would not express to you fear because I'm, I'm a young man.  I ain't supposed to be scared.  But I could be scared inside.  You know what I'm saying?  The, the real deal is I'm scared inside.
Story_ID: 622454
Speaker 1: So when it came to us going to the school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], I don't think any of us feared it as much as we thought we would until we got in there.  See, 'cause you, you didn't really know.  You know what I'm saying?  You lived in Virginia.  You knew what they did in Alabama and Mississippi and Georgia, how they killed people, but you didn't really think that they hated you here like they hated us in Mississippi until you got there.  See, see, and that was the illusion that we had, because when you got there, holy Jesus.  You know, it was like (crying)--
Speaker 2: Take your time.
Speaker 1: When you got there, it was like--I never knew that people hate--(crying) I never knew that people could hate you so much and, and don't know you.  That, you know, that, that was the thing, because I wasn't a bad guy.  I--that was what I knew; I was not a bad guy.  I don't care whether you're black or white; I was not a bad guy. But they hated us.  I mean like, (makes sound) they hated us.  It was like, there was no fake.  There was no, no, no, no--they hated us.  I mean, and, and, and, and when you, when you, when you got to that school, whatever they were trying to tell you about white people, it was not the same.  It was like, it was, it was, it was the worst thing that any human being could experience in--I mean it, it was, it was, it was terrible; it was, it was terrible.  And, and I, I would, I often think about that, you know, that how--and I, I--and you could see now like, I'm sixty-six years old, and I'm just talking about what happened fifty years, at fifty some years ago.  And the pain, you know, like, it, it's like, when you inflict that time- type of thing on a child, which I consider myself as a child at that time, it never leaves him, ever, ever, ever leaves him.  You know, you, you look at kids today, and you wonder what impact that the bad things have on their life.  Boy, it stays with them; it stays.  And they, and they tried to tell us, you know, "They're gonna call you names," and, and that, you know, like, and I, I still remember, you know, 'cause we had a saying in those days: sticks and stones may break your bones, but words will never hurt you.  That is the biggest lie that anybody could ever tell you, 'cause words hurt bad, man.  They hurt deep.  I would have rather you had hit me in my head with a rock.  The swelling would go down, and my head would stop being sore.  But, but when you, when you, when you take a person I think as a human being, as a natural God part of you that connects you with all other human beings, and when you push it away from me as if I'm not what you are, it hurts.
Story_ID: 622455
Speaker 1: --Mean, you know, you know, you, you wonder why kids--why, why styles take place, as much as every child thinks he's different, if he ain't wearing the same thing somebody else has got, he feels like he's in the wrong place.  You say, if one guy buys a pair of hundred dollar sneakers, and you got on twenty dollar sneakers, you feel out of place, even though you know, your sense tell you, why would I need a hundred dollar pair of sneakers?  But if you step into a room and there's fifty people in there, you're the only one who does not have the hundred dollar sneakers, you feel bad.  I don't care what you try to act like you feel, you know, 'cause the first thing--and kids are cruel.  They go, "Whoa, man, where you get them old whack shoes from?"  That's the first thing they gonna say (laughter), you know what saying?  Now, that doesn't sound like you should respond to that, but that's how (unclear) as human beings, that's basically how--especially the blacks, you know, 'cause I've, I've, I've, I've realized that from, from that--then to now, you know, like I can go over to Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia], where I went back again too in the, in the six--in 2000, graduated in 2001--and I saw all the black kids.  All of them had on Nikes or Timberlands, you know, and stuff like that.  And I could go right across the street to Old Dominion [Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Virginia] with the white kids and ain't nobody over there had the same pair of sneakers on, and didn't care about it.  But that's the way this, the blacks have been brought up.  I don't know who, who initiated that, but whatever it is, it works.  If you don't have--I mean it--you know, you compare the two, coming from--that this, it's a different life.  And, and, and when we got to the high schools, it's like I knew I was black, and I basically did not dress like whites, but I didn't feel bad because I was black and they was white.  I felt bad because I didn't dress like them or talk like them.  You know what I'm saying?  I was a guy who is, is like, who was not a dumb kid.  In fact, I was fairly intelligent, but I had--I lived in a black neighborhood, and I talked lazily.  You know what I'm saying?  And we have our own, you hate to say, Ebonics or whatever the language is, but you got it.  It just like I would say stuff like--it's funny--I would say stuff like--I would come to school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and the guy would see my sneakers.  You know, black guys, they clean their sneakers with, with bleach and Ajax, and them bad boys are white.  And you get to school and white people look at them, 'cause they don't--the only time they're white and bright is when they're new.  After that, they don't wash them and (unclear).  And the guy would look at me and say, "Oh, my god, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], where did you get those bright sneakers from?" (Laughter) You know.  I said, "No, they ain't bright.  I washed them," you know.  "You washed them?  What you wash them with?"  I said, "I washed them with Ajax in the zinc," zinc.  He said, "In the zinc?  What is the zinc?"  (Laughter) Now, black people say zinc.  I didn't even know what the word called sink (laughter).  So he said, "A zinc?"  Now, I went home and looked up the word zinc.  It was a chemical.  (Laughter) You know what I'm saying?  But, I mean, that, that's Ebonics.  You, you, that's the way you talk in the neighborhood.  So what I had to do, to keep from getting teased about the way that I talked, I had to, what's the word, go along, change the way that I talk, because now I'm up here with twenty-five hundred white students.  They don't talk like that.
Speaker 2: Now you had to adapt.
Story_ID: 622456
Speaker 1: Let me go, go back--
Speaker 2: Go (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a minute.  I, I didn't want to stop the flow of what you were saying.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: But I wanted to go back to the closing of Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] and of the high school by--I mean the, the Norfolk [Virginia] high schools by the governor [J. Lindsay Almond].
Speaker 2: Governor, right.
Speaker 1: When did--what had happened to rescind that, that you all actually went to school?  What happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when they closed the--most of the people who were here, the, the, the, the, the, the public, like the [U.S.] military and all these people who had children here, it became a hardship to them because a lot of them were, like I said, in the military.  Their kids were here, and they couldn't a, they could afford it.  But it was a hassle to put them in private school, because Norfolk then set up all private schools.  And their kids started going to those schools, where the people who were, who, who, who did--who were not of substantial means, and even the ones that were of substantial means, because I remember listening to a military captain, I think he was, who was saying, "I have no school to take my kid to.  Now I have to pay this amount of dollars to take my two kids.  That's a substantial amount of income, because the schools are closed."  And the message was getting back to the business community, which, when businesses looked to relocate to places, first thing they think about is what, how the schools are for my kid.  The schools are closed.  You gotta go to private school.
Speaker 1: So this is interesting.  There, there's a third column in the, in the fight now.  You got the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --blacks of Norfolk, the, the whites of Norfolk--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then you got the military--
Speaker 2: Military.
Speaker 1: --which is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the military was the biggest--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --part because General Eisenhower got involved in it on that deal--I mean President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]; he was president at that time--because he was getting the flack from the military about, you know, I got my people here, and they can't go to school.  So, all of that was happening at the same time.  So, this went back and forth because it was--in, in fact, a lot of Virginians don't know that not did those--see, Virginia closed six schools, three high schools and three junior high schools.  We didn't have middle schools then.  They were called junior high.  The fact that they closed those six schools is nothing when you consider, in which I found out this forty years later, the general assembly came within one vote of closing every single school in the state of Virginia, one vote.  Isn't that amazing?  One vote of closing all the schools in Virginia, and this was, this to me was an impact, it was an impact on the economic wellbeing of the city.  And, and, and you find out much later in your life that Norfolk is, is, is, is only over the last, I would say twenty years maybe, beginning to come back because of what the impact and toll from racism takes away from a particular city.  I mean it--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --it just destroys it economically and, and in every other way.
Speaker 1: So, in--and we said this off camera, but in '59 [1959] Norfolk was the largest city in Virginia.
Speaker 2: Largest city, three, over three hundred thousand people.
Story_ID: 622457
Speaker 1: And also, they-it [Virginia] was a democratic state--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a democratic governor.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess you would call them Dixiecrats in those days. But--
Speaker 2: Yep, di- that's right.
Speaker 1: --but the governor was--who, who was the governor in--
Speaker 2: J. Lindsay Almond.
Speaker 1: Almond, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, J. Lindsay Almond.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And they were, and, and, and you know, they had a mayor, a mayor in Norfolk [Virginia], Duckworth [W. Fred Duckworth], who was like, he was just a staunch segregationist.  Now, you probably don't know this, but go check this out, somebody killed Governor Duckworth [sic.]--and to, to this day, they don't know who did it.
Speaker 1: During this period?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right after it, right after it was over, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  See, because he, he was--I'm not gonna get too much into the politics of it 'cause I don't know all the intricacies of how it happened.  But he was, he was so adamant, a staunch racist, and all of a sudden he dies or is killed.  And they--and that was, that was during the time after he had to concede to change his story, once they say--not change his story, but he had to concede to what was--
Speaker 1: To the pressure of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the pressure of opening--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the schools back up.
Speaker 1: You got federal pressure on it--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, big time.  And, and, and I didn't know that his murder is still unsolved.  It's, it's amazing.  I mean, Virginia--
Speaker 1: So, what we're saying too I guess by demon--and, and what his murder demonstrates is that the, the constituents were really--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: -up in arms.  They, they--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --did not want to change.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I mean, there were a lot of, of white families also that fared (background noise) well because--
Story_ID: 622458
Speaker 1: This is nineteen fifty--
Speaker 2: Eight [1958].
Speaker 1: Eight [1958].
Speaker 2: And, yeah, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The pressure is mounting on the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --governor [J. Lindsay Almond] to do something.
Speaker 2: To--yeah.
Speaker 1: The, the mayor, you said Duckworth [W. Fred Duckworth] had to capitulate on some level.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so what, when did they finally open the schools?  They--
Speaker 2: They, they, they, they--in, in Jan- what happened was in January of '59 [1959], the guy, Edward R. Murrow--remember him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: 'You See It Now' [sic. 'See It Now']?
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: He came to Virginia, because it's now mushroomed and much bigger than, as you know, than it was.  And he came to Virginia, and he did a special.  He did a one hour CBS special on, on the school closings here ['The Lost Class of '59'].  And I'll show you a little bit of it.  I got the tape.  And that I think catapulted us to, to the national scene, I mean big time on the national scene, because it, it, you know, it was like '60 Minutes.'  It aired for one hour.  And he did a, he did a very good job of, of portraying what was, what was really happening down here in the South and how it affected the economy, how it affected the [U.S.] military, and how everybody was affected.  And, and from then, President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] got involved, and he said, he ordered them--you know, the [U.S.] Supreme Court said that they had no standing.  They had to open the schools, and, and Eisenhower ordered to them to open the schools.  So they sat a date of, of February the 2nd to open the schools up.  That was the beginning of the second semester of, of the school year.  And so, you know, so that's when I think we got a little more schooling towards what it was gonna be like going to the schools after they had given us a date.  Even my apprehension was beginning to fail then because, you know, after you've gone to the, to this tutoring school [at First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia] that we were in for like, like I said, August, September, October, November, December, January, we had been going there, you know, for like five months, it, it, it was, it was beginning to get a little rough to me because I think what they did was, in their desire to, to assure us of being ready, that tutoring school was the hardest school that I ever went to in my life.  I mean, they would--it was just hard.  It was grueling.  It was, it was, it was like practicing for the Super Bowl.  You know what I'm saying?  You were, you--I knew we were ready.  You know, it's--mentally I mean, to, to do the work of--and, and that was one of the things that the, that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] wanted to, wanted us to shine on, was our academics.  They wanted to make sure that these first seventeen kids that went into the schools exhibit an extraordinary ability to, to, to do the educational work there.
Story_ID: 622459
Speaker 1: Now, what was your first day like?  Can you describe your first day in school?  Now you went to Nor--to Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I, I think about that because the night before, Freddy--I call him Freddy; his name is Alvarez Gonsouland.  Freddy was like a, a year older than me.  But we had played football together on, on the recreation team.  And he was, he--you know, we played together.  We, we--I was, I was a running back, and he was a running back.  But he was bigger than me.  He was like about 160 [pounds], 65, and I was like 135, 40, something like.  And he was older, so he was like one of my idols; you know, I looked up to him.  And, so that evening after we found out that the schools were gonna open that Monday, I, you know, I, I thought about--I said--I called him up, and I didn't want him to think (laughter) that I was afraid, you know.  So I, you know, I called him with the usual stuff.  Like, I said, "Yo, what's up, Freddy?"  He said, "Not much."  I said, "So what we're gonna do tomorrow?  You, you, you, are you going to school?  We going, can we go to school together, you know?"  He said, "Yeah," said, "that's no problem."  I said, "Well, what time you gonna leave?"  He said, "About eight o'clock."  So I said, "Well, you want me to come over there on my way out?"  He said, "Yeah, yeah, you can stop by here, and we'll go on up to school."  So, I knew then that I was a little afraid.  You know what I'm saying?  I was a little scary, but I didn't want Freddy to think I was scared.  We, like I said, we played football together.  And he seemed so, like nonchalant about it like.  I mean, he was older.  Like I say, he was fifteen going on sixteen, and he was, he was a little more mature than I was, so that's why I wanted to hook up with him.  His brother that went with us, he was in the junior high school, so he wouldn't, you know, be going our way.
Speaker 1: So you were a freshman.
Speaker 2: I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: Freshman.
Speaker 2: It was my first year of high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was in ninth grade.  He was in tenth grade.
Speaker 1: So you were fourteen, I guess.
Speaker 2: I was fourteen--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right.  So, what happened was, so that morning, he, you know, he came and got me.  That was so funny, you know.  And so we were getting ready to walk up.  And I told you the main street that goes through there, Sewells Point Road, that went to the ocean, it also went directly back down past Norview High School.  So, he said, "Well, we're not gonna walk down Sewells Point Road."  There was a street about a quarter mile over called Chesapeake Boulevard, which ran the same way.  But it was quieter, and it was away from, you know, the main drag.  He said, "Why don't we go up there and walk down because it's--be less people and, and the white kids don't usually use it to go to school.  They usually come" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] didn't provide no car for you all--
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: --no escort or--
Speaker 2: Nothing, nothing. And, and--they were nowhere near me.  So we--
Speaker 1: Not even your parents [Lena King Heidelberg and Colonal M. Heidelberg] were with you, nobody?
Speaker 2: Not even my parents--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no.  So we walked down, we were walking down Chesapeake Boulevard, you know, now, and we weren't really talking about it.  And, and like I said, he, he didn't seemed as though he was really worried about anything.  And I remember, you know, I said to him, I said, "Are you scared, man?"  Say, he said, "No, scared of what?"  I said, "Man, you don't think nobody's gonna try to lynch you or something?"  I said, "What you gonna do if somebody hit you?"  He said, "I don't know.  I have to deal with that when it happens."  So I said, "So you're not scared?"  He said, "No; ain't nothing to be scared of."
Story_ID: 622460
Speaker 1: I didn't say nothing, so we kept walking 'cause he didn't have a lot to say.  So then (laughter)--I'll never forget it 'cause it was about forty something degrees.  It was cool, cold.  And so he looked at me.  We, we were coming up behind the back of the school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  The school was about a mile from our house.  So, you know, and like I said, on that side you didn't see any of the children coming.  So, when we were getting towards--close to the high school he looked over at me, says, he says, "Are you hot?"  (Laughter) Right, so, I said, "No, man; I'm, I feel good.  It's cool out here."  He said, "Well, you must be scared."  I said, "Why you say that?"  He said, "You sure are sweating on your nose" (laughter).  So, I put my hand up there, and it was like water all there. I was sweating all through my eyes, right.  So, so, he, he just smiled and kept walking. So then we looked in the back of the school, and there was no kids.  We coming up from the back of the school, so I didn't see nobody.  So I said, "Oh my god, Freddy [Alvarez Gonsouland]." I said, "I don't see anybody."  I said, "Do you think they, they, they, they called it--they changed their mind and decided not to open the school?"  He said, "No way."  (Laughter) So, I said, "Okay," so we walked, and then we came around the side of the school.  Then we turned towards the front.  That was it, holy Jesus. Good Lord. It was like, first of all, for me, I had never in my life seen that many white people at one time anywhere.  And they was like, it's, it's just like a sea of white people.  You know what I'm saying.  I said oh, my god.  I mean, and they was like all over the place.  And as soon as we turned, it was some kids standing up on the steps, and they said, "Here comes two more niggers!"  And like whoa, (laughter) what did he say that for.  Then, it's like everybody out there turned towards us, and they started running.  Now first of all, I didn't know whether they were gonna (laughter)--what they were running to us for.  But there were cameramen and policemen, right, and they started flashing the bulb, flash, flashing, you know, oh, my gosh.  So they came and they were so close to you.  And they, and, and the kids started going, "Go home, niggers.  Why do you want to come to our school?"  I mean, it was just, you know, "Black boys, get out of here;" "Hey, mal-mouths;" "Hey, Africans."  I mean, they had more names for me than I ever, ever thought I had, you know.  And they were so close to you.  Like, the reporters were there, you know, were asking them dumb questions: "Hello, what's your name? Are you scared?"  You know, and, and they had told us don't talk to the people; don't say nothing.  But see, but we could not walk because they were surrounding us.  We had to like almost stop to talk to the--you know, and they just kept asking us questions, but you know, we just kept inching our way--we didn't really realize that we were there about ten minutes earlier than we should have been, you know.  And so they were just asking questions, and, and we were like, you know, policemen were there, you know.  I don't know why, but I, I didn't feel safe.  (Laughter) You know, for some reason I didn't feel safe.  I mean, you could feel the white people breathing down your neck.  You know what I'm saying?  And they, and they kept saying stuff like, "We ought to kill these niggers right here and now."  And I mean, it was just--and, and, but the one--and, and you know, I, I, I think about people when they tell us about, you know, don't use that word; use the n-word.  You know what I'm saying?  I say what, you know what, if I was telling you this story, there's no way I'm gonna tell you and say, "And they called me the n-word."  I said they ain't call--if they had just said, "Hey n-word," I would feel much better.  I said they called me nigger straight up and down.  And I want to make sure that, that everybody understands.  I'm not just saying the word nigger.  I'm telling you what they called me.  And they called it to--that was the one word you could hear above everything that was, that was going on out there.  And the, and the pitch was so loud.  I mean it was, it was a, it was, it was just the sheer volume of the crowd was scary, you know.  And, and it seemed like it took forever for the, for that bell to ring, right.
Story_ID: 622461
Speaker 1: And so the bell rang (makes sound).  So then Fred [Alvarez Gonsouland] and I, as slowly as we're walking, went up the steps [of Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  And I really didn't, I had never been to high school, so I didn't really know what I was supposed to do, you know.  And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had told us nothing about this.  So I said to Fred, I said, "Where do we go now?"  (Laughter) So, and I don't even know how he knew.  He said, "I have to go, I have to report to the cafeteria.  I don't know where you go."  I said, "Where do I go?"  (Laughter) He say, he said, "Well, follow these freshmen here."  And it was a whole bunch of them.  He said, "Just follow them."  So, so, and when you got inside it was like, oh, they were all around you, you know.  And so, Freddy went on his way, and that was the last that I saw of Freddy.  Now--
Speaker 2: So you were by yourself in a sea of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was by myself.
Speaker 2: --white freshmen.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: And were they doing the same thing--
Speaker 1: Oh, they were just calling names, and, and they couldn't even walk in front.  They could turn around--"Hey we got a nigger here."  "Why don't you go home, nigger?"  "Get out of our school," you know, and all the way down, and, and, and, and I was just following them.  And then we went on down, and then I saw the sign said gymnasium, freshmen--I mean auditorium, freshman.  So then I, I turned the corner, and I was following, and I walked in, so.  When I walked into the auditorium, man, it was like, they started to singing.  I could hear it coming.  I didn't know the school had a balcony in the auditorium.  All I could hear was, (singing) "Fe-fe-fi-fi-fo-fo-fum, I smell a nigger in the auditorium, Charlie Brown."  I mean, and, and it was, it was like, it was--you know how the rock singers sing?  That's what they were doing.  I mean they were like--and I'm saying, "Oh," and then everybody in there turned around and started looking.  So then I looked and I saw down, the teachers were standing down in front of the stage, and they had tables.  I guess they were giving the assignments, so.  And they, they were just singing.  They were all around us, "Go home, nigger; go home, nigger."  So, I walked down.  I said well, best thing I'd better do is go down here as close to the teachers as I possibly can because if they try to kill me, hopefully the teachers (laughter), you know, to at least try to stop them from killing me, right.  So, I got, I got down to the--near the front, so.  And then I saw a row, you know, and I went in about maybe four rows from the front and went in.  I went into the aisle and you know, I walked and I sat down right in the middle.  Man, as soon as I sat down, everybody in that row that I was (laughter) on got up and left.  Everybody in the row in front of got up and left.  Everybody in the row behind me got up and left.  And all of a sudden, from the place being jammed packed, here I was sitting with nobody.  And I mean they just like--and I, I really didn't even know what to do.  And so the teachers called my name, "Heidelberg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]," and so I went up.  I went up, and she gave me my, my, my schedule, and I walked out.  I didn't really know where--I had to go to the, my homeroom class, but I didn't really know where it was 'til I got back in the hall and I realized it was up on the second floor.  And I followed, I followed that up to the second floor.  And so I saw the numbers and went into the classroom.  So when I got in the classroom, I wanted to sit--they had, the classroom had a window, the long windows on the side.  So I said well, I'm gonna sit by the window, that way if they try to lynch me, I can jump out the window.  You know, I was (laughter)--I thought that's my quickest ex- I mean, it, this was survival.  You was thinking how do I get out of here if they--because I'm, I'm, I was so sure somebody, they were gonna try to kill me, and there was no question about it.  So, so I go in, and I sat down right on the second row on the end, on the end, second row.  The guy in front of me got up; the girl beside me got up; and the guy in the back of me got up, so again I had my own space.  And you know, and the teacher was standing up there, and I'm saying to her--and they, they come in, "Why do we have to have a nigger in our classroom?"  "We don't want no niggers in here."  I'm thinking the teacher is gonna say, "Hey, hey, calm down."  She just let it; she just (laughter) let it.  I mean it just went on until the, the bell rang the second time, when you're supposed to be in your homeroom, you know.  And so, so she said, "Well, okay, class calm down," and she started calling the roll.  And I mean they were like, shooting spit wads at me, throwing paperclips, you know.  And, and she never, ever, ever said a freaking word to any one of them.  And it was, it was like--so then, I mean it, it, that, that first day was so bad.  You know, like I, I--you, you know, you go to every class, and in every class it was the same exact thing.
Story_ID: 622462
Speaker 1: So then, I think about--I, I, I looked at my schedule, and I had the second lunch [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], which was about 12:30 instead of 11:00, 11:00, 12:30 or something like that, came out the second.  And so, I didn't know where the cafeteria was, so somebody I think told me, said, "What lunch do you have, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]?"  And I said, "Second lunch."  And, and he, he showed me where the cafeteria was, so I walked to the cafeteria.  And by this time, I was really starving, (laughter) 'cause like, I mean it was like I had worked four hours, really like I had worked four hours.  And I walked into the cafeteria.  When I walked into the cafeteria, you know how you, when you're coming up to the cafeteria you can hear all the noise, 'cause the kids are loud in the cafeteria.  And the minute I stepped my foot over the cafeteria door, the place go quiet, I mean like, you could not hear a sound.  And like all you could hear was my feet going (gesture) (laughter), right.  I said, "Oh, my god," everybody was looking at me.  And this, this place was huge, huge cafeteria.  I had never--they, they didn't have no cafeterias like this in no black schools, you know.  This place was huge.  And so, I walked halfway down, and the lines, they had like, one, two, three, they had like about six lines.  So I stood in the line to go to the right side, and, and the lines came out into the cafeteria about fifteen people from, from where you go into the, the door to get, you know, to, to get your food.  So, I got down to about where the line ended, and I stopped.  And so I was standing there, and then, you know, the, the noise picked back up, and they started calling, "Hey look at that nigger over there," and "Black--," you know, they were just going.  So I was just standing in the line.  I'm saying please, just let me get in and get my food and get out of here.  And what was different about that first day was this girl--I heard this voice behind me say, "Hello."  And right, I really didn't want to turn around because that was one thing that they, that they (laughter)--that they had taught us in the tutoring school, to make sure all the boys, "Do not put yourself into any kind of position with a white girl.  Just stay away from her."  And, and they, they really didn't have to tell me that, like I said, 'cause Emmett Till was fresh on my mind.  And the way the person spoke to me when they said hello, I knew it wasn't a guy.  So then, there was about three or four--they let the cameramen in, right, who were flashing me from the front, (makes sound) you know, while I was standing in line, but I wasn't talking.  They was asking me questions, but you know, I, I didn't, I, I didn't even acknowledge them.  So when I heard the person say hello, I turned around slowly, and it was a white girl.  And when--and I, and I, when I turned around, she said, "Hi, how are you?"  It sounded so good, man, it was like--'cause first of all, I had not spoken to anybody in four hours.  I had not said a word except, "Here" (laughter), you know.  That's all I said in four--three classes, was here.  She said, "How are you?"  And, and I'm scared to death.  I said, "I'm all right."  And the minute that I said, "I'm all right," all of the cameramen stopped taking pictures, and they left; they left.  They didn't take no more pictures after that.  So she says, she says to me, she says, "I am so sorry that you have to go through what you're going through.  I really apologize for these, behavior of these students."  So I said, "Oh, that's all right."  She said, "No, it's not all right.  But I just want you to know that everybody is not like that."  So I said, "Thank you," and I turned around.  And I never saw her again, ever saw that--who she was again.
Story_ID: 622463
Speaker 1: So, I walked on down, and the line got shorter.  And I mean, I got to the door where you go in, right.  And one of the reasons--(crying)--whoa.  I got to the door and like, there were like, black people serving the food.  And they were so proud of me.  I think about that 'cause, you know, all my life you done heard--you, you see movies, and, and they always have them Stepin Fletchit [sic. Stepin Fetchit] type people talking, who can't talk, and old slow talking and stuff like that.  And when I walked in there, there was like, these two black ladies and, and a black guy, (crying) and I knew her 'cause I used to like--I knew her daughter.  I used to like, go with her daughter.  I didn't know she worked there.  She said, "How you doing, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg?"  She just called my whole name loud.  It just made me feel so good, you know, like, 'cause they didn't tell you that black people talk like that.  She ain't scared of no white people, at all; you could tell, her voice.  It just made me feel--and all the other white--other black ladies said, "Hi, Andrew Heidelberg."  And then the black guy, he was--had a big pot in his hand, man, he said, "How you doing, son?"  You know what I'm saying?  And it's like, they didn't care that there were white people there; I mean it didn't mean nothing.  I just can't tell you how, how it made me feel.  It was like whoa, you know, like, thank you; I needed that.  And they said, "What you want to eat?"  You know what I'm saying, you know, like--and you know, you smile, man, and, and, and I--and they say, "You, don't worry."  I mean the look on their face, I never seen people so proud of me.  I, I, I didn't even know what I had done.  But just the fact that I was there [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], to them, you know, and, and, and that's when I knew that it meant something more.  You know, you, you look at them, she was like in her thirties, and the guy was like--I mean, they were so proud, man.  It was like whoa; I mean it gave me a whole different perspective of what happened, because it was like they, they, they were waiting.  They, they, they waited.  You know, it's, I guess it's the same feeling like I felt when Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] got elected.  It was like whoa, man, look at this, I mean, the, the tears.  I mean they were just, I mean they smiled and, man, they called my name so loud.  I mean that was what got me.  And they called my whole name.  She said, "How are you doing, Andrew Heidelberg?"  And man, and everybody in there looked around, and they weren't gonna say nothing to her.  You know what I'm saying?
Story_ID: 622464
Speaker 1: I got my food, man, and I walked on through.  It just picked me up for, for, for a minute, you know, so I came out.  When I came out of the door, the teachers had two tables sitting there.  So I said to myself, I said I'd better sit close to the teachers (laughter) 'cause if they try to kill me, at least they might pull them off. And so I walked behind the teachers.  And, and the, and the windows were on the wall over there, and, and the students were beyond them, so I stood.  There was no seats, so I stood behind--I leaned up against the wall with my tray, and I stood behind the two rows of students' tables, right.  And of course, they were calling me names and looking at me, you know.  You know nobody was gonna get up for me, you know, so--
Speaker 2: No other black students were on lunch--
Speaker 1: None (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at that period?
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: 'Cause there was only, in your school--
Speaker 1: Only seven in our school.
Speaker 2: Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were--
Speaker 2: 'Cause the other--
Speaker 1: --there were, it was--
Speaker 2: --ten were scattered in the other schools--
Speaker 1: Yeah, other schools.
Speaker 2: --the high schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they're two high schools.
Speaker 1: --two freshmen.  We have Olivia Driver [Olivia Driver Lindsay] and I was freshmen, and there was Carol Wellington, Johnnie Rouse, and Freddy [Alvarez Gonsouland] were in the tenth grade, and then Delores Brown [Delores Johnson Brown] and Patricia Godbolt [Patricia Godbolt White] were in the eleventh grade.  That was us.  So, and what, what I--I'll, I'll finish the story first, but I'll tell you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I stood on the wall, and then about, I guess it was about five or six minutes later, a student gets up.  No, he didn't get up.  He, he's, he, he, he, he, he, he, he stopped.  Then he threw his fork.  Then he threw his fork down.  He said, "This food stinks.  I can't eat no more in front of these niggers."  And he threw his, his, his, his tray, the whole tray, just flipped the whole tray.  I said, "Oh, my god" (laughter) so.  So he got a little bit on the two people that were in front of him.  So, the guy, another guy sitting down said, "My food stinks too.  These niggers are killing me," and he got up and threw his (laughter) tray on the floor.  I said, "God damn." Then about five of them just went to the trash can and just said, "Oh, this food stinks," and they threw it.  So I went, I said, "Oh, my god."  So, now that whole table was gone, so then I went and sat down (laughter).  So I was sitting there by myself, man.  And, and it was so funny how life is, 'cause I guess I started, right, and everybody's looking at me, you know.  And the food, some is on the table; some is on the floor, you know.  And so I started eating it--and no, no joke, man, about five minutes into the food (laughter), my food started smelling like what's (laughter) stinking.  I said, "I can't eat no more."  I got up and put mine in the trash.  It wasn't the food.  It was just--I don't know--just the perception.  And I, you know, I threw my food in--I threw--just got up and threw it away.  I just didn't want to eat it, you know, and walked out of the classroom, and went on down and got ready for my next class, my next class was gym, so physical ed [physical education].  So I walked down towards the gymnasium.
Story_ID: 622465
Speaker 1: And when I got towards the gymnasium, I didn't really know a lot about Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia], but Norview was a football school, and it was the best--listen to this: Norview had won thirty-six straight games.  They had not lost a game in three and a half years.  They were the--they'd won seven--six Eastern District championships in a row, two state championships.  They were the best team on the East Coast, not just in Virginia, on the East Coast.  I mean, it's just like this area now, which is known for football players.  Norview, I mean they, they, these guys were good.  I mean, a lot of them, they played with--they went on to LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and then became players with the Cowboys [Dallas Cowboys].  And I mean they were, you know, they were, they were--
Speaker 2: Now this is something because they missed their football season--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --closing the school--
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 2: --right?
Speaker 1: No, no, see--
Speaker 2: They closed the schools and missed--
Speaker 1: Listen.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This, I'm gonna give you a piece of history.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: When they closed the school from, in 1958 to February, Norview still played football (laughter).  That, the--you tell me how they did--I didn't know that when I--back then.  They still played every football game.  I said, "How could they play football with the school closed?"  I still don't know, but they did--they did not (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You said it was a football school.
Speaker 1: It's a football school.  They did not miss--now we had one school in Chesapeake [Virginia], and people don't know this about Chesapeake, 'cause Chesapeake is a big city, land wise, not necessarily population wise.  Chesapeake closed--no, Chesapeake had a good team.  They had a school called Oscar Smith [Oscar F. Smith High School, Chesapeake, Virginia], which I think year before last or so won the championship here in Virginia.  But it's predominantly black, right.  Oscar Smith was a white school, and they were one of the top teams in the, in the Eastern District just like Norview.  But what they did was, they forfeited the game to Norview that they had against Norview.  They did not want to play them because Norview had black students going to its school (laughter).  They took the loss; they took the loss.  I said, "Whoa, took the loss just because we were going to the school."  There was no blacks on the team.  Just because they had blacks in the school, Oscar Smith forfeited their game with Norview.
Speaker 2: And yet, the, probably--correct me if I'm wrong, the cafeteria staff over at Oscar Smith was probably black too, fixing their food--
Speaker 1: Probably, oh, the same way, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --fixing their food.
Speaker 1: Yeah, most of them, most of them was like that.  Most of the schools were like that.  They're colored, and the Negroes did those, did, had the--because the kids loved--they used to make rolls at Norview and that's all kids used to eat.  I mean them black people could cook some food.  Yeah, they had it.  That, that was, that was amazing, never missed a beat on the football team, never, while the school was closed.  But I don't think nobody knew that but the--I mean the, the black people probably didn't know that.  Like I said, I didn't know that until I came back thirty years that that happened.  I thought when the schools were closed, everything was closed.  But they played--that was the only sport they played.  They didn't play baseball nor nothing.  They didn't--I mean none of the other sports.  They played football.  Football was king, I'm gonna tell you.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, okay, so you go to gym.  You're on your way to gym class.
Speaker 1: So I'm down at--when I got down to the--the reason why I was telling you that because when I got down there, they had all these pictures on the wall of the football teams, all the way down on both sides of the walls.  And the, the pictures there were about maybe seventy inches, like a seventy inch screen television.  Those were the Eastern District championships.  The ones that were like a hundred inch screen was like the state championships.  And they had up like--I mean it was just a football school.  And so I was standing down there, which I, which I, I never forget that story either.  I was looking up at the pictures, you know, 'cause I didn't know anybody, and these two white guys walked up behind me.  And the guy said, "What are you looking at, nigger?"  So I didn't say nothing.  So the other said, "He's looking up there at the football pictures."  The other guy said, "Well, don't worry, nigger, they won't have no niggers up there ever."  I never, ever--that was my freshman year--never, ever forgot that until my senior year when I played, and that picture went up on the wall with the fly in the buttermilk.  (Laughter) It was mine (laughter).
Story_ID: 622466
Speaker 1: Anyway, gym class, did you participate in gym class [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and did they--
Speaker 2: No, I think what happened was I, I changed up, and it was really not that much to do, you know, like, we just did the basic things, because they didn't want me involved really in, in, in nothing that they were doing.  You know, I changed my clothes, and, and we might have--I can't even remember what we, what I did, I, I really don't--I don't want to make (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like calisthenics or something or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I don't remember none of that.  It was just so traumatic.  What I remember, going forward in the, in, in, in, in, in that freshman year, was when, when I usually left the cafeteria after about ten minutes, 'cause I didn't want to stay in the cafeteria because there are just too many people would just make fun of what (unclear).  So, I usually would eat very quickly and come out, come down, 'cause my next class was in the gym.  And, and I would just hang up there and just read the pictures over and over again.  But, there was this kid that was, after about, I guess about in March or April, he was in my--he wasn't in my gym class, but he took gym at the same time.  So he used to always be standing outside the gym waiting for the, the, the, the bell to ring so he could he go either his health or his gym class.  And so, when I used to come out there, you know, he'd begin to start speaking to me, say, "How you doing, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]?"  You know, and we just, just--it was just such a relief, like I said, to say something because, you know, like, there was nothing to say in the classes.  The teacher never call on you for anything in the class, so you was really like--
Speaker 1: So none of the teachers or administrators (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None.
Speaker 1: --offered--
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: --any support of any sort?
Speaker 2: No, none, they didn't.  I always thought that they were more concerned about the fact that they had a job.  They couldn't overtly do things, you know, against me, but they didn't overtly do anything to help, you know, you know, to--
Speaker 1: Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to help me or tell somebody, "Hey, that's enough," you know.  The, the, those actions were really dictated by the kids, and they never really said anything.
Story_ID: 622467
Speaker 1: Do you think that they also felt under pressure by the white community to not help you?
Speaker 2: I think they felt under pressure because they needed that job.  They know they could not step, do anything bad.  But they didn't have to do anything positive to help us, and I think the people realized it, and they didn't, none of them, none of them, you know.  And so, so that was, that, that was the difficult part, part about it, 'cause I didn't look at it as much as, as them not helping me because they were teachers.  I looked at them as adults.  Why would you--how could you, as an adult, stand by and just let people, you know--
Speaker 1: Were there, were there, was there adult participation in the harassment outside the school and that sort of thing?  Were, were adults--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, outside the school--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --oh yeah, oh, no question, just not in--
Speaker 1: How long did they maintain a crowd out there when you would come to school?  Did, did they--
Speaker 2: Well, they were out there probably about a week, a week and a half.  And after that, you didn't really have the, the people outside.  But, but, as I explained to people, the only--the, the, the impact of what was happening was the only place that was desegregated or integrated was that building, that building.  Because after school was over, I went my way, and they went their way, and never did the twains meet; nothing, nothing changed.  See, that, and that's what people don't understand.  And only, and inside that building most people don't really understand what was really going down, how tortuous it was, because they, when you got inside, they were ridiculous.  They were really ridiculous, and they never--see, this--you know, when I, when I, when I go and talk to kids and, and adults, and what I try to explain to them is: if you had told me that doing this desegregation process that okay, for about a month, two months or three months, you gonna have to put up with this, this, this. But what the people don't know is this, this wasn't just one day, thirty days, sixty days, ninety days.  This was every single day.  And--
Speaker 1: For your whole four years?
Speaker 2: Listen to--this is what I'm trying to explain to you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I went to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] for three and a half years, the second half of my freshman year and then my sophomore, junior, and senior year.  And they called me nigger, coon, black boy, Charlie Brown, mal-mouth, I mean, all the names, like I said, I didn't know I have, every single day.  And when I say I'm gonna be kind and say okay, maybe it was a lit- let's say five hundred times a day--I'm, I'm being kind. Five hundred times every single day.  And see, this is what I know the people, and the population, and the other people who weren't going to school with us did not know, because they thought because it was integrated or desegregated that it was cool; everything was cool.  You had already done what you had to do.  But it was like this every single day.  Now see, what I tell people, you can't imagine what it does to the psyche for somebody to call you those names every day.  And for--my case was different because in my senior year I played football, okay.  But for two and a half years, every single day, they did that to me five hundred times minimum a day every day for two and a half straight years, no break, because that's what I kept thinking.  I know it's gonna let up.  Sooner or later, they gonna just get tired of calling me names.
Speaker 1: Well, they did.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Didn't they sort of--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --have class when you were in class I mean, after a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they still called you nigger all during the class, all during the class.
Speaker 1: Did the teachers ever participate in that--
Speaker 2: Never, never, teachers never did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they never stopped anybody.
Speaker 1: They didn't stop the--
Speaker 2: They never said--
Speaker 1: --students from doing it.
Speaker 2: --hey, that's enough.
Speaker 1: I mean, but it would seem like that would disrupt the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: --class.  You could--how could you learn in an environment--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --where somebody's calling--
Speaker 2: Because I was just sitting there.  I mean they were, they, they wouldn't say it all day as much as--if there was an opportunity for them to say it.  What--you know, if something was said, and it could some kind of way, a slur could be taken out of that to refer to the nigger, they would say it.  And the kids would laugh, and then she would go on with her lesson.
Speaker 1: And that would be your name basically in class (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, that's it; that was it; that was it.
Story_ID: 622468
Speaker 1: When I look at the other sixteen kids that went to school, I feel bad for them, because all of them, not some of them, all of them left that schools, whichever school they went to, with this taste of what I'm telling you happened.  I was the only one that saw a different side of the white people, and that was because I played football my last year.  Because when I--I went out for the team in my junior year, and to this day I still don't know what possessed me (laughter)--I'm, I'm serious--to go out for the football team except that I loved football.  This was the biggest football school in the South, and they were winners.  And people loved it like--I mean, like I said, you--their--they, didn't, they didn't stop playing football when the season, 'cause this is how much they loved Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  Norview was the school, the football school, bar none, all the way from Delaware all the way down to Florida, Norview was known.  You know what I'm saying?  And so I decided to go out for the team in 1960.  This was the first time that ev- a black had even ever attempted to play anything at a previously all-white school anywhere in the South.
Speaker 2: So, did--none of your, none of the gym teachers or coaches ever said, "Well, you, you're pretty fast." Or, "You look like you might be"--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, look, when I--
Speaker 2: --"you'd be a good candidate for the"--
Speaker 1: When they found out how good--how fast I was, not how good, how fast I was, was in my junior year.  Because in my senior--I mean my, in my sophomore year, the only thing that they saw was how I participated in my gym classes.  And I'll show you the record.  They, I mean they--look, they was on me.  They had--they knew everything that I could do in the class.  I did agility runs, you know, all of that stuff, how fast I was, because--and I, and I, I beat them all, I, you know--I--all of them.  But that was no incentive for them to ask me (laughter), no, no, they ain't gonna ask you like, "You ever thought about playing football?"  No, sir, that, that did not come about.  I, I realized that I wasn't gonna be able to play sports, so I, I, I, I used to look at the football players who had the big Ns on their--they had the white cardigan sweaters with big N, and inside the N they had whatever sport, they had a baseball, a track wings, or either basketball, and some of the guys had all of them on theirs, you know, depending on what they play.  And I loved the, the letters and, and I couldn't get one 'cause the only way you could get one you had to be athlete.  And so, but they had intramural, which you could get a letter and buy your sweater like that.  You know, but like we say that, you know, the, all the guys with the real ones will laugh at you 'cause you got intramural.  It was a difference.  It was a little smaller, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, would they let you play on an intramural team?  I mean who, who would--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) play with you?  Did you have friends by that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, you had to play the individual sport.  I played (laughter)--it's funny--I did horseshoes.  I won the horseshoe championship for Norview.  I did table tennis.  I won the horseshoe championship for Norview.  I did track and field, track, and I did the broad jump, the broad jump, the agility run, and obstacle run, or something, something obstacle and, and something like that.  I won all, all three of those for the, for the whole school, Norview school.  You had to accumulate twenty-one points to get that letter.  And the only way you, you get four points if you win whatever it is.  I got four for winning, you know, for winning.  You get three for second or something like that.  So I had like twenty something points, and I got my, got my intramural letter.  But, so they, they, they used to--when we, when we used to have the intramural stuff at the school, the athletes used to come in there just to check me out.  You know what I'm saying?  And I didn't find out 'til later that the ladies in the cafeteria used to say when I used to go to gym class, which the cafeteria was here, and the gym was like out further, she said all of the men in the gymnasium used to come and come through the cafeteria and watch me when I used to run.  But I never knew that, but she told me that for forty years later, you know.  But what I realized was this: they have thing--they have, they had in a citywide intramural competition, which was between Norview, Maury [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and Granby [Granby High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  And I--they didn't even tell me about it, and they didn't let me go.  And I only, only reason I knew is I saw it in the yearbook who is the citywide champion.  I said these are the guys that I beat (laughter), you know.  But they went--
Speaker 2: So they didn't tell you about it, and, and neither did they--
Speaker 1: I couldn't participate anyway.
Speaker 2: And Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia] couldn't, couldn't either, right, as a high school.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington couldn't compete as a high school in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not against them, no.
Speaker 2: That's, that's--
Speaker 1: Book--Booker T. only played and did things with black schools.  Yeah, that, other than that, they didn't do anything with Norview at all.  And, and, and I think when I found out about the citywide thing, man, I was just like crushed.  I said, "You wouldn't tell me?  I'm the champion at Norview, and you enter the person that came in second place into this citywide championship, and, and didn't even, didn't even let me"--I mean, that's when I really knew that it was, you know, you, you, you're not gonna play.
Story_ID: 622469
Speaker 1: That's why when I went out for the football team, you know, like I, I think about we play--I went out in, in that, that August and practiced with the team.  And, and I think, I think what hurts a kid more is when you, when you participate and you do well, and they still don't acknowledge it, you know.  Like, I went out for the football team, and we played a scrimmage game the last week of practice.  We scrimmaged a team from either Arlington [Arlington County, Virginia] or Alexandria [Virginia].  You know, we didn't usually scrimmage the teams from around here, from around Norfolk [Virginia].  And I think I scrimmaged and I ran halfback.  I must have scored seven or eight times, easy.  And I remember coming back to the locker room that day, and, and it was the last cut.  And if your name is not on the board, you're gone.  And I came back and you know, my name wasn't up there.  I mean, I, I guess that, that was the, that was really crushing, crushing blow to me, you know; like, that's when the impact really came to me what, you know, hey, I don't care.  They don't care.  You don't count, and you're not gonna count.  I mean, I remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But so--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What kind of relationship did you have with the coach?  I guess I'm just--
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: --you know, the--
Speaker 1: I didn't know the coach.
Speaker 2: --the, the coach--I mean who let you run?  I mean, some, somebody had to--
Speaker 1: Oh, they let you come out.
Speaker 2: --give you the ball and you know, and, and make sure that--
Speaker 1: No, yeah, they gave me the--
Speaker 2: --they ran a play for you.
Speaker 1: --ball, oh yeah.
Speaker 2: They had to--
Speaker 1: They did all of that.
Speaker 2: You had to--yeah.
Speaker 1: They did all of that.  They let me play--
Speaker 2: So they didn't--
Speaker 1: --let me practice, let me scrimmage.
Speaker 2: So nobody said that you couldn't--
Speaker 1: Couldn't try out.
Speaker 2: --try out and couldn't play and all that sort of--
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, they never said I wasn't good enough.
Speaker 2: They just didn't say anything, right?
Speaker 1: They just cut you (laughter), you know, like simple as that, you know.  So, one of the things that I found out from one of my friends on the team who was, who was still the--this guy named Ken Whitley.  He would--he still works at Nor- he teaches driver training at Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] now.  But see, these are things you learn fifty years later, which there was a vote among the team when I went out for the junior year whether they should keep me or whether they should get rid of me.  He asked, the coach asked all the players.  I didn't know that.  And they voted no.  And the reason--and the guy that was a good friend of mine, he voted no also.  But when I got to know him, I know he didn't vote no because he didn't like me 'cause I was black.  I, I--had nothing, nothing to do with it.  He was, first of all, was an All-American.  He made All-American football.  He was the state wrestling champ.  He was, he was an awesome player.  I mean, he was--and one of my best friends on the team.  The reason that he voted no was because if he had voted yes and they had kept me on the team, a lot of the teams would have done exactly the same thing that Oscar Smith [Oscar F. Smith High School, Chesapeake, Virginia] did when they forfeited that game because schools were in there.  He was really more interested in not messing up his year, you know, and I know that.  I--and, and you and nobody can convince me of any other reason why he would vote no.  The only reason he would vote no is because he would not want a disruption.  He loved football and so much, he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the other white schools wouldn't play Norview (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They wouldn't play, yeah.
Speaker 2: --if you--
Speaker 1: And he didn't want that to happen, so he voted no, and he told me.  Fifty years later he told me; he told me why.  And then I, and I believe it.  And, and, and I would never have thought of, thought of it any other way.
Story_ID: 622470
Speaker 1: Okay so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I remember going home that day after they cut me, man.  I, I was, I was, I was walking down the street, and you know, like, and, and I cried all the way home, all the way home, because I had, I had really played hard, man, I mean.  And like I said, I scored about seven or eight times, and, and, and there was no place.  And you know, I remember talking to God.  I said you know, why--this is, this is what I'm saying what it does to kids.  I said, "Why did you make me black?"  I mean, first of all, I didn't want to be black no more.  And that to me has got to be one of the most terrible things that any individual--when you don't want to be who you are.  You know what I'm saying?  And I, and I, and I talked to God all the way.  I said, "Why would you, why would you make--," I didn't understand God.  I, I--why would you make somebody like that who's not gonna be liked by so--you know.  What, what is that all about?  I, I, I could not understand it.  I really did not understand it.  I mean, football was such, such a, a powerful source in my life, you know.  And I look at, and you know, I look at all of the whatever you might want to consider accomplishments--it's just like going to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  People ask me, say, "Well, how did you make it through the end," right?  Well, I was angry with myself for having that feeling that if I start something, you can bet your boots I'm gonna finish it.  And the only way you're gonna stop me is you gotta kill me.  I ain't gonna--I would give out before I give up.  That's, that's me.  I don't care, you know.  And you know, I used to look at football, and I used to say--I used to be angry sometimes 'cause guys were bigger than me.  And I'd be angry sometimes 'cause they're stronger than me (laughter).  I'd be angry 'cause they're faster than me.  You know what I'm saying?  And I'd be angry sometimes because they're just damn more talented than I am.  But there's always--I look at the way God does it; there's always a factor that balances it all out.  The one thing that you can't do better than me: you can't want it more than me.  I don't care who you are.  And that's what, that was what my driving force was.  You've got to, to want it more than me.  And when I--after I went, I remember Freddy [Alvarez Gonsouland] transferring in our junior year because he wanted to play football in my june--he went to Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia] and played.  You know, I, and I used to go see his game.  I wanted to do that too, but if I did that, that mean I quit, and I was not gonna quit.  And I hated it because that's the way I felt.  You ain't gonna make me quit.  If I have to stay here and don't play nothing, I ain't gonna quit, 'cause you ain't gonna run me away from here.  You know what I'm saying?  So, and I hated that, because I really wanted to quit the school too.  This is even before football.  I really wanted to quit 'cause I didn't want to go through that crap with, you know--
Story_ID: 622471
Speaker 1: Now, did the community--you talk about the cafeteria staff [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] and their support of you.  Did you get support at church and at home and in the community from black people?  Did they constantly encourage you?  Did they kind of cool off after a while and take it for granted that you were okay?
Speaker 2: I think most of the people had the opinion that, like I said, once the school was integrated, I mean, it was all over.  Was, wasn't nothing else going on; that was it; you had done it.  You know what I'm saying?  Now, when you talk about my church, now, there's a lot of people don't know this.  My religion is Judaism, see.  And most people don't know this.  Like, it was very difficult back in those days for Jews, the same way.  And my religion is Judaism.  I'm not a Jew, but my religion is Judaism.
Speaker 1: But in those days, were you, were you--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my religion was Judaism.  Now--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --here's the irony of all of that.  Like you said, why, what, how did your church feel?  Okay, now, the Sabbath in Judaism is from the beginning of the Sabbath when the sun goes down on Friday to Saturday when the sun goes down; that's the Sabbath.  You don't do no sports.  You don't do anything (laughter).  We didn't even watch tel- once that sun go down on Friday, your life is not the same.  I mean, as a kid, just, you know, like, you don't understand it, but you don't do nothing.  Your moth--your mother doesn't cook.
Speaker 1: But what was the name of the congregation that, or, or the sect that your parents [Lena King Heidelberg and Colonal M. Heidelberg] belonged to?  What did they call it?
Speaker 2: Church of God and Saints of Christ.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's a Jew--
Speaker 2: Jewish.
Speaker 1: Jewish?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Saints of Christ?
Speaker 2: Saints of Christ.
Speaker 1: Church of God and Saints--
Speaker 2: See, most peoples--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most people--most of the outside Jewish people used to look at us funny because we talk about Christ.  But the--see, the, the--it has nothing to do with the way I think that the world or the Catholics look at Christ like Christ, like, I think they inter--I don't know; I'm just saying I think they think--they say Christ is--Jesus was God, whatever they say (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Three in one and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, three, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --Father, Son, and the Holy, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, which would--that's not--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: We talk about sons of Christ.  Christ to us means exactly what it says, one that is anointed.  So, we're the Church of God.  This is God's church.  But we are Saints of Christ, meaning we follow the word of the anointed person that God anointed to bring this word to us.  So we, we teach the re- the, the, the, the religion of Jesus.  We don't preach Jesus.  Do you hear--you get, get my point?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: It's not about Jesus--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as much as it is, it's about God and how Jesus required us to go with God, to be with God, to do godly things.
Speaker 1: That's not--
Speaker 2: He didn't--yeah.
Speaker 1: I would guess there's a small sect of people, group of people--I mean it's not like a big church or anything, is it?
Speaker 2: It's the largest and oldest black Jewish sect in America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it goes--it has roots--is that roots with Rabbi Ford [Arnold Josiah Ford] in New York [New York]--
Speaker 2: No.  Our, our church was reestablished, as we call it.  We don't say founded.  It was reestablished by a prophet, William Saunders Crowdy in 1896.
Speaker 1: William Saunders.  Is it--
Speaker 2: S-A-U-N-D--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --E-R-S, Crowdy, C-R-O-W-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He is the prophet that found- that reestablished the Church of God and Saints of Christ.  And, and, and what--let, just let me explain it to me, since you got it in there.  The difference between how we look at things and I think how the Jewish, the majority Jewish people is that we believe we are prophetic Judaism, meaning that God deals with us through a prophet.  And there's no rabbinical council.  We got a rabbinical council, but the rabbinical council doesn't dictate what happens to the church.  God's a, appoints a prophet.  The prophet appoints a leader to take over after him, and that's, that's where we go from, that God speaks--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to us through a prophet.
Speaker 1: Now did Saunders reestablish the church here in Norfolk [Virginia]?  Is that where it was--
Speaker 2: He reestablished it in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Kansas.  And we have tabernacles, we call them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, like, some people call them branches.  We have tabernacles in other states.  I think we, we're in about twenty states, Jamaica, and Africa.
Story_ID: 622472
Speaker 1: All right, so the football team, now how did they finally accept you as a football player?
Speaker 2: Well, I--what, what I think happened was, after I--watching Freddy [Alvarez Gonsouland] play for that year at Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and I came back and it was my senior year [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  Well--yeah, my senior year, so I said--and I, again, I don't know what made me go out again, 'cause I was so hurt from the last time.  But I said, "Heck, 'cause it's my senior year; I got nothing else to do; I might as well go out and try it again."  So, so, come August, I said well, okay, go out.  And, and little did I know, I guess how God works his stuff, but the colleges had done a bang up job.  They were doing a bang up job.  They were doing the sit-ins like in Greensboro [North Carolina].  And I think the move, which I didn't know, but I'm surmising now from how it happened, besides God intervening, but what happened was that--
Speaker 1: This is 1961--
Speaker 2: This was '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think the sit-ins and all of the protesting going on in the black colleges [HBCUs], I think it gave the majority race an idea that hey, this is not gonna go away.  Black people are not gonna back away from this, and this is something that you're gonna have to deal with.  And so, I went out for the team again.  And man, it was, it was--it wasn't different.  The whole setup was the same way.  And again, it came down to the last scrimmage, which we, again, scrimmaged this team from northern Virginia.  And, and this time, you know, they--people like to say, "Well, you were like five or ten pounds heavier, and you were much faster and stronger," you know, but, and, and I was basically the same type of guy.  But in that last scrimmage against this team, I think I must have scored just about every time I touched the ball I scored.  And I came back into the locker room that day, and man, and you want to talk about something bringing tears to my eyes, man, like.  And I looked up on the board, and I saw, I saw the names: Whitley [Ken Whitley], Zongalowitz [Calvin "C.J." Zongolowicz], Piercey [Patrick Piercey], Rays [ph.], Heidelberg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg].  Man, I saw my name and I said, "Oh, man."  And as I, as I stood there in awe really, you know, like, like, this was like, to me, you know, you just got drafted by the Pittsburgh Steelers (laughter).  It was like the greatest feeling in my life.  And as I turned around, there was the two captains standing there.  And they held a hand out and say, "Hey, welcome to the Norview Pilots."  And man, and then the rest was history, so.
Speaker 1: Was it your teammates, were they--I know the story of Paul Robeson when he went out for football at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] they tried to hurt him, you know, every time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) he touched the ball.
Speaker 2: --the only thing that, you know, like, when I think about football, that, that part, if you're a football player, doesn't really bother you, you know.  The only thing, like, that I think can hurt you is if your players don't try to do their best to protect you.  But the opposing team--and I, I never had any of my players, that I know of, ever did anything, let somebody intentionally or what.  They played hard to protect me, you know.  And when--and I think about that, because that's what changed my view, my outlook about whites, you know, because as a team, it, it's, it's, it's a camaraderie there that is like, exists nowhere else on the planet.  I mean--
Speaker 1: So I take it that some of the five hundred times you was called a, a nigger (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nigger.
Speaker 1: --was, was reduced on the team.
Speaker 2: Look--
Speaker 1: They, they didn't do it on the team.
Speaker 2: --here's what happened: When I made the football team that evening and school started that next Monday, I don't remember nobody, nobody, nobody calling me nigger after that, nobody.
Speaker 1: At all?
Speaker 2: At all, not, not five hun- not five, not even five.  I mean, the, I mean, everybody--I passed people in the hall, they go, "Good luck, Andy, good luck."  And you know, everybody was like, I was accepted, really, I mean, and, and, and, and what, what, what I think sealed it was when I played the first game.  Now, now, let me just tell you this right quick, 'cause I, I don't want anything to represent what I consider the impact of what we as the Norfolk 17 did for the desegregation of the schools.  But as much as I used to hate them always referring to, "Oh, you're the one that played football," that cliche about, you know, black guys can play sports, but they dumb; that's all they can do is play sports, that cliche doesn't mean that much to me because I, first of all, know that I was not dumb.  You know, I, I, I was intelligent.  I ain't gonna, I ain't gonna say I was smart.  People might have said that.  But I was, I was definitely in- intelligent.
Story_ID: 622473
Speaker 1: And one of the things that, that happened was that, before I made the football team [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], white people thought of us, me--I don't know about--I'm gonna consider the race--thought of us not as humans.  I can't tell you how many times--(laughter) this is funny now; you're gonna think it's funny, but it ain't--how many times people came by the, the gymnasium locker room to look in while I was taking a shower, to see did I have a tail.  Now at first, when they first did it, I thought it was, I thought it was like a joke, or they was trying to be funny.  Now, but see, when you look back and you think, here are black people, that white people do not know, and kids, only thing they know about white--black people is what they read about them.  They never really been in their company, never seen them in the shower, nothing.  And all they hear is that black peoples are from monkeys; they got tails, and they, this is what their parents used to tell them.  So they didn't really know, so they wanted to know for sure: Do you have a tail?  And they used to come ev- every practice, every day it was a different group that came past to look in the shower to see did I have a tail.
Speaker 2: This is, to me, that's incredible.  But--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --I've heard this enough times (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --these stories to know that--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --this must be--
Speaker 1: Oh, there was no question--
Speaker 2: --question (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There was no question about it.  And I'm saying to myself, because like I said, at first I thought they were joking.  But when I saw that they weren't--I could tell by the look on their face that they, they, this is what they were told, and they just wanted to check for themselves, you know.  And, and, and that always amazed me.
Story_ID: 622474
Speaker 1: But what, the point that I was making about why I, I, I didn't deal with that stereotype about the blacks being football players or athletes and that's all you can do, because as I got older I realized what playing football did versus everything else we did.  And let me tell you: If we--if I had never played football with Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]--and you're gonna only hear this from me--if I had never played football for Norview, I believe that it would have taken desegregation a few more years to sink in and be accepted by more whites.  And I say that because of this: when the black people came to that first game that I played, there was--first of all, now this is high school football--there were eleven thousand people at the first game (laughter).  This is a high school football game, right.  About ten thousand were white, maybe eleven. Ten thousand were white, and about a thousand were black.  Now, this was the first time in many of the white children's lives that they had really looked at black people as people, because they looked in the stands and said, "Oh, my god, he's got a sister; he's got a mother; he's got a father."  See now, now that makes you a human.  See, before, we weren't human.  They didn't, they--because as long as I went to Norview, nobody talking about my mother [Lena King Heidelberg], my--nothing.  You know what I'm saying?  Nothing.  But all of a sudden, when I started playing football, I got a family, just like they have a family, mother and a father or their children.  Their mother and their fathers are with my mothers and fathers.  And I can't tell you how many times my dad [Colonal M. Heidelberg], he got offended, but it didn't bother him that much, they said, "Give that ball to that nigger" (laughter).  You know what I'm saying?  Now that's a cheer for them (laughter).  But they didn't care.  They didn't say, "Give that ball to the black boy; give that ball to Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]."  "Give that ball to that nigger.  You wanna, you wanna get some runs, give that ball, give that ball to the nigger; he'll score."  And my, you know, my daddy and them had to sit there.  But, but what it did was, it took--this, this was the, the, the social interaction of blacks and whites, which had never come.  Even if you went to a counter to sit down to do a sit-in on a counter, the white person can still leave.  The people behind the counter gotta serve you, but the white person sitting by you is gonna leave.  This brought us together socially, because the people in the stadium couldn't leave.  You, if you rooting for Norview, I'm Norview.  See what I'm saying?  So, it gave us that social mix beyond that building.  Like I said, because for the first two and half years the only thing that was desegregated was that actual building where I went to school.  And then once I came out of the school, I went my way; you went your way, and we never did meet again at all, only time, if we come back the next day in that building.  There was still no mixing, nowhere.  And if you had--would expect either churches or movies, forget it.  They weren't gonna mix that.  But there's--football brought you together socially.  So now, now and that was, that's the impact when you, when you think about why, why did they--football was pop- powerful, more powerful than any of the other sports; football was powerful.
Story_ID: 622475
Speaker 1: Now tell me this, how--had the black population increased much since you started, well, you know, since your fresh--freshman year, to your--say your, there were like, what, seven or eight of you when you started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] is predominantly black now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but--
Speaker 2: What you mean?
Speaker 1: --by the time you were a senior, how many blacks were, were--
Speaker 2: Maybe, they maybe had maybe two or three more, two or three--
Speaker 1: So it's--
Speaker 2: --more blacks.
Speaker 1: --no more than about ten or twelve--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a dozen--
Speaker 2: No, not even that many.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: See, here's the thing about what people don't understand about the desegregation thing: when they ordered the desegregation, people think, because this is the way I used to think, it said, "Proceed with all deliberate speed."  All right, now, when we used to say delib- the word deliberate, we say, "He hit him deliberately."  That means he intended to hit him.  That's not what it, how it's interpreted when you say proceed with all deliberate speed.  Deliberate speed means bring in to see how they act; do an analysis on it; check it out; go back; bring in three.  This is what deliberate speed is.  Deliberate speed is calculated, analyzed.  So when, when, when, when, when--I don't know what the white--black people thought, but I, I said--when they said proceed at all deliberate speed, that means to me they pour it on.  That's not what it mean.  And that's exactly the way that they did it, three here, go back, check it out.  Did it work?  Oh, everything went all right.  Okay, give me four (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they were still controlling the numbers that--
Speaker 2: It's, oh, it's con- definite controlled.  It's con- definitely controlled.  It's deliberate speed (laughter).  You know what I'm saying?  So, you, you, you had to understand the language of what they're saying.  They are doing exactly what the law says, and they're not gonna do it any faster, any faster.  And that was what was happening with us.  So there weren't--let, let me give you this figure, because most people don't know this.  This gonna blow you away.  I went to Norview, how many years did I say, three and a half?  I never, ever, never, ever saw another black person in Norview inside that school (laughter).
Speaker 1: You mean other than the--I mean not a student, you mean?
Speaker 2: Black student.  I saw them before school; I saw them after school; never saw them in the school, not at lunch, walking that hall (laughter).  How the heck could they do that?
Speaker 1: So, whoever was making the class schedule or whatever tried to make sure that you all never were together.
Speaker 2: We never, we were never, ever--
Speaker 1: Lunch schedule, class--
Speaker 2: Nothing, nothing.  I, I, I--and, and, and, and, and the other kids, like, when I tell them this after fifty years later, and you wonder why, why is it--how could I go through this and still--
Story_ID: 622476
Speaker 1: I have two daughters [Angela Heidelberg Roldan and Kirsten Heidelberg] who gra- ended up graduating from Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], both of them, right, and they don't know nothing about this.  How come I never told my daughter- my kids?  The hurt and the pain of what we went through was so terrible that you push that crap aside.  You never talked about it.  If somebody asked you how, how was it going, you would say, "Oh, it's all right."  That's all you say.  And it wasn't all right.  You only said all right because you didn't want to talk about it.  There are fourteen of, of us left today, right, fourteen alive.  When, when, when the City of Norfolk [Virginia] decided to honor us after fifty years for what we did, they brought us together in '08 [2008]. Oh-eight [2008]?  This is--no, '09 [2009].  I got the pictures in there.  I'll show them to you.  This was the first time, and at that, how many came to that?  I think it was twelve, eleven or twelve came, out of the, the thirteen that are still--fourteen--thirteen that are still alive.  Two was missing.  I think two people were missing.  That was the first time that we had ever gotten together in fifty years to talk on that, that, that, to talk about it.  And like, when I sat there and listened to their stories, and, and it, and it comes like pulling teeth because nobody--I guess I'm probably the most freely speaker about those affairs.  And I think it's because I wrote this book ['The Norfolk 17: A Personal Narrative on Desegregation in Norfolk, Virginia in 1958 - 1962,' Andrew I. Heidelberg] in '06 [2006].  And, and since then I've been talking about it, and, and, and as you see, even now when I talk about it, it evokes pain and, and tears.  Well, if you would have, if you--I got the video for the, for us when we sat down and we talked to--WHRO [WHRO Radio, Norfolk, Virginia], did this special on us.  Man, that night, when I hear their story, and, and I guess that's what we didn't know.  It is--we went to different schools together.  We all shared the same experience, but we never talked about it.  And we are still messed up, believe it, like all of us.  You know, we're, we, we function.  All, I mean, all, everybody has really done well, you know, but messed up, man, my life.  And I watch them when they talk, and we all talk.  And once, once we started talking, the tears come from everywhere.  And, and some people, even today--that, that one girl, she still can't sleep.  One guy--and I, I don't like to call their names because I like for them to say that.  But we--there's one guy who, who I asked him to come to the meeting, he said, "No, I, I can't."  And it's--and, and, and he won't come because he, he can't deal with it, still, to this day.  I mean, and then some of us left.  You know, some quit.  They just couldn't take it, you know, just couldn't take it.  It was, it was, it was hell, man.  It was like--and, and, and I always think about that, 'cause if something happens in the school now they call in the psychiatrist.  Ain't nobody ever come to us and say, "Look, do y'all need any help?"  You know what I'm saying?  What has helped me has been the fact that I wrote this book and people want to hear about it.  And, and the point about it, the people didn't really want to hear about it until fifty years later.  Because I wrote the book when I, when I, when, as I told you, when, when I had got cut from nor- Pittsburgh Steelers in 1967.  I got cut from the team.  And I guess that hurt me so bad, and it, it, it evoked some of the feelings of rejection that I felt like when I was, when I was at, at Norview.  And, and my mind just went back to that time.  And, and, and that's when I said, "You know, let me write some of this down," 'cause it was fresh in my mind.  And I wrote all of the things that's in the book, wrote it down.  And I, and I kept it for all those years, never, never intending to publish it, but it was such a cleansing thing for me to write it down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a little known chapter in, in the history of black folks in this country--I mean, these, there are a lot of stories I think like your story but that are never told, and we just don't know.  But--
Speaker 1: If you're over fifty years old in America, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you're black, you got a story.
Story_ID: 622477
Speaker 1: Now there, there's--let's go back to the game now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's eleven thousand people show up at the game (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were eleven--
Speaker 1: And you said a thousand--
Speaker 2: --eleven--
Speaker 1: --African Americans showed up.
Speaker 2: A thousand African Americans.
Speaker 1: What was the--how did the black community approach you during those days that you were at Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, like--
Speaker 1: --even after--
Speaker 2: --outside the gate was like another thousand blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was a black neighborhood right across the street from Norview.  And like, that, that was, they were my fans, man.  That was like, it was like freedom, man.  And, and they were screaming.  They couldn't even get in.  You know what I'm saying?  And, and, and I was like, I, I was everything.  I was like--
Speaker 1: So what happened in that first game?  Did you, did you do well?
Speaker 2: First, oh yeah.  Oh man, I, that's when I, that's when it hit.  I scored two touchdowns and ran a kickoff back all the way.  And like, I woke up the next morning and (laughter)--and everybody talks about that--and I see in letters at least this big, 'Norview Streak Reaches Thirty-Seven.'  That was our thirty-seventh straight win.  And they had, 'Heidelberg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg] A Star.'  And I looked that, boy, like, it just like, I, you know.  And people to this day, 'cause I had friends, they said--when they introduce people who don't know about it they say, "This my man, Heidelberg, here.  He played football with the white people, and he, he could, he could run four yards, and they put his name up in three inch letters."  He said, "I played with a black school.  I scored sixty-five points in one game.  They had a little article like this for me" (laughter). And look, that is the truth, because I never forget this black kid who I went to college with.  He played at I.C. Norcom [I.C. Norcom High School] in Portsmouth [Virginia].  He played a game, high school basketball game.  He scored 127 points in one game.
Speaker 1: Some people couldn't do that in the gym with the ball by themselves.
Speaker 2: By themselves.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He scored a hundred twent- they had an article on the back page (gesture) about like this.
Speaker 1: Wow, in one basket--a high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In one game.
Speaker 1: That's incredible.
Speaker 2: That might still be the record, high school record.
Speaker 1: Did he go on to play--
Speaker 2: He played at Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  Yeah, he went, he had a full scholarship at Norfolk--
Speaker 1: Did he--
Speaker 2: --was very good.  Yeah, he was--
Speaker 1: Was a pro--did he play pro ball?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't play pro.  He didn't play pro, but he, he, he was, he was super good in, in college.
Speaker 1: What, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Johnny Morris [John Morris].
Speaker 1: Johnny Morris.
Speaker 2: Johnny "Pep" Morris, yeah. Yeah, he was, he was something, man.
Speaker 1: At I.C. Norcom.
Speaker 2: He went to I.C. Norcom.  He was, he was awesome, a hundred and twent- this is eight minutes a quarter.  I think--was it eight or twelve?  How many, ten minutes, whatever they play.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: That wasn't like a--
Speaker 2: It wasn't, it wasn't like--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --twelve minutes like the pros plays, you know, 127 points.  And the article was like about (gesture) that big.
Speaker 1: Man, he, he, he must have (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, he was, he was tearing it up.
Speaker 1: The Nets were the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh man, yeah, he was, he was, he was something else.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, at any rate, so you, you do well, and you--so the whole season went pretty good--
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, now the second game, our game was first the turning point, because we had to play E.C. Glass [E.C. Glass High School] in Lynchburg [Virginia].  Now, you ever heard that name?
Speaker 1: Yes, we--
Speaker 2: Carter Glass--
Speaker 1: Well, Lynchburg--
Speaker 2: E. Carter Glass?
Speaker 1: --we heard of Lynchburg.  You know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, see, a lot of--even black people don't know.  Carter Glass was one of the biggest segregationists in Virginia history. You, you got to check that out.  That's funny how they still got the school named after him, E. Carter Glass.  We used to call it E.C. Glass.  And they were probably one of the best teams in, around at that particular time.  And we went down there to play them our second game.  I think it was like, maybe sixteen thousand people.  They had--oh, they (unclear), this is high school football.  But that--what was most impressive about it, is they had the National Guard around the entire stadium and National Guard around the entire field.  That was a trip, 'cause of how racist it was.
Story_ID: 622478
Speaker 1: And you know it's funny when we went down.  I'll tell you the quick story.  So, we get to Prince Edward County [Virginia].  Now this is where Farmville [Virginia] is, so you can relate to this, right?  We get to Prince Edward County, and we come to the restaurant where we're gonna eat, and we go--so the, so the coach comes out and says, "Well--," now we had just won the first game thirty-seven to noth--(unclear) don't know.  We killed them, Princess Anne [Princess Anne High School, Virginia Beach, Virginia].  Coach said, "The tables in, in the dining room is not ready yet.  Why don't you guys walk around for about a half an hour and then come back, and they should have everything ready."  So, the whole team, here you got sixty guys, one, one black guy.  And we walk out.  Like, it was downtown; it was the main street.  What, what first amazed me was there was no people in the town, in the whole downtown.  I--we didn't see no people.  This was funny, no people.  So we were walking down and we were talking about football, yeah, 'cause this was, this was what you call a good--this was the toughest game we was gonna play; we knew that.  So we passed this building, and it look sort of like a courthouse.  It had like four pillars in the front.  I'll never forget it, huge pillars.  So I looked up and, and I saw Prince Edward County.  And you know, as a black person, certain things stand out to you that you consider dangers that you remember.  And I kept saying to myself, "Prince Edward, Prince.  Why does that name--," I, I knew it was supposed to mean something to me, right, but I, but I couldn't, I could not place it.  I, I knew it, it's something you don't forget this.  It's like Emmett Till.  You don't forget, you know, it's a, it's a sign, but I, but it couldn't come to me.  So one of the guys in the back, he, he yelled out.  He said, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]," so I turned around.  He said, "Do you know where we are?"  So I said, I said, "Unh-uh" (shakes head).  He said, "Prince Edward County," right.  And I--(unclear) then I said--I knew that was supposed to mean something to me.  He said, "Their schools are still closed."  Remember now, Prince Edward closed their schools in 1958.  They did not open them until 1964--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --all right.
Speaker 2: But they were still playing football in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not Prince Edward.
Speaker 2: No, no, okay, that's--
Speaker 1: Their, their school, there was--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --that, that was--their city schools were completely closed.  Now, see, and now that's what you call adamant about not desegregating your schools.  They didn't have no public school, no public high school.  Okay, so, this was really the first time I got scared, you know, because the captain said, "Hold, hold up."  He said, "Let's not go no further."  He said, "Let's just turn around slowly.  And y'all close in around Andy, and let's just walk back to the bus very slowly."  And like, when I see white people get scared (laughter), you know, like, like, I mean they were serious, but these were my teammates.  So they closed in around me, and, and no, nobody said a word, and we walked back to the bus.  And about, when we got back to the bus, they were just about ready, and then we went inside.  So we was, you know--so, the restaurant was there, and we sitting there.  Now everybody's like (sighs) (laughter), you know.  So we're like laughing, man.  We were like, oh, man, it was funny, like, "Oh, my god, I couldn't believe that we were here, we're here in Prince Edward County.  That was scary."  And everybody's like, I mean everybody on the team was just talking about it, so we just laughing.  And then we're laughing too 'cause, you know, because the guy had the newspaper from the, from the whatever the newspaper was in Lynchburg [Virginia], and it had in big letters (laughter)--and it's funny--"Bring your nigger" (laughter).  This was in the newspaper, "Bring your nigger."  And it had a guy, he, he had his shoes off; he had his feet in a, in a, in a big tub, and he had the newspaper (laughter), he had--he was reading the newspaper (laughter).  In the front of the newspaper, I mean they printed it right in the newspaper, "Bring Your Nigger," we're ready for him, you know.
Story_ID: 622479
Speaker 1: And so, we were laughing about that too, and the guy comes over to me, the coach, the assistant coach, Coach Buck Moody [John Moody].  He comes over to me, and we're laughing.  There's me, Kenny, and Zongo [Calvin "C.J." Zongolowicz], and I think it was Dave Fitzgerald [David Fitzgerald], and we're sitting there.  And he says--so we're laughing.  We said, "Coach, oh, man, but that was hairy out there, man."  You know, we're just laughing.  He said, "Wait a minute, hold up, hold up, hold up."  He said, "They're not gonna feed us with you in here, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]."  So we look at him, "Ah, come on, coach, come on, you know, we said stop." Oh, we, oh, we talk, and everybody's laughing, right.  So we just started laughing, man, and he said, "Hold, hold it, hold it, hold it."  So we stopped.  He said, "I'm not joking."  (Crying) He said, "They're not gonna feed us with you."  I said--and like--(crying) he said, "They set up a table for you in the kitchen."  And so, you know, like, he said, "Come on."  And like, you know, like, all the players, you know, like, I think it hurt everybody.  You know, they was like, whoa.  So, you know, I got up and you know, like I walked back.  And you know, the, the white guy was standing at the door, and he opened the door, you know.  And I went in you know, like, I go in, you know, and I see this black lady and this black man.  I don't know why, man, they got the biggest grin (laughter), they got the biggest, proudest look on their face, you know, like, "Come on in here, son, come on in here."  And I, I looked, man, and they had this table, man, with a tablecloth and like, everything (laughter) on the table, you know, like, you know, it was like, whoa.  They said, "You sit down, son.  We gonna feed you."  And, and, and, and, and I think when you see again like the pride on their face, it was like, I mean, they knew what was happening.  I didn't know what was happening, but they knew.  And they were like, so, so proud of me, you know.  And, and I mean they had everything.  I had never seen a table like that, set like that, I mean everything.  So they said, "Sit on down," so I sat down and then put my napkin on my lap, right.  As soon as I get ready to do my first bite, man, into the door comes Kenny and Zongo.  They said, "Hey, hey, if you sit in the kitchen and eat, we gonna sit in here and eat with you."  And the two of them came in, and like, man, and that just like changed everything.  And you know, we sat in there, man.  We laughed; we ate so much.  It was, it was, that was like, I don't know.  I remember like when we got ready to leave, Ken Whitley gets on the bus.  He goes, "All right, hold up, team; wait a minute."  He said, "I don't care where we go from now, but I'm gonna tell you one thing, we have to eat in the kitchen.  I'm eating with Andy all the time" (laughter). That's when the guys just laughed.  But, man, that was, that was, that was a real, a real tough one.  That, that kind of reminded me always of what my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] had always said to me about the race thing.  She said, "Look, one thing I want you to always remember: you don't have to worry about white people.  If you remember and never forget that you're black, you will not have a problem."  And I really didn't understand that, because I played that first game and I was a star, believe me.  That was like--my head was like this (gesture) big, and I took myself as a member of the team.  I wasn't black.  I was a Norview Pilot [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  But I did forget I was black.  You know, I didn't even think about color no more.  And because she said, "The minute that you forget that you're black, somebody's gonna remind you.  And when they remind you, it hurts; it never feels good."  And that's exactly what happened.  Because when that guy said to me, "You can't--you've got to eat in the kitchen," he reminded me, you are still a nigger.  You know what I'm saying?
Story_ID: 622480
Speaker 1: And when they remind you it does hurt worse, when somebody has to tell you.  But when you remember that you're black, then you, you know, you just be careful, you know.  You don't have to--you know, it's, it's basically how I, you know, like, but I raise my kids, my daughters [Angela Heidelberg Roldan and Kirsten Heidelberg], I say look, "You don't have to grow up hating white people.  And I don't want you to do that," because I learned from, from my teammates that all white people are not bad.  You know what I'm saying?  And basically, if, if, if they all had that attitude, we would still be in slavery--you what I'm saying--if they all had it.  But the point that I say is, "You take people as they are until they prove themselves differently."  So, you take white people as good people until they prove to you that they're not good people.  And, and, and I think that helps.  But you never, as I tell them, "Don't ever forget that you're black, right; don't ever forget it, because one day somebody will remind you, and it might" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was, there was another story you told off camera I think when I came in about taking some of your friends in Norfolk [Virginia] on a shortcut through the white community--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and a comment that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can, can you briefly--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --kind of tell that again--
Speaker 1: This, this was after I had gone to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and I hadn't played football, but I had gone out for the team.  And I think it was the junior year, and, and so I had a lot of black friends.  And so we were going to watch a game over at Foreman Field [Norfolk, Virginia], which was the biggest stadium that we had in, in, in Norfolk.  It was a big game or something, so we were going to Foreman Field.  So I told my boys, "Well, let's cut through here, through the white neighborhood, to get to Foreman Field," because we could come down the, the basic main route and make a like a square.  But we could diagonally cut through and get there much quicker.  So as, as I explained to you, when you go through the white neighborhoods, you don't--we didn't walk on the sidewalks; we walked in the street, because we didn't want whites to think that we were nowhere near their houses.  We were in the streets, and you could not say anything differently about us.  So when we got--we were going down the street.  And so we took a couple of turns, and the guys said, "Berg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], we lost, man."  I said, "I ain't lost, man.  I know where I'm going."  I said, "Go down here," so we went down there, and we took another turn.  That guy said, "Man, we are lost, Berg.  You don't even know where you are."  I said, "I do know where I am."  So we saw this white man sitting on the porch.  He looked like he, like I said, about sixty-five or seventy.  I said, "I'll prove to you I know where I am."  So we walked down--we was in the streets.  So the white man was sitting on the porch, so we--I, I went, I went over to the edge of the, to the curb, and I said, "Excuse me, pop, can you tell me if this is the way to Foreman Field?"  (Laughter) He looked at me.  He said, "I ain't your pop, you black son of a bitch" (laughter).  I looked--the, the guys that were with me, the, guys laughed.  I mean like, it was so funny.  It was so funny to them that they didn't even get angry at, at him calling me a black son of a bitch.  And all the way to Foreman Field that was the laugh.  Every, every three minutes one of them would look at me and say, "I ain't your pop, you black son of a bitch" (laughter), and everybody would just laugh.  But that's how blatant it was.  I mean, there was--white people had no respect, fear, or anything of, of telling you during that time, you know, calling you nigger, you know, or anything like that.
Story_ID: 622481
Speaker 1: I mean, Virginia--
Speaker 2: For the newspaper to publish, "Bring your nigger"--
Speaker 1: "Bring your nigger," in big letters, not, not little (unclear), big letters.  I mean, Lynchburg [Virginia] was, Lynchburg was like pretty rough.
Speaker 2: Well, how did that game go, anyway?  We didn't, we--
Speaker 1: They beat us.  That was the worst thing.  They beat us twenty-one to nothing.  They were like farmers.  They, I mean, they were good now.  They were like--most of them were like about 5'10", about 200 or 190 [pounds]; they were big like little fire hydrant.  Now, nobody on the team is gonna say anything differently, but I'm gonna tell you the real story.  That was the first time that I thought, I thought, that I experienced prejudice against me from the referees, because on two separate occasions, which I'll never forget it, and I guess the coaches never said anything, but I'll tell you how I know.  We had a play called dive right and dive left, which was really a quick opener to the halfback coming straight between the guard and the tackle, and it was fast.  And out--in the, in the back, which usually flanked out at least three or four yards from the quarterback.  So he had to run over there to get it to, the ball to us 'cause it was, it was fast.  You just, you just take off and run straight.  And then usually if you get through those two defensive players, you break it to the outside, you gone.  I mean that's how fast it was.  And the faster you were at doing it, the better chance you had.  And in the second quarter, he called dive right, and I, and I, and, and, and they was hitting us.  I mean they were putting leather on us, and I knew that, and I knew the best chance I had was to be fast and quick.  And he called dive right, and I jumped through that hole so fast, and I hit the outside to the right.  And I took a step and I was going, and I, and all I could see was the end zone.  I know it.  And when I turned up, the referee blew the whistle again, (makes sound), I mean.  And I--now, first of all, you should have blown it when I jumped through the hole, but you waited 'til I got through hole, broke to the outside, and I was touchdown.  And you--I knew they weren't gonna catch me.  And he called the play back and said it was offside.  And that, that happened twice.  Now, nobody on the team has ever said anything to me about that, even on my team.  But I met this guy, who went to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], white guy who went to Norview when I did.  He's the one that we got together and, and wrote a screenplay for the, the book ['The Norfolk 17: A Personal Narrative on Desegregation in Norfolk, Virginia in 1958 - 1962,' Andrew I. Heidelberg] for a movie.  And he came to see me while we were talking.  He said, "You know, one thing always puzzled me about that Glass [E.C. Glass High School, Lynchburgh, Virginia] game."  He said, "I know they beat y'all, but," he said, "there were two times that, that you jumped through there, and everybody in the stands knew that they had called a whistle."  He said, "Did y'all ever think about that?"  Now there was nobody on my team had ever said that to me.  And here is the first person who watched the game, and, and, and that's what kind of confirmed it in my mind 'cause I never said it to any of the players.  I just felt like that when I was running the ball.  Like, why would they stop the play now.  But, in any event, we still lost the game.  So, that's what stopped us from winning the state championship.
Story_ID: 622482
Speaker 1: So the--you said during that season you all could not win the state champion because of this loss to--
Speaker 2: That loss.  We didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I.C. Glass [I.C. Glass High School, Lynchburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: --know it at that time, because we went on to--the biggest thing here was the Eastern District champion.  And, and we played against Maury High School [Matthew Fontaine Maury High School, Norfolk, Virginia] in the championship game, which was, which was between Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] and Maury.  And I tell people, because they, they always wonder, you know how many people came to the championship game, was thirty thousand people at the championship game.  And I always say--I, I don't talk about Virginia now, but an article came out maybe about ten years ago about some of the largest crowds that have come together for sporting events in, in the history of, of Virginia and the history of Norfolk [Virginia] also.  And the, the largest event was--it's bigger now--it's like thirty-eight thousand--no, that's a, that's the country--high school.  But in Virginia, they had five events, the largest one being thirty-two thousand, and the smallest one being twenty-six thousand.  And they never mentioned the game that Norview played Maury for the championship, which was thirty thousand people.  And I always wonder why.  I mean, but it goes along with basically how I think Virginia has approached letting the rest of the world know how it was during those particular times, I mean, and the fact that none of the, none of the children who were involved had ever written anything about it, so it gave the person who spoke it the expertise of saying this is the history of what it's like, which is one of the reasons why I, I brought my book ['The Norfolk 17: A Personal Narrative on Desegregation in Norfolk, Virginia in 1958 - 1962,' Andrew I. Heidelberg] out.  Because when I started hearing the stories of how they interpreted how it didn't affect the kids, and Virginia took it in stride, and, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is, this is interesting.  Virginia--correct me if I'm wrong here--Virginia is seen as like the site of the original settlement of Jamestown [Virginia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you've got, you know, [President] George Washington, and Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson], and Madison [President James Madison], Monroe [President James Monroe].  They're from Virginia (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight, we got eight presidents.
Speaker 1: These, all the univer- University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --old--all these schools and intelligence linked--
Speaker 2: Yeah, William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia].
Speaker 1: The, this is the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --pride of the South in a lot of ways--
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the place the, the capital of the Confederacy was originally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right, Williamsburg [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --started right here.
Speaker 1: So, there's a, there's a, a sense of pride about Virginia being bigger than the rest of the South.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's, that's what has happened.  That is really the way that they responded.  Like I said, that was such an ugly time in Virginia history.  And, and I can understand a little bit why they wouldn't want it known.  But I think more than, than taking their attitude is that you would want to avail the people of their history, good or bad, you know, like you can't change it.  Just like I, when I tell the young people, I don't--when I go back and talk about what happened to me, I still know that at this point in my life I'm still a better person than I would have been if I had never gone through those experiences.  But the thing, the, the thing that I like to make sure, I like to make sure that the truth is known, which I think is important for our young people, black and white, to know how your people were, to know how my people were, and to know how we were as, as, as, as Virginians.  And, and, and it seems that the, the older the information gets, the more the opinion of the majority seems to be going along the lines that Virginia, like I said, took everything in stride, wasn't no one--when it came time for desegregation in Virginia, everything was cool; we didn't, we didn't have no problems; we just accepted it, and that's the biggest lie that anybody could, could, could ever promote within, within the history annals.
Story_ID: 622483
Speaker 1: One of the things that I'd like to make sure that they know is, is I can't speak for the other sixteen children, but I can tell you my side of the story so that my kids will know that, that, that, that here's how it was.  None of this stuff come at a, at an easy price.  And, and why is it important for you to grasp this type, this information, this education that you're getting is because this was hard to gain hold of.  This was not, this was not something that they gave to us.  When we used to get books at the black schools, the books were two or three years behind the books that the white kids get.  And they were the ones that the white kids used to use before they got the updated version.  And of course when we got them, you'd see all the white names in there, and the book was out of date.  We--sure, sure, you're up to date on what, what education you get out of this particular book, but this particular book is like five years behind what's really happening in the world, so you're at a disadvantage from all aspects.  So all that what was bestowed upon these seventeen children should not go unnoticed, should not go untold.  You know what I'm saying?  And like, as I point out in my book [The Norfolk 17: A Personal Narrative on Desegregation in Norfolk, Virginia in 1958 - 1962,' Andrew I. Heidelberg], why is it important?  Well, it's important that people know their history.  And that's, you know, it's, what the saying goes: if you don't remember your history, you, you're destined to repeat it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there seems to be a tendency these days to celebrate the result and forget the struggle.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that, that's exactly what I'm saying.  And I don't, I, I, like I said, I don't tell the story to try to extract vengeance or give a bad name to white people.  I mean, like I said, that, what happened to us has already happened.  There's nothing you can do about it.  It's already happened.  It's the thing that I tell the young kids today, is that 90/10 principal.  Ten percent of things that happened to you, you don't have any control over that, and you never will.  It happens, it happens, it happened.  Now, but you got control over the greater part, the 90 percent, because the 90 percent is how you respond to what happened to you, and that dictate what's happens.  So you still have the control of it.  You--somebody could come along and just punch you upside your head.  You cannot prevent that; it happened.  Now, you jump up and want to kill somebody.  Now that's how you respond to what happens you.  See what I'm saying?  So, so, so, a lot our children and other children need to know, that how you respond to what happens to you is the key here.  You got options all along the line.  And the better you learn how to respond to them, the better off you're gonna be.  I mean you set a whole chain of events in, in, in motion negatively if you respond negatively, you know, and vice versa: you re- you set a whole chain of events in, in, in place if you respond positively to what happens to you.  That doesn't mean that you sit back.  And me, I'm, I'm the first one to tell you, like I said, I was a Malcolm X man, you know, get back, you know.  There's a time to fight, and then there's a time not to fight.  And you've got to, you've got to know that, and, and, and although it's not easy, you look at what, what has happened over the years, what the experience has been, and hopefully you'll learn something, because this education thing is very important.  And, and, and, and, and the less of it we get, as you pointed out to me, it's cool not to want to be educated (laughter).  Like, I, I can't understand that.  I mean, when I was a child, even in a black school, I never wanted to miss a day out of school, not one.
Story_ID: 622484
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, now at, at the end of your senior year, now, now you all won the, what, Eastern (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eastern District championship.
Speaker 1: Eastern District championship.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and then, how, how are your--I assume you made good grades--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --in school.
Speaker 2: --did good.
Speaker 1: Did you have--were there any attempts to sabotage your grades--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --on the part of the teachers--
Speaker 2: The, the biggest saboteur of my grades was me.  I think that after (laughter), after I played that senior year, my head was so big that (laughter)--and I try to tell the young kids this, you (unclear) fame is, is not easy to cope with, you know.  And I was like probably one of the most famous people in Virginia.  You know what I'm saying?  And, and I remember the good favor that I had a, a chemistry teacher at Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], white gentleman named Mr. Anderson [ph.], will never forget it.  And in April of my senior year, after I had played football, started slacking off, jamming like I was the cool guy, the cool football player, having a good time, talking to everybody, not too much to white girls, but just having a good time.  And he called me into his office--to show you how things changed--in his chemistry office.  And, and he came out in the front where the, the sinks and the Bunsen burners, all that stuff was.  And he had a cigarette in his hand; he was smoking a cigarette (laughter).  So, he said, "Come on in, son."  So I came on in.  And he says, "Come over here and have a seat," so I went over and had a seat.  He said, "Let me explain something to you."  He said, "You know," he said, "you have done very well for yourself, and for your race, and for this city, and for this state."  He said, "And I really would not like to see you go the way of what the stereotype says of you, that you're good athletes, but you're terrible in the books."  He said, "Because you're failing my chemistry class."  So, and I, and I didn't know 'til that, then, right.  I said--he says, "And I know by your grades that you shouldn't be failing my class.  You got an A plus in advanced algebra; you got A plus in trigonometry; you got an A plus in plane geometry; and you got B's and A's."  He said, "But you're failing my chemistry class."  He said, "Now, this is what I'm gonna do for you."  He said, "If you fail my class, you're not gonna graduate in June; you don't graduate, and then you will be the stereotype.  All of this that you've accomplished goes down the drain 'cause you didn't graduate."  He said, "But this is what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna give you a D so you can graduate."  He said, "But you need to get your head screwed on right; your education is very important."  He said, "Now I understand how difficult it is."  He said, "But you gotta do better than what you're doing."  And, and I will never forget that.  You know what I'm saying?  Because even though I only graduated, it was 456--453 students in my graduating class.  That's a big--that's bigger than some schools, 453 students.  I was num- I graduated number 200 and something, 230, 40; I don't know what it was--in the top half but right at the, almost at the midpoint, you know.  And that was because of, of, of how poorly I did in, with my chemistry, my, with my chemistry grade, 'cause I didn't, I didn't have no other, no other D's in anything.  You know, I might have some C's, but no D's.  And so that, that made me graduate like 2--like I said 240 or 230, something like that.
Speaker 1: Did you find the work generally from your freshman year on more challenging than the work in the black school?
Speaker 2: No, no, I, I didn't find it more challenging at all because, like I said, I was not a dumb student.  And, and, and that half a semester that I spent at the tutoring school really got me pumped, you know, got me into good habits, study habits, and, and had me primed.  So the work was, it was, it was--wasn't, wasn't difficult at all.  I, I never had no--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --note--
Speaker 1: You know, high school often (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I never went to--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a black high school, so I don't know.  See now, when I was in junior high school, that was all completion, you know, like, 'cause I had black guys that were--and we was all challenging each other.  So it, but it was still more like fun.  I mean, I was never what I considered the guy who--when I see a smart guy, I know a smart guy, believe me. You know what I'm saying?
Story_ID: 622485
Speaker 1: And I was not that kind of guy because I would come in the classroom [at Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and I would make A's; believe me, I would make A's.  But you might not know it, but I stayed up all night long (laughter), you know, to get that A, because I wanted to the A's. It was just like when I went back to Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] to get my degree.  I had to take two years, even though I had a hundred and, I had a hundred and sixteen credits.  But it was so long ago, in the '60s [1960s], versus coming back in the '90s [1990s], that a lot of the courses that I took were obsolete.  And in order to graduate in a particular discipline, you had to take, first of all, the, the twenty or thirty credits in that discipline, and then you had to get rid of all of the courses that you had taken that were obsolete; replace them with, you know--(unclear).  I went back to school, and I took seventeen courses, fifty-one hours.  I made--
Speaker 2: Well, that's kind (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) seventeen, seventeen A's.  You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Seventeen.  I, I didn't get--the lowest grade I got in any class was A.
Story_ID: 622486
Speaker 1: Well, what were your prospects when you graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was gonna go to--
Speaker 1: --from Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia]?  What were you going--
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I--the first--I got fifty-one scholarships, like I told you, when I graduated.  And I really didn't want to go to school.  It was--you know, I wanted to be a doctor, but I hadn't thought about school.  Tell me how I figured that out?  But anyway--
Speaker 1: These are athletic scholarships offered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all athletic scholarships.  And so when, so when the ta- came time to graduate, I really didn't want to, like, look at all these schools that offered me these scholarships, 'cause I really didn't want to go anywhere.  I liked my home.  I liked living in Virginia.  And all of my boys went into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  So in my life, the thing is, let me go into the Marines first because the war and the draft thing was a big thing.  That made you think differently about a lot of stuff.  The only reason you would, would be unavailable for the draft is if you were in college, which was also one of the reasons why I went, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was starting, it was kind of starting to heat up in six--it was sixty-one [1961], but it wasn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really big yet, the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean the U.S.--
Speaker 2: But, but you could be drafted.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: You could be drafted.  If you were at one--1Y or whatever they classified you, you, you had a likely chance of being drafted into the [U.S.] military.  So, so I didn't want to--the [U.S.] Army was not my thing.  So I wanted to go to, to the Marines, but my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] would not sign for me.  At that time, they had to sign for you to go into the service.  And so when I found out that she wasn't gonna sign for me, I said, "Okay, well, I might as well go to college."  But by that time, it's now June--no, August maybe, of '62 [1962].  And--no, '63 [1963]--'62 [1962]?  Yeah, '62 [1962]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --graduated June.  It's now August, getting close to September.  So when I decided that I was gonna go to college, all of the scholarships that had been offered to me were gone except, I think I had eight left, and they were all the black schools [HBCUs], Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], Maryland State [Maryland State College; University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland], Elizabeth City [Elizabeth City State College; Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], you know, schools like that, and Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  Those were the only ones where I could still accept the scholarship to, so I, I decided to take the Norfolk State one 'cause I had a girlfriend in Norfolk [Virginia], you know.  But, and it's amazing because I went to Norfolk State for two reasons.  One, all of the black guys that played at Booker T. [Booker T. Washington High School, Norfolk, Virginia] told me, "The only reason why you were a good player is 'cause you played with the white boys" (laughter).  That's--I used to tell them, "You got to be crazy."  They said, "Now you know damn well, if you was running that ball like that the white--the black boys would have tore your behind up" (laughter).  I said, "Okay; we'll see."  That's one reason why I went to Norfolk State.  The second reason that I went to Norfolk State was because I was gonna major in chemistry because I made that D, and I was definitely gonna correct that.  So that was my major when I went to Norfolk State, was chemistry.  And I came to Norfolk State in--
Speaker 1: In the fall of '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: --fall of '62 [1962] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 622487
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  We're completing an interview for The HistoryMakers we started a couple of days ago.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg, A-N-D-R-E-W, H-E-I-D-E-L-B-E-R-G.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm currently retired--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --former banker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 13th of May, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're currently at my home in Hampton, Virginia.
Story_ID: 622488
Speaker 1: All right, now, we're picking up where we left off.  You had graduated from Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia], and you chose to go to Norfolk State University [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, take us from there.
Speaker 2: I, I think I went through the part where the lady had offered me a scholarship at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute; Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia], and I returned that down, and I went to Norfolk State.  And my primary reasons for going was that I had let all of the other scholarships expire.  And the only ones I had left were to the predominantly black schools [HBCUs].  So--
Speaker 1: Right, it's August I guess then.
Speaker 2: That was in August, right.  So, my dad [Colonal M. Heidelberg], who was well known to the, the, the superintendent of recreation, who was a black man at that time, he was the, in charge of the recreation department for the blacks, for the blacks, not for the whites.  There were two recreation departments in Norfolk [Virginia]; one was for whites, and one was for blacks.  And I had played in both recreation leagues.  And he was really responsible for, for steering my dad to commit me to Norfolk State Uni- Uni--not university--Norfolk State College.  And so that's how I actually ended up signing a four year scholarship to go to Norfolk State.  I, I didn't really know anything about Norfolk State College.  But one of the things that I thought would be helpful to me was the fact that when you come from a small town like Norfolk, and as I might have said earlier, many of the black students that went to the, to, to the black schools, Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School] in Norfolk, I.C. Norcom [I.C. Norcom High School] in, in Portsmouth [Virginia], Huntington High School [Collis P. Huntington High School] in Newport News [Virginia], Huntington and Carver [George Washington Carver High School, Newport News, Virginia], and Phenix [George P. Phenix High School], which was in Hampton [Virginia], most of the students who played football looked at me as though I was really not such a great football player, playing with the white school.  And they used to always say, you know, "If you had been, if you had played in a black school, you would never had that much notoriety."  So I, I really wanted to go to Norfolk State to show them that there was no slack in playing football with the white schools, that the white players that I played with were some of the best players in Virginia.  And the second aspect for going to Norfolk State, was a chance for me to redeem myself and major in chemistry, which I almost failed coming out of high school, and I got a reprieve from the teacher at Norview High School.  So that's basically how I got to Norview [sic.], and--
Story_ID: 622489
Speaker 1: I remember Coach William Archie--they called him Bill Archie--who graduated from West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  He--this was his first year taking over the job as head coach at Norfolk State College [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  And this was also Norfolk State's first year playing in the CIAA, which was the Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association, because the years prior to 1962, they were in I think the Eastern Collegiate, ECAC [Eastern Collegiate Athletic Conference] or some smaller group.  And they were moving up to the CIAA, which at that time was probably one of the larger black conferences in the country.
Speaker 2: Now is that the one that would include Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and some of the other--
Speaker 1: Howard and all of the- them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Morgan State--
Speaker 1: There was also a southern where--conference also, which was where like Florida [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], Tennessee A and I [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], and all of them.  Whatever it was, they were, they were the two major conferences that, that were available for black schools at that time.  And so I remember Coach Archie coming over to, to my house to, to recruit me for that, to, to sign with him, because I was thinking about either Maryland State [Maryland State College; University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland] or Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] at the time.  And he indicated that, that he needed a player like me.  And, and I, I think one thing that I learned from, from that interview was probably the strength that I had as a, as a football player, as a running back or as a receiver, or later on in life an example of how to, how to play the game, this game of life.  He said to me, he said, "The reason I want you for my team is because I've designed an offense that I think will maximize your strength.  And the one key element that I think you have that many players don't have is I don't have to block for you all the way over the goal line."  I didn't know what he meant for that, from that statement at first.  But when, the more I played, the more I began to realize what he meant was because my attitude was this--and that, that's where I think I was a little different.  Whenever I touched the ball, I tried to score a touchdown, whenever I touched the ball.  I don't care where it was.  Anytime I touched the ball, it was to try and score a touchdown.  And I found out later that that's what it means, because you never know when that person might strike you, because every time that they run, they're trying to score.  So if you slip at any one play, he's gonna break it, and he's gonna be gone all the way because his goal is each time he touches it is to get to the end, end zone.  So, he doesn't have to block for me all the way over 'cause my desire is always to get to the end zone.  And I, and I, I began to realize that that's why I really wasn't one of those four yards and a cloud of dust or three yard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There, there seemed to be--
Speaker 1: --cloud of dust type player.
Speaker 2: --coaches that even though--you know, Woody Hayes, they always said that he designed his offense for three yards and a cloud of dust.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: You know, so he, he was, his goal to hit, make three yards, not to score a touchdown on every play, was to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, exactly.  That's how most of--
Speaker 2: --inch his way down--
Speaker 1: --them play.
Speaker 2: --the field.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  They always said take care of the first downs, and the touchdowns will come, see, and my goal was no, I wanted the touchdown now.  And in fact, I got a scholarship from Woody Hayes too.  He, he wrote me.  He was one of the, the coaches, one of the schools.  Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] was one of the schools that had offered me a grant.  They called it a grant in aid at that particular time for me.
Speaker 2: You, you would have played with Paul Warfield and Ferguson--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Bob Ferguson--
Speaker 1: Yeah, all, all of them.  I mean I--all of the great guys during the '60s [1960s].  I, I played against quite a few of them playing in the, in the CIAA.  We, we played against schools that turned out quite a few professional players during that time.
Story_ID: 622490
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And not to mention that there were quite a few even on the team that I played on, you know.
Speaker 2: I think Leroy Kelly was at Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] back then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yep, Willie Lanier was there.  Darryl Smith--Darryl Johnson was.  Darryl and Michael Johnson [ph.] had played up at Armstrong [Armstrong High School] in Richmond [Virginia].  There was--we played against A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], which Cornell Gordon, Sugar, Sugar Ray Hart [sic. Ronald Hart], Francis Earl [sic. Ronald Francis]--Francis the big tall end.  And you know who was on the bench at that time at A and T?  (Laughter) I always think about that.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson].  He, he was on the bench for A and T.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He was a quarterback, that's right--
Speaker 1: I didn't, I never did see him play--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but I remember the game very well because we went down to North Carolina to play them.  And, and of course, we were new in the league, so nobody really wanted to play Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] because they don't get any credit.  If you beat us, they can could say oh, you just beat a team that has just came out of the ECAC [Eastern College Athletic Conference].  And if you lost, they would say oh, my god, you let Norfolk State College--'cause we were called Little State at the time, because originally, Norfolk, it was the Norfolk division of Virginia State College [Virginia State University], which was in Petersburg [Virginia].  So they called Virginia State up in Petersburg, Big State, and they called Norfolk division Little State.  So, we really had no recognition.  There was no incentive for anybody to play us during that particular time.  But I remember when we went down to A and T, and A and T was like, they played a lot of the schools.  They play--in fact, they had, the week before they had played Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Jacksonville, Florida].  And Bob Hayes was playing at that particular time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Bullet" Bob Hayes, the world's--
Speaker 1: "Bullet" Bob Hayes.
Speaker 2: --world's fastest human.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, yeah, that's when he set the 9.2 record.  And they, I think Florida A and M just squeaked by them that year.  So they came to--when we got there, they were really gonna show how powerful they were.  And I think they were, they were happy they won the game, but they were quite embarrassed that they, they only beat us 13-6.  And, and the game ended with the ball on the four yard line.  We had it, and the time ran out.  And of course, Cornell Gordon, who is from Norfolk, was a, a friend of mine.  I was, I was always happy that I scored the only touchdown in that particular game for Norfolk State.
Story_ID: 622491
Speaker 1: So, well, well, how did the team do?  You know--
Speaker 2: Well, we on, we only--that first year that Coach Archie [William Archie] came to Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] was very difficult to get games.  We only had eight games that season, so our record was four and four.  So we didn't, you know--but he called that, as he always said, said, "A tie is like kissing your sister.  There's really no thrill at all" (laughter).  So, so we were four and four, and, but we had set a name for ourselves.  And I think that the people in the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] conference really gave us some respect from that situation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did the team have success further on down the line, did--
Speaker 2: Well, no, we didn't really get any better than that, which, and I, and I think a lot of that was because I didn't play up to my potential.  I think that the whole desegregation situation took a toll on me.  And I don't mean that it, it was, it was the reason why I didn't play well.  There's no excuse for that when you don't play well.  But one of the things that I know was that, just to be back among black people again, look, it was like (laughter), it was the greatest joy that I had in my life, coming from a situation of that desegregation.  I mean, I just had missed all of the fun.  My high school years were really terrible.  And, and when I got to Norfolk State, which all the black people I wanted in the world, all of the girls that I never had a chance to talk to, I just went buck wild.  So, you know, like I--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --I'm not afraid to admit that.  Yeah, I mean, and my, I mean, and, and, and I think about that because my first year, I went, went--take for example, when I took the, the, the entrance exam to go to Norfolk State there were five hundred freshmen.  And, and I'll never forget it.  And we went into this, this huge auditorium.  It wasn't huge, but they called it the little theater for Norfolk State.  And, and we took, five hundred and some of us took a test for classification as freshmen.  Out of the five hundred or so, there were eight students that they chose for the honors group, and I was one of them.  Now that made me feel good, out, out of five hundred and some people.  Now, I went into the honor's group, and, and I'll never forget it because the first day that I went into the class the lady said to me, she says, "Okay, class," her name was Dr. Capps [Marian Palmer Capps], never forget her.  She said, "Our first assignment--let me give you assignments now," was, she, she had a list of books.  She said, "Everyone in here must read two books a month for the class."  And I had, first of all, I had never read a book in my life.  And, and I, I said, "There's no way that I'm gonna be able to read two books a month or one book every two weeks."  And she said, "Why?"  I said, "Because I play football."  I said, "I came here to play football.  I didn't come here for this."  And, and I, and I think about that now, how ignorant and dumb that was to, to say that, because I remember down the road in my freshman year, which I made the dean's list in my first year in being a chemistry major, made the dean's list.  And she said to me, "I, I would like to offer you a, an academic scholarship."  And I told her, I said, "Dr. Capps, I think you got me mixed up with someone else.  I didn't come here for this.  I came here to play football."  And, and, and, and I think my life as a student went down after I had proved that first of all that I could play against--because all of the guys that said I couldn't play if I had gone to a black school, most of them were on--had tried out for Norfolk State.  And the ones that didn't try out, didn't play ball.  They were at Norfolk State.  And, and I started over all of them.  And the second thing is that I did, brought my chemistry grade up to a, to a, to an honor grade, and, and I felt like I had accomplished what my goals were.  And from there on it went downhill.
Speaker 1: So motivation kind of was not (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was none. If I had of been around whites, I, my motivation would have stayed up there, and I know that.
Speaker 1: As you said before, when you were running you felt like you were running for the whole race.
Speaker 2: That's right; that's right.
Speaker 1: --to vindicate everybody.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And after I played at Norfolk State that first year, I felt like I had justified whatever I had done and that I had done what I was supposed to do.  So I, there was no pressure on me to do anything.  And I really didn't do anything.
Story_ID: 622492
Speaker 1: So, did you set any records in, in athletics when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  No. I didn't, I didn't set any records [at Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  I mean, I still have friends now that, that want to go back and try to get to school to remember the people who played during that era and bring some of the hall, hall of fame and stuff like that.  But I never was--I never after that first season--I start--I, in fact, I got benched the second year for--because I wa--I didn't really play that well.  I got put on the bench.  But then, you know, I started out the season--no, or I, I realized.  I started the second season, and they were wondering if I was gonna have the sophomore jinx.  And what happened was we played against Maryland State [Maryland State College; University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland] up in, wherever it was in Maryland, and they--and I hurt my knee.  And so, that killed me for I think the next five games.  I was out for the rest of the season.  So the following year, I still was not top shape, and I lost my position to another receiver, and I didn't play two months sporadically during my junior year.  And then my senior year I started again.  And you know, and I, I had in between, you know, a, a kickoff return or, or a kick--a, a punt return for a touchdown here.  And I, you know, might have scored a touchdown here or there but nothing that, that I think would have enabled me to get drafted into ca--into the pros.
Speaker 1: So you, you played receiver in, in college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I played wide receiver in college, yes.
Speaker 1: --rather than running back.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a little too light for the, for the running back in the college.  I mean they hit quite harder and more frequently, so I, I felt better if I step out to the sidelines a little bit and--
Speaker 1: How much did you weight then?
Speaker 2: I weighed about 180, 185 [pounds], but I wasn't a fierce type runner like that anyway.  I was, I was more quick and, and speed.  I--you know, they--most of my plays were designed to try to get me to the outside, not to bring me in the inside.
Story_ID: 622493
Speaker 1: How'd you do academically the rest of the time?  Did your grades stay pretty good?
Speaker 2: Well, I--no.  My grades were--I think I did very poorly, in fact.  I passed all of my required core classes--not all of them; I shouldn't say that.  I did my math and English.  I didn't do well in, after that, in chemistry because of the labs that were required to, for the afternoons, and I was at football practice.  So I really didn't do well.  I mean I ended up probably with a D average in my second year for chemistry.  And I switched my major in my third year to biology, which I thought would be easier.  But I didn't realize that there were just as many labs (laughter) in biology as it was in chemistry.  So, I ended up somewhere around 2.1 average [grade point average] for the year.  I mean for my whole disappointing college career, and, and I, I mean from football, sports, and all.  So--
Speaker 1: But who, were, were there any outstanding individuals in college [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] that, that really made an impact on you, even though you weren't doing as well?  I mean were there any professors or, or fellow students that were--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, like, one of the things that I always had in college was the, the people who were, were really smart, I always were in their company.  They gravitated towards me because I was more of a down to earth person that could mingle with, you might want to call them nerds because they were so smart.  But I could, I could talk to them, because like I said, I was, I was intelligent, and I had enough chutzpah, as I call it, to, to do what I needed to do to pass a course.  But I just didn't--when you look at the types of courses that I was taking, you can't pass those without putting forth what I consider a serious effort.  And I just was not in the mood.  I was too busy having a good time, and it took a toll.  That's, that's where my statement, prior planning prevents poor performance, and, and if you don't plan it, in the beginning, you, you, your, your, your performance is gonna, is gonna suffer, so, you know.  But I, I, I took that experience out of college.
Story_ID: 622494
Speaker 1: Now, when did you leave Norfolk [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I left after four years.  I, I, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I completed my full four years. I had to because--
Speaker 1: Okay. So it's is 1966--
Speaker 2: It's in '66 [1966].  And when I did not get drafted, you know, I left and went up north because--
Speaker 1: Now how close did you come to getting drafted?  Were, were you close at all 'cause you--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think I was--
Speaker 1: --came back your senior year to play--
Speaker 2: No, I played, but I didn't do anything spectacular.  So, and we had like, how many guys?  Like, it was maybe two guy--no, one guy on the team, my quarterback, Kenny Reaves [Ken Reaves].  He got drafted by the Atlanta Falcons.  And he played like--
Speaker 1: Is a, is a quarterback or?
Speaker 2: He got, they made him a defensive back.
Speaker 1: That's what I was thinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he played like thirteen years with the Falcons.  He was, he was really good.  There were like, two guys.  They didn't get drafted, but they signed--we had like about six guys that signed as free agents, with the Cowboys [Texas Cowboys], with the, with the Eagles [Philadelphia Eagles].  So, so we had some guys; so we had some good guys on the team.  I, of course, did not get the call, so this guy, this guy I'll never forget called me up from Providence, Rhode Island.  His name was George Patrick Duffy.  And he called me up and said that they were starting a, a football team in the Atlantic Coast Football League.  And he wanted me to come and play with them, and he was gonna pay me six hundred dollars a week to play.  I said whoa.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1966 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: That's good money in now in '66 [1966]
Speaker 2: That's right. Oh, that was real good money.  That's why I went, I went there.  You know, like I, I tell people (laughter), when he flew me up, I didn't really know where Rhode Island was.  You know, you read about it, but you didn't know.  So I flew to Canada first (laughter), thinking that it was--I mean I flew to Boston [Massachusetts] first, not Canada.  I flew to Boston, thinking that New England--Providence was beyond Boston.  And when I got--I'll never forget--off the plane, the lady said, "You have to go back down.  Providence is, is down from here."  So I had to end up catching the bus and, and take--she says, "It's only like forty-five minute ride."  So I caught a bus.
Speaker 1: I, I just want to put this salary in perspective though, 'cause the average guy working in a General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] plant would've made enough to have a car and a house--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and take care of--feed his family--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --made about a hundred and twenty dollars a week--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --in 19--yeah.  That's what my dad was making (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --in 1966.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Six hundred dollars--
Speaker 1: --so six hundred dollars a week--
Speaker 2: --was a lot of money. Oh, it turned my head big time.
Speaker 1: --that, that's a, that's a lot--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --lot better than I would have thought that semipro would pay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those days, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and of course, it was a--he wanted me desperately.  That was, that was the thing.  I don't even know how he knew me.
Story_ID: 622495
Speaker 1: Now, one of the, the things that I found out after I got there--this is how, actually how I got my chance to try out for the Pittsburgh Steelers.  The Pittsburgh Steelers trained in Rhode Island, in North Kingstown [sic.] at the University of Rhode Island [South Kingstown].  I did not know that.  This is where they had this, their camp.  So, it, it, it made sense that this team that I played on was called the Rhode Island Steelers, which they were owned by the Pittsburgh Steelers, right.  And--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I, I, think Coach Matthews [Ray Matthews], I can't think of his first name; he was our coach.  He was former eight year wide receiver with the Pittsburgh Steelers; he was our coach.  And so, and this was the first year that Providence had had a team, and they were trying to get some, you know, some good guys.  So, I played with the Rhode Island Steelers.  I think our record was something like--we didn't win a lot of games, something like four and six or something like that maybe, you know.  But I had a really good season.  I mean I was the star of the team.  I scored more touchdowns than anybody on the team.  And, and, and that year turned out enabling Pittsburgh to call me up in 1967 when the season started.  They, when they, actually they moved from the University of Rhode Island to Latrobe, Pennsylvania, which is outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], about thirty-five miles.  And that's when they moved their camp to Pennsylvania.  And out of the whole team, I, I remember the day that I was working in this aerosol plant.  After the season was over, I was--and, and he--I got the call from Bill Austin, who was the head coach.  And he called me and, and said, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], I'd like to offer you a contract to come and play for the Pittsburgh Steelers."  Oh, man, that was, that was the happiest day of my life.  I said, "Me?"  He said, "Yes."  He said, "I have a contract here for fourteen thousand five hundred dollars" (laughter).  I said, "Whoa."  Now see, I can put that in per- perspective because the teachers at that time, the salaries that they were making was about four thousand dollars a year, as a teacher.  So that was like--and so they sent me the money and the ticket and signed me to come and play--try out for the Pittsburgh Steelers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right.  I mean a good salary in those days.  If you could--
Speaker 1: Oh, that was big time money to me.
Speaker 2: --you could make six thousand dollars, you were doing it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in 1967.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: A house cost you twelve thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean a decent house.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's--okay.  So that's a lot; that's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --pretty good money.  So, they, they wanted you to play wide receiver in--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Pittsburgh.  And so, so what happened?  What was camp like?
Speaker 1: What happened was I, I, I didn't know.  I think that after that year, I, I kind of felt better about myself, even though I didn't play well in college [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  I felt really good that I, I--I mean I played well.  I mean I played against a lot of guys that, that went back to the pros and, and became stars.  You know, I, and I played in games, and I, and I scored in many of the games.
Speaker 2: This is in a pre--in a preseason and when--
Speaker 1: No, this was, no was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the Atlantic Coast--
Speaker 1: --the previous year, in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Okay, in the Atlantic Coast league [Atlantic Coast Football League].
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in the Atlantic Coast league.  And, and, and when I got--what I did was I quit.  Our camp started July 17th, and I remember leaving May 1st.  I left this job that I had in the aerosol plant May 1st.  And I went and worked out twice a week, twice a day, from May to July, and in the morning from eight [o'clock] to ten, and in the afternoon from three to five every single day.  I mean I, I ran and I ran.  And I, you know, it was just me and one guy.  He was a tight end, a big, big guy.  He was six- 6'6", 245.  So we ran.  He didn't run most of the time with me, but he would, he was there for when--he came out in about June, after I'd been out there about thirty days.  But when I got to camp, the first day destroyed me (laughter).  It was like I had not done anything.  It--
Speaker 2: Well, let's pause (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the work was that hard.
Story_ID: 622496
Speaker 1: You get to camp in August, and you--after all these workouts and you find out that--
Speaker 2: Hey, we had, first we had ninety-two rookies, never forget it, ninety-two rookies in camp [for the Pittsburgh Steelers].  And like, first of--and all, they were all names that of guys that I had heard about and read about in college, you know, ok- Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], Oklahoma [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma], Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], I mean, you know, just a, a who's who among college players that you, that you, you didn't know, but you had read about them.  And here's little old me, you know, a free agent, which I, which I was glad to be that.  When we--the first day of practice, one at, there's was one at, from eight [o'clock] to ten, and then there was the second one at, again the same, which was the same schedule I had, three to five.  And it was, it was the most difficult thing for me to survive, just, there were, there were, you know, just the, the conditioning.  And I, I'm telling you, after the two days, I really didn't know whether I really wanted to play football that badly.
Speaker 1: So it's really much tougher than what you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my god, I had never--
Speaker 1: You, you were running, but--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --what did they make you do that you weren't already doing?
Speaker 2: First of all, which I didn't find out this until I got released, they had Bill Austin.  There were, there were three coaches that were in the NFL [National Football League] that had coached under Vince Lombardi, and they had become head coaches.  It was Bill Austin; it was Van Brocklin [Norm Van Brocklin] for the Falcons [Atlanta Falcons]; and it was another guy.  I can't remember his name.  But Lombardi, he let me know that I, I probably couldn't even have survived the camp at the Green Bay Packers because the conditioning.  And, and, and you realize now, that's, that's, that's most of the game, is, is, is the conditioning, that you have to be in top shape.  I mean like there's no question about it.  You--and, and I, like I said, I had worked out for over two and a half months every day, every day.  And the first day they, they destroyed me.  I mean it was like, it was--they had this exercise called down and up where you run in place.  And he say, "Hit it," and you fall down and hit it.  And then he said, "Up," and you would jump up.  Now all of the rest of the stuff I was really used to except that.  I had never run across that one before.  And partner, it's like, it was like you did it for about fifteen or twenty minutes, where every once in a while after--there were guys that left the first day.  I bet you there were ten or fifteen guys that quit the, quit the first day.  And then three days later they started dropping again.  I remember this one kid said, he said, "Heck, my daddy has a--," I don't know what he--it was some kind of cattle farm in Iowa or something.  He said, "I can go back there and forget this."  He, he (laughter), he didn't even go back to the room to get his clothes.  He just went home.  I mean it was like it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He must have been a white guy I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a white guy I mean.  And one of the things that was happening was we had meetings every evening from seven to nine, two hours of going over the plays.  Man, it was like, it was so bad that when the veterans got there, the, the, the veterans--these are all rookies.  When the veterans come, which is about two weeks later, they put up with the two a days for about three or four days.  And after that, you could hear them, "Come on, coach, now what you trying to do?  Them two a days gotta go."  So, and, and, and they--I mean it, it, it gets very, very difficult.
Story_ID: 622497
Speaker 1: So do you think maybe they were trying to weed out the, the rookies?
Speaker 2: No, I think that that's basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) In the beginning, just burned you all out to see who's gonna stick?
Speaker 2: No, that, the conditioning is a major part of your, your being able to make a professional team, to me.  It's, it, you know, like, for instance, the professional players, when they came--this is funny, 'cause I--all of this was new to me.  They would not talk to you at all.  I don't care who you were, no rookies.  They don't talk to rookies.  What you find out is that the reason why they don't befriend rookies is because, if they befriend you and you get cut, it affects their thinking.  You know what I'm saying?  They feel bad for you, and they don't have--this is amazing--they don't have time to feel bad for anybody.  And so, rather than to go through that, they don't talk to no rookies until you make the team.  Once you make the team, they'll talk to you.  And I, you know, 'cause I remember, like, this guy who played defensive end for the, for the--
Speaker 1: Steelers [Pittsburgh Steelers]?
Speaker 2: Steelers.  His name was Big John Baker.  And my--the tight end that had come up there with me was going out for offensive tight end.  John Baker played defensive tight end, so he got to kind of know him.  He didn't talk to him a lot, but he, and he knew that Luke--the guy's name was Luke.  I call him Big Luke.  His name was Kurt Lucas [ph.].  We called him Big Luke.  He, like I said, he was big.  One of the things that I found out is they do gravitate towards big guys.  If you're big, they might not talk to you, but they'll let you hang around with them.  You know what I'm saying?  And Big Luke was big.  So, they knew that Big Luke and I were good friends, 'cause Luke and I talked every day.  And, and when every time we would pass Big John (laughter)--and it's funny, Big John Baker--he couldn't, he wouldn't talk to us, but he would go like this, (winks) (laughter).  It was funny.  He would turn like (winks), and that was like saying hello to you.  And, and I never, ever forgot that, because every day that I used to see him, you know, and, and, and that makes you feel a little, a little comfortable, just that somebody cares.  You know what I'm saying.  He, he would just give you that (winks), and that, that was what I remember.  But I got to know quite a, quite a few guys that, that stayed on the team and, and, and one of them who, who played in, played in the Super Bowl.  He had got--he had played with Pittsburgh, but Pittsburgh didn't get in the Super Bowl.  He had gone to--got traded to the front--to the Denver Broncos.  His name was Ray May, never forget Ray.  He played middle linebacker.  And he ended up, after playing about six years in, in Denver, he ended up getting traded to the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts].  And, and I saw--he gave me eight tickets to the Super Bowl, and I went down to see Super Bowl V in Miami [Florida] when they played--Baltimore and Dallas [Dallas Cowboys] played in the Super Bowl.
Story_ID: 622498
Speaker 1: That was, that was--it was, it was a good experience.  I learned quite a bit from, from not playing [for the Pittsburgh Steelers].  I only got a chance to, to, to get in one scrimmage, and that was against the Cleveland Browns, and after that I was on my way home, back to Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 2: So just one scrimmage against--was that a, was that a scrimmage or a--
Speaker 1: That was a scrimmage (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) exhibition--
Speaker 1: It wasn't an ex- an exhibition game, really a scrimmage.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I didn't, I didn't really get a chance there either because I--you know, one thing that I realize is that you, you, you need to understand a lot about--it's, it's, it's like everything else.  If, if I had had some, some, some people--at that time, there was quite a bit of prejudice still going around in the leagues.  The leagues, the league itself was not crystal clear or, or, or, or in favor of a lot of blacks.  They had specific blacks that they put in.  You know, you had to either be really exceptional or, you know.  And if, if it ever, if it came down to the league keeping a white player or a black player, you, you know that unless you were head over hills over him, you weren't gonna get--you weren't gonna be retained.
Speaker 2: And the position that you played, as I recall in those days--I was a kid watching the football--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the wide receive- blacks had just started playing wide receiver (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Playing wide receiver--
Speaker 2: --basically--
Speaker 1: --exactly, yeah.
Speaker 2: --'cause that was a white position before.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, all of them.  You look at them--
Speaker 2: Earlier in the '60s [1960s] there was, you could be the running back; you could be--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: -defensive back--
Speaker 1: Right, but you could not-yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) any of the line of positions--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --except you couldn't--
Speaker 1: Had the guys like--
Speaker 2: --the receiver couldn't--
Speaker 1: --Lance Alworth--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --coming off and all this, all of the white boys (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Raymond Berry--
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of them, yep.
Speaker 2: --all those guys.
Speaker 1: Yep, yep.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were a tight end.  You could play tight end.  You could play running back, you know, and you play defense, but you, you know, there were certain positions.  You know, and they had three of us.  I, I, I, I think about that 'cause we had three guys in that scrimmage that they were getting ready to decide, and I was, and I thought I had a pretty good chance against both of them.  One of them was faster than me, and the other one, he was, had, had been a--at that time, they used to have a future draft choice.  He had been drafted the year before and been given $175,000 bonus.  So those were really my two competition to see which one of us they were gonna keep.  And, and all I wanted to do was do better than the guy that was not the future draft choice, 'cause I figured the future--they were gonna keep two of us.  So, and he and the guy who was not a future draft choice had a super scrimmage.  And the guy who was the future draft choice did terrible. And I did terrible (laughter), so.
Speaker 2: Do, do you remember who the name of the guy--those two guys that, that--
Speaker 1: They didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who made the team?
Speaker 1: --end, end up playing much.  Jerry Marion was the guy that they had drafted in previous--I forget the other guys.  He was from Mississippi state, Mississippi Valley [Mississippi Valley State College; Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] or something like that.  He was good.  He was really good.  All, all of the guys were good.  One of the things that I, I realize from playing, and I, I wish some of the blacks could have--that had talked to me about, you know, the reason why I played because white guys couldn't play football.  And even though there was prejudice, one thing I found out about the NFL [National Football League], every--there were ninety-two rookies, as I said, that went up to that camp.  Everybody that plays in the NFL is good (laughter).  That, that's the one thing I found out.  There are no cheapies up there, I mean really good.  I don't care what color they are.  They are really heads and hills usually over anybody else.  That was the one thing.  And, and even though I used to look at some white guys myself and say, "Oh, he just made the team because he was white."  But if they kept him, he was good.  You know, you might not want to acknowledge it, but he was really good.  So, so that was--that dispelled sort of the myth in my mind that there were a lot of, of white guys up in the NFL that shouldn't have been there.  There were some, there were probably some blacks that had not been given the same equal chance, but anybody that they kept, oh yes, they were good, very good.  That was, that was the one convincing factor that I had about taking that next step to, to, to the professional.
Story_ID: 622499
Speaker 1: So, what did you do after that, after you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, what happened was, after that scrimmage, we were supposed to scrimmage the Chicago Bears.  And the game of all places was gonna be played in Norfolk, Virginia, at Foreman Field.  So, you know (laughter), I got cut the week before the game.  And I, and I had called all of my boys to tell them we're coming to play the, the Bears.  And I know they, to this day, they were all looking for me.  And I was so embarrassed, so embarrassed, and, and that I didn't even want to go back to Virginia.  And I, and I said, "I'm going back to Rhode Island where I, where I came from."  That--and I, and, and I never, I never went back to Virginia until the '90s [1990s].  That's how long I stayed away.
Speaker 1: You just never went back until the '90s [19901]?
Speaker 2: Never went back, never went back.  I was just so embarrassed.  And you know, in which, which you learn that everybody, people don't, I mean, they don't really care whether you--they would love to see you make it.  But, but you shouldn't let those kind of disappointments dictate how you respond to, you know, most of, you know--
Speaker 1: You didn't go back to see your family or anything at all?
Speaker 2: Nope, nope, nope, never went back, never went back, never.  I went back and got a job, and that's when--because I had gone to the Steelers, the bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] was willing to give me a job as a teller, so, 'cause, 'cause people knew me from when I played in Providence [Rhode Island].  And then they knew me because I signed with the Pittsburgh Steelers.  And so the--you know, it was, it was, stood the bank well to get some publicity out of me by offering me a job as a teller.
Speaker 1: And so that was enough notoriety to, to make you special in Providence, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, oh yeah.
Story_ID: 622500
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now do you think, I mean, now, you have an unusual name for a black per- person.  Do you think that's helped you in your career?
Speaker 1: Well, I, I think it has helped me at times, and it has, depending on what time it was.  I remember once when I was--the later in life, when I, I caught--I sent in my resume to get a job in, in New York [New York].  This is in the '80s [1980s].  And I, I'll never forget it.  I went--called--sent it to Bank Leumi [Bank Leumi USA]--at that time, it was Bank Lewd--Leumi in New York.  And the guy called me up and said, "You are just the person we've been looking for.  I'm looking at your resume," and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  "Can you come down?  When can you get here?"  I said, "Well, I live in New York, so I, I can get there today, tomorrow, whenever you want to see me."  I went the next day.  And he saw my name Heidelberg [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]; he thought I was somebody that I wasn't.  When I got there (laughter), he says--he looked at me, his eyes.  He said, "I'm, I hate to tell you this.  I'm embarrassed, but we have filled the position."  You know, so (laughter), in those instances, you realize that your name helped you get where you were, but as that--and that, that color, when you walk through the door you can't hide that.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: But I think--I don't know if it, I don't really know if it helped me.  I think as long as you didn't see me--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a certain amount of notoriety of having a name like that.  I don't know if you remember the old series with Leslie Nielsen.  What's it--
Speaker 1: 'Night Court'?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Police Squad!' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Series of movies called--
Speaker 1: The 'Airplane!'?
Speaker 2: --something Gun, you know--
Speaker 1: Oh, 'Top Gun.'
Speaker 2: 33--
Speaker 1: No, not 'Top Gun.'
Speaker 2: 33 1/3 ['Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult'].  I mean, what is it that everybody called him.  He was a spy or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And O.J. Simpson was in those movies and his name's in it.  And he, he's a football player--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in real life, a super football player, before he got in big trouble and stuff.  But his name in it was Nordberg, and that was like a joke in the, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you're a guy named Heidelberg that went to Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know.  But here's a guy named Nordberg, a black man who's an athletic, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, it's sort of like Bill Cosby in--
Speaker 2: Yeah--'Naked Gun.'
Speaker 1: 'I Spy.'
Speaker 2: The 'Naked Gun' series.
Speaker 1: 'Naked Gun,' yeah--
Speaker 2: 'Naked Gun' series--
Speaker 1: --that's it.
Speaker 2: --that's right.  Yeah, he was a guy named Nordberg, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't know that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and that was the running gag in there, yeah, the name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but even Bill Cosby in his scene with Robert Culp, 'I Spy,' his name was Scott [Alexander Scott], and the Culp's name was Robinson [Kelly Robinson].  But they would always look at him and say, "You're Robinson, right?"  He says, "No, I'm Scott" (laughter).  So, so name, name, it makes a difference now.  I know that it makes a difference.  I just don't know if what ins- instances it might have facilitated or, or, or, or made it a little easier for me to, to, to do some things.
Story_ID: 622501
Speaker 1: So you got a job in a bank as a teller first, right?
Speaker 2: I started out as a teller.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. This--
Speaker 2: And, and, and I was amazed at how easy it was.  I mean, it was a very simple job, adding and taking me--I'll give you a hundred dollars in the morning, and you give out fifty dollars in the, during the day, and take in a hundred.  You should have an extra fifty, so you should have a hundred and fifty when you quit, when the day is over.  And, and that was very simple to me.  But most people I think were in awe sometime or nervous about money.  I never had a problem with it because I, I could add, and I could subtract and divide, and so I did really, really well.  I happened to get a manager--after, after being there in the bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] about six months, I began to realize, looking at a lot of the white guys that I knew, that although I didn't have a college degree, I was as, as intelligent or more intelligent than a lot of the guys who were in the managerial you know, positions.  And I remember asking the, my manager, "How can I get a better job with the bank?"  So he asked me--I, I said, "I don't know."  I, I said--he said, "What do you want to do?"  I said, "I just want a, a better job.  He said, "Well, the best jobs are to do something that the bank does.  The bank is a--bank, bank makes its money by lending."  He says, "All you need to do is learn how to loan money.  And the way you learn is you, you have to get the bank to let you go to its credit department, and they'll teach you how to loan money."  I said, "Well, what do I have to do to get that?"  He said, "Well, that's the difficult part."  He said, "First of all, they don't send you to the credit department unless they have plans for your future.  And secondly, you can't get there if you don't have a college degree."  So I said, "Oh."   So, I was thinking about that.  I said, "Well, I'm gonna try to get into the credit department."  So, I didn't know how I was gonna do that, but one thing happened--a couple of things happened to facilitate an opportunity for me.
Story_ID: 622502
Speaker 1: At that time that I was a teller, the charge cards came out for the first time, Mastercard and Visa card. Mastercard first.
Speaker 2: This is 1967?
Speaker 1: This, yeah, '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so the bank, which was, at that time it was a in- it was called Industrial National Bank [Bank of America Corporation].  It was the fifty-fifth largest bank in America, nice small, progressive bank, moving.  And so they invited all of the, the marketing people from this marketing company to explain to us about the new charge card, and what, what we should expect when the cards gets here, and how you handle the customers, blah, blah, blah.  One of the things that I noticed about the advertisements that they were showing us, and they came to--I was working in the largest branch that the bank had.  My bank had fifty branches, and I was in the largest one.  So, when we had our marketing meeting, there was three other branches that were combined with us to have this lesson given to us by the marketing people.  And I noticed in all of the marketing that the, that there were no black people, you know, in any of the marketing.  There was one scene where there was like about five people in a line to use the, their machine, the machine to get money.  And it was one--it was a very, very light skinned guy that you look closely you could see he was a black guy, and he had on a tennis outfit.  So, during the meeting, I asked the marketers about, "How did the, you know, how do you do all of this marketing and you don't have anybody that represents me?"  You know, I said I come this--I said, "You got this one guy here, this white guy [sic.] with a tennis outfit on.  It's always gotta be a black guy doing something athletic."  I said, "I come to work every day.  I have on a suit and a tie every day.  Why don't you put a black guy in line that's got on a suit and a tie?"  So he says to me, he said, "Well, this plan has been approved by your senior management, and we don't have control over that.  If you have any questions about that, you know, talk to them."  So okay, so I let that go.
Story_ID: 622503
Speaker 1: But what happened, fortunately, was the bran- unfortunate but fortunate--my branch [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] about two weeks later got robbed by a lone gunman, came into the branch, and he robbed the teller that I was talking to.  In fact, I was getting ready to go--it was a Friday night.  I was getting ready get her to cash a check for me so I could have money for the weekend.  So, this guy came to the window, and he, he gave her a note says, "I got a gun."  So, she started giving him what--he told her to put the money in the bag, so she's putting the money in the bag.  And I'm standing there waiting for her to cash my check, right.  So I didn't say anything 'cause I knew she had a customer.  So then, when the guy left the window--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: You better pause, I guess.
Speaker 2: That's, can we pause?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, I'm thinking where, where were we?  We, okay, so they--you were going to talk to the management of the bank about a, a position (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and he suggested that I got to the, to the credit department.  So, as I said, if--fate has it that in the next couple of weeks the branch got robbed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay--
Speaker 2: So they say--
Speaker 1: --you're in line getting ready to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they--yeah, I'm waiting--
Speaker 1: --cash your check, right, okay.
Speaker 2: --for the young lady to give me my cash.  And she's got this smile on her face like, like, (expression) you know.  And I, so I'm standing there after the guy walks away.  I said--and she never looked at me, so I said, "Are you gonna cash my check?"  So she says--she didn't say anything.  So I said, "Are you gonna cash my check, Lonnie [ph.]?"  She says--she was in shock.  I didn't know that, you know.  She says, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], that man took my money."  (Laughter) I said, "What man?"  She says, "That man."  I said, "Did you pull the alarm?"  And I looked over, and I saw she had pulled the alarm.  I said--so I looked, and this, now this guy is at the door, and he's leaving, going out of the branch, right.  So I said oh, no, so I--I'm twenty-two years old and crazy.  I was like--I, I think about that now.  So I, I, I, I, I run down at the end of the counter, and I go from behind the counter.  And the manager is, is, is, is standing out by his door, and I said, "Lonnie just got robbed, and the guy is going out.  I'm following him."  (Laughter) So, I break out of the bank, and, and then I see him walking down the sidewalk.  I don't know where he was going.  So, I'm, I'm, I slowed down and started walking behind him, and he's walking fast.  And then so he's--it's so funny--he stopped and turned around, right, so I dropped down to the ground like I was tying my shoes (laughter).  And so then, I just kind of looked up a little bit, and he turned around and just kept walking again.  So then he, he went into the street, and he went around to the driver's side to get into the car.  So I, when I got up by the car, I stopped and, and leaned up against the wall.  It was another bank right over there, so I, I was standing on the wall like, you know, whistling like I'm looking around.  So he, he gets in the car.  And this was funny.  It was it was almost like right out of a movie.  He started trying to start the car.  It went (makes sound).  The car wouldn't start (makes sound), and (laughter) he, he's going on and on.  So then, I looked down where the bank was, back towards the bank.  Now this is--the bank is now about maybe a 150 yards from where we were from the door, and I see the police cars coming, (makes sound), right.  They don't put on sirens, right, and they pull right up to the door.  So, then just as they pull up to the door his car started, (makes sound).  So I whistled (makes sound) you know, and they looked.  And I said (gesture) (laugher) like that.  So, they jump in the car.  And to make a long story short, he goes to the next corner.  He crashes into a car in the intersection, and they catch the guy.
Story_ID: 622504
Speaker 1: And of course, now, I mean, that's big news.  So, the president of the bank comes down about a month later to con- give me rose.  I couldn't believe they gave me a, a dozen of roses and a five dollar raise, five dollar a week raise, right.  So, my manager says, she says, "If you--this is the man that you ask.  He's the president of the bank," right.  So (laughter), so all right, when he said that, I actually went right up to the, to the president, and I say, "Mr. Cummings [John Cummings, Jr.], my name is [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg," and blah, blah, blah, "and as you know," and I--we--I went on and told him about what I wanted to do.  He said, "Well, give me a call in the next week, give my secretary a call, and I'll sit down and talk to you," blah, blah, blah.  So, the call I went to talk to him about two weeks later was about putting black people in--they told me that I should talk to him because senior management was responsible.  And I told him the same story that I told the people.  And he said, "Well, don't worry.  We'll have some people in there."  So, I waited again about another month, and nothing happened, and so I gave a call to, back to his office.  And he referred me to the chairman of the board.  This was funny, man, this is the president of the bank, now.  And, and, and at that time, if you put things in perspective, we were like a $3.5 billion bank.  That was big during, during the '60s [1960s]; that was really big.  And so, I had to go downtown to meet the chairman of the board.  So, they called me up one day and said, "Mr. Simmons [ph.]--," his name was Simmons--had--"will, will see you this evening.  Please come downtown, and he will meet you at 5:30," blah, blah, blah.  So I go down to the main office, which was this huge, huge building.  And you know, the building is really the 'Superman' building.  You ever seen 'Superman' that used to come on TV?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I mean the old 'Superman,' when they say able to leap--
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: --tall buildings?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Daily Planet building.
Speaker 1: The Daily Planet.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the building in, in fleet--that's Industrial National Bank's [Bank of America Corporation]--
Speaker 2: In Providence [Rhode Island].
Speaker 1: --in Providence--famous bank for that.  So, so I get downtown.  I had never been to the downtown, you know--I had no reason to go down there.  And it's huge.  So, there's a--I got on the elevator.  It takes me up to the chairman's office, which was up on the, one of the higher floors.  Anyway, so, the secretary or his--she comes out and say. "Mr. Simmons will be with you.  Have a seat," blah, blah, blah.  And she was going home, 'cause it was like about six something by then.  So I sat out there, you know, and about ten minutes later he comes out.  He says, "Andy Heidelberg?" (laughter).  I say, "Yes, sir."  So he says, "Come in."  So I go in, and he takes me into the bank.  Man, he has this huge desk with the--you know, I mean it was like, this is like something right out of England, I mean.  And New England is just like England, you know, a lot, lot of the, the English, British type stuff they had.  So he sat down, and I told him the story, that I talked to Mr. Cummings and the marketing company and blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I thought that the bank could do better than this with respect to, you know, showing the types of people that works in the bank.  I was black, and I thought we should have some black people in the advertising.  So, boy, and, and he scared me really.  He hit--and I don't usually get scared, but he scared me first.  He hit on, he, he's, he hit on his desk.  He said, "Damn it" (laughter).  I know I jumped a little bit, and I said--I looked at him, and he says, "I'll be damned if I'm gonna let any employee in mine come in this bank and tell me how to run my bank."  I, I said, "Sir, I'm not trying to tell you how to run the bank.  I'm only saying that I work in the bank, and I think that if you advertise for services, that black people just like me would like to see themselves in the same commercials that the white people are in."  See, now at that particular time, which I didn't know, this, this, the re--the, the rein- reinvestment, the CRA, the Community Reinvestment Act (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Community Reinvestment Act, yeah.
Speaker 1: --was just--and see, I didn't know anything about that.  So, it really was, it really would, would behoove them to, to show--because that was the whole thing that the Reinvestment Act was about.  You have your banks in these basic--in these communities, but you never give anything back to the community.  And so, so he says--and I don't, I don't remember how the rest of the conversation go, but I know the next week they had two or three black people on a television commercial and in the newspaper, so.
Story_ID: 622505
Speaker 1: And that's what got me the opportunity, because I then later went back to the, to the president [John Cummings, Jr.] of the bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] then and told him that I wanted to get into the management training program.  And that's when he told me, he said, "Well, you know, the requirement is that you got to have a college degree."  And I, you know, like, I, I think about some of the stuff that I used to say then.  But I think a lot of it had to do with the fact that I had gone through the desegregation process, and I basically was not anymore in awe of white people.  You know, I felt comfortable.  I'll tell them what was on my mind.  So I told him, I said, "Well, look, the one thing that I know for sure is that when you hire anybody, if you tell them that a college degree is required, the college degree does not tell you how good they're gonna work out.  It only tells you what they might be capable of doing."  I said, "Well, I've been working at the bank now about nine months--," no, it was longer, about a little over a year, about a little over a year.  I said, "And the one thing that the degree tells you is what a person is capable of."  I said, "I've been with you for a little over a year.  I think you already know basically what I'm capable of doing.  So, it's very easy for you to just make a decision."  So he said, "Well, let us think about, let, let us think about it, and I'll get back to you."
Story_ID: 622506
Speaker 1: So that's how you basically--
Speaker 2: So, so he told me he would get in touch with me in a few weeks about doing management training program. In the meantime, there had been one black bank started in America [sic.].  It was in New York [New York]; can't think of the name of it.
Speaker 1: I know it, but I can't think it.
Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts] was, was putting together a black bank in the City of Boston.  It was, you know, so what happened was there was this young lady who worked on--this black young lady--who worked on the desk at my branch.  She was a customer service rep [representative].  And it was amazing.  She graduated from Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], and, and she was just a customer service rep for the bank, which basically opens and closes savings and checking accounts and stuff like that.  I could never understand that, but I, I, I'm beginning to understand.  So, what happened, I don't know how she must have applied to this bank in, in Boston, and it was called Unity Bank and Trust [Unity Bank and Trust Company; OneUnited Bank, Boston, Massachusetts].  It was the first black bank in Massachusetts and the second black bank in the United States.  So, she applied for a job and got the job.  When she got to the, to the, to the bank, she told the president of the bank that there was this guy in Providence [Rhode Island] named [HistoryMaker] Andrew Heidelberg, and he was a teller.  She said, "But he's really smart."  And she sold--I don't know what she--she sold him a bill of goods.  She said, "You might want him for your head teller."  You know what I'm saying.  So, the guy called me up about a week later, told me who he was.  And he, he would like to come down to Providence and talk to me about working for Unity Bank and Trust, so I said okay.  So he came down the following week, took me to lunch, man, told me that he wanted to, you know, give me a job as a, as head teller.  Now, I was making, at, at Industrial National Bank [Bank of America Corporation] I was making eighty dollars a week.  And he offered me sixty five hundred dollars a year.  Boy, that was like, whoa, 'cause I'm making like about four thousand or something like that, about four thousand and some dollars.  He said, "I'll, I'll--if you come and be my head teller, I'll pay you sixty five hundred dollars a year."  I said, "Oh, man," so I said, "oh yeah."  I said, "Let me think about it a week."  So, what happened, at the same time the president called me back, called me down to talk to me.  He said, "Well, look, we've thought about it, and though you don't have a degree, we are, we are willing to take you, give, offer you a chance to go into the management training program at Industrial National Bank, and we'd like to pay you sixty five hundred dollars a year," a year.  So now I'm thinking so much--I said, "Whoa."  So I said to myself, "You know, Mr. Cummings [John Cummings, Jr.]," I said, "I think that's a, a, a good offer, and I really do want to accept it because I just recently got this offer from Unity Bank and Trust."  I, I'll bet you a dime to a donut he already knew that (laughter).  So, 'cause I thought it was ironic that he called me, you know, the day after that the guy offers me sixty five hundred dollars.  So, I said to him, I said--he said--I said--he said, "Well, what do you, what are, what are you gonna do?"  He said, "We made you the offer.  We are willing to let you go into the manager training program without a degree, and I think you'll do very well."  I said, "Yeah, but the only thing is like, you can only offer me sixty five hundred dollars."  I said, "Now, all of the other people that I know in, management trainees that come into with the college degree, they get more than sixty five hundred."  So he looked at me.  He said, "Well, I'll tell you what: I'll give you seventy two hundred dollars."  I said, "Yes, sir, thank you very much, because I really didn't want to be a blank--black banker."  I said, "I really wanted to just be a banker.  And I think that if I went to a black bank, I might learn how to do things well for the black community and in a black bank, but I still would not know how to do banking in a white bank."  So I said I'll think I'll--this opportunity is great for me, and I'd rather stay here and get, continue to get the training that I, that I'm getting here.  And, and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 622507
Speaker 1: I went into the, to the management training program.  And my, my manager had already told me that if I wanted to be a, a, a big banker or make a lot of money in the bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation], I should learn how to make loans.  And at time, as most of the time, most of what the management training programs offered its trainees was opportunities to go work in the branches.  They didn't really pick you to do like marketing, or, or bank cards, or commercial lending, or, or you know, utilities, all of those other kinds of lending the primarily give you to go into the branches.  So what I, what I--what, what he said to me, he says, "What you have to do is to get them, convince them to let you stay in the credit department for an extended period 'til you can learn how to make loans."  So I, I went into the management training program and did really well.  I stayed.  You know, it was about a nine month program, you know, where you get--where it allows you to go to virtually all of the departments in the bank, as, as if you were gonna be--have a choice to say, "Okay, I like this one; I'll stay there."  So, I went through all of the, the various programs.  And at the end of the nine months, and I don't know how I befriended the, this man named Henry Tingley [Henry F. Tingley, Jr.].  He was the second highest banking, bank--he, he was the, an executive vice president.  And for some reason, I guess I had captured his attention. And, and, and he was the one that came to tell me that the bank had decided that they were gonna make me its, a manager of one of its branches.  And this was the first black manager that they ever had.  It really was the first black manager at any major bank in New England.  And, and so he asked me what did I think about it.  And I told him, well, I really didn't want to go out in the branches, 'cause you could get lep- lost out in the branches.  And I told him that I really wanted to go back to the credit department 'cause I had spent a month there when I did my management training.  And I wanted to go back there for an extended stay so I could really get a good, strong credit background.  So he says to me, he says, "So you don't want to take the branch?"  I said, "I really don't wanna take it, Henry, Henry, and I, I hope that you would understand that."  (Laughter) He said in his inimitable English voice, he says, "Well, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], let me explain it to you this way."  He says, "You never want to have the bank offer you something and you turn them down, because you don't know if they will ever come back to you and ask you again."  So I said, "Yes, sir."  He said, "I'll tell you what I'll do."  He says, "You go out there in the branch, and says do a damn good job, and learn how to manage people."  He says, "And I'll make sure that you get back down here."  And, and I--I mean, that was the best thing.  I mean, and from the--one person that could do that.  So I said, "Yes, sir, Henry, I'll do it."  So I went out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so about what year is this?  This is--
Speaker 1: This was in 1971 maybe, maybe around 1971.
Story_ID: 622508
Speaker 1: And this is Indus-, Industrial--
Speaker 2: Industrial National Bank [Bank of America Corporation].
Speaker 1: Industrial National Bank, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  And Industrial is interesting too.  Industrial National Bank, see, I, I--the history, when you know this, Industrial National Bank had the second oldest bank charter in America.  The first one was the Bank of New York [Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, New York, New York].  That was the first bank in America.  The second bank was--when Industrial National Bank was a--it came about as the, the merger of the Industrial Trust Company and the Providence National Bank, and they became Industrial National Bank.  And I'm thinking that the Industrial Trust Company was the one that had the original--
Speaker 1: Charter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1791.  That's old (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's--yes, it really is.
Speaker 2: Yeah, hell yeah.  Yeah, so, so, you, you know the, the people who were running that bank were very good.  It was a very aggressive, progressive, young, intelligent bank.  And this is what they, they, they all, the people used to say about, on Wall Street [New York, New York] about us.  You know, we were one of the first banks to, to get set up on the Cayman Islands, you know, and you know, hide their money like (laughter), you know.  I mean they--but we really knew, the management knew exactly what, they were doing.
Story_ID: 622509
Speaker 1: So I went out to the branches, and I became--they--we had three different branch sizes, A branch, B branch, and C Branch, and this was that, this was a B branch, which is a medium sized branch.
Speaker 2: So this, this where in, in Rhode Island?
Speaker 1: This was in Cranston, Rhode Island.
Speaker 2: Cranston, okay.
Speaker 1: And I had thirteen tellers, one assistant manager, and a janitor (laughter), and they were all white.  And this is funny 'cause I remember the, the, the first--another young man came to, to my branch for his management--he was in the management training program.  He came for his one month training in the branch system.  He came to my branch, and we got to be real good friends.  And he told me that they sent him, said, "You're going there, here with a, a black gentleman, and don't be afraid.  Whatever you see that he does that you don't like, please let us know" (laughter).  I can't believe--I said, "They told you that?"  He said, "That's what they told me."  (Laughter) I just said, "Oh, my god, yeah."  And so, but it was, it was, it was, it was a, it was quite a learning experience.
Speaker 2: Was this in a white neighborhood in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, it was a Italian neighborhood.  That was, that's what--
Speaker 2: Most neighborhoods in, in Rhode Island are white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, not, yeah, oh yeah.  There, there's only two-tenths of 1 percent of the population at the time was minority.  Now there was a million people.  So that's--think about it now, two-tenths of 1 percent of the, of the state of Rhode Island's population were black.  It was about a million people.  So that gives you may about twenty, twenty-five thousand black people in the whole state.  And, and you know, that was that was interesting.  And so, I did a real good, really good job.  My branch was, was, out of all the branches, was in the top five in, in everything that we did.  It was so funny I remember we, we, we, we, when the charge cards had--when we had a, a, a contest with the charge cards to say--see how many people, how many--what branch gives out the most cash advances on charges cards, 'cause you were encouraged when the customer comes in, and they want to try to get--they want--they say, "Well, we'd like to get a five hundred dollar loan or a one thousand dollar loan."  They say, "Why don't you just get it on your charge card?  That way you won't have to go through no approval or," you know what I'm saying.  So, for that particular month we won the contest.  I think we made advances of something like thirty seven thousand dollars in cash advances for the month that people--and what it--what they did for the winner was they gave the manager an expense to take his branch out to any restaurant in Providence [Providence County, Rhode Island].  So, I took mine out to the--'course the, one of the best restaurants in Providence was in Cranston, was the big Italian restaurant called Twin Oaks, huge Italian restaurant.  So I took my branch there.  It was so funny.  So I had all of these people.  So they, they, they set up the table, you know.  My secretary took care of all that.  They set up the tables, like two tables end to end.  And they had all of the tellers, all women, and then my assistant manager.  He was a guy.  And the janitor, he was a guy.  So, the janitor sat at one end of the table, and I sat at the other end of the table, and it was so funny (laughter).  After we ate, the guy, the waiter comes and brings (laughter) the bill.  And he takes the bill to the janitor (laughter).  It was so funny, 'cause the janitor say, "Oh no, no, no, no, please don't give it to me.  That's the manager at the other end."  He, he (laughter) was so embarrassed.  You know what I'm saying?  But that was, that, that's the way it was.  I mean, I had to be the janitor.  I'm black.  But I mean my employees, boy, they just laughed (laughter); they laughed.  But those were some of the things that I learned while, you know, going through the system.
Story_ID: 622510
Speaker 1: And sure enough, after two years, my friend, Henry Tingley [Henry F. Tingley, Jr.], got me, got me back downtown and put me in the credit department [at Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation], and I became a credit analyst.  And I stayed in the credit department for two years and really got really proficient at, at writing credit analysis for, for major companies that were borrowing.  See, every time a customer comes to the bank to borrow, they submit their financial statement.  I'm talking about large loans like in the millions now.  They submit their financial statements and to the credit department.  The credit department spreads, spreads them out and put them in a format and then makes an analysis of the, the financial condition of the company.  And, and then they write up a report, which is usually about five or six pages long.  And they submit that report to the lending officer, the, the officer who handles that account.  And they also always make a recommendation to say the credit department feels that this is a good loan to make.  And if they don't like it, they'll say the credit department doesn't think this is a good credit risk at this time.  Of course, that doesn't dictate what the lending officer can do.  He, he could still do whatever he wants to.  But if anything were to go wrong with it after he was told by the credit department not to, then he could probably have some repercussion.  So, so, the credit department was a very integral part of the, the lending process.  And I, like I said, I stayed there for, for two years, which is, normally you don't get a chance to stay there because you're behind the scenes.  But it's your opportunity to learn credit analysis and how, how to make loans.
Speaker 2: So about what year is this when you're in the credit department.
Speaker 1: This as probably in 1970--when I went in there?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It was probably about in 1972.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you only stayed about a year out at the branch, or--
Speaker 1: Two, I stayed about a year and a half.
Speaker 2: Year and a half, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, how long do you stay in, stay in the credit department?
Speaker 1: I stayed in the credit department two years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so we'll take it's about 1974 now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So in '74 [1974] my, my same friend, Henry Tingley, came to me again and said that they wanted to--I, I was, I, I got promoted to a credit officer before I left, which that--you know why I thought that was so great?  Because, see, when you- when, when they do the annual report for the bank, they don't put bran--they put the branches in there, but they don't put no names.  They tell you where the branch is.  But when you become a credit officer, you're a credit officer for the bank.  So you are listed with all of the officers of the bank in the, the senior, the vice president.  They got the senior--the executive vice pres- the president, the executive vice presidents, the senior vice presidents, the vice presidents, the assistant vice presidents, and then the officers, other officers, which are credit officers, one of them.  So my name was in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the annual report.  That was, that was, that was really beautiful.
Story_ID: 622511
Speaker 1: And after about a couple of years, Henry Tingley [Henry F. Tingley, Jr.] came and got me again and said that they were gonna make me a loan officer.  And, but right now, and he, he was--what I liked about him, he was so fair.  He said, "At this point, we haven't decided where we're gonna put you," because, see, in order to become a loan officer, they usually put you with a vice president for maybe about three or four months, until you learn the ropes.  And then they will give you your own lending portfolio to manage of your own.  And the problem that they had was in the, in the, the New England division, which is the loans made throughout New England and New York.  There were seven officers, and they couldn't find an officer that wanted--it was funny, man--that wanted to take me under his wing for three months.  So, he told me to hold up in there, but they would find someone.  And eventually, the, the vice president, Jewish guy, who was not from Rhode Island--he was from New York--he, he agreed to take me under his wing for, for, until, you know, he thought I was ready to be on my own.  And that was, that was the, the only opportunity that I would get, because none of the other officers wanted to do it.  So that was, that was indeed a, a break.  And he--what, what was fantastic about it, this was what was amazing: he was the best lender in the entire bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation].  That's what it was.  And he could relate to me.  And he said to me, after we had worked together maybe a couple of months he says, "I was glad to take you in to teach you how to, to lend," he said, "because your chances are like my chances."  He says, "I'm probably heads and hills over most of the officers in here, but I'll never be president of the bank because I'm Jewish."  He says, "And you're gonna face the same situation because you're black."  He said, "So I'm gonna do my best to make you one of the best lenders that we have."  And, and, and he, he was right.  He, he was an, he was one of the best lenders, if not the best, that the bank had.  He--and I remember when, when we had the opportunity to review the W.T. Grants.  Remember W.T. Grants?  That store that used to be, S.S. Kresge [S.S. Kresge Company], used to be--
Speaker 2: Grant, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which is Kmart [Kmart Corporation].  S.S. Kresge's is Kmart.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Grants, yeah, I remember Grants.
Speaker 1: Grants, right, W.T.  It was W.T Grants.
Speaker 2: T. Grants, right.
Speaker 1: And, and we were trying to get involved with some of the bigger, bigger retailers, and W.T. Grant came to us to, to--we were invited to render an opinion of whether we wanted to join, it was a $250 million credit by a consortia of banks, maybe ten or twelve banks.  And they wanted us to come in for ten and a half million dollars towards their line of, total line of credit.  And, and Arthur, who was the--Arthur Lowenthal [ph.], who was the gentleman who was training me, they let him look at it.  And he looked at the package, and he kept it maybe a couple of days.  And you know, we talked about it, and you know, we got the credit department to spread it like we normally do.  And then he went over with me and explained to me, and he didn't like the way they were handling their accounts receivables.  And he recommended to the bank that we, we refuse to--we, we don't get into it.  And two weeks later W.T. Grant filed bankruptcy.  I mean, his stock went up like--
Story_ID: 622512
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this: did, did you--I've been in a situation like this myself, where you're, you're, you're with a group of white people, and you're the only black person there.  What did you hear them say about the Jews?   Did you have, did you have the same sense that he had, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I--
Speaker 1: --wasn't going anywhere?
Speaker 2: --I kind of knew that the Jewish population was, was at--because the bank was English, English all the way, you know.  There were no Jews.  He was the only Jew.  You know what I'm saying.  And, and, and so, he was basically like me.  He, he, he was, he was where he was because he was that good.  He had--they had hired him from manufact- at that time, it was manu- Manufacturers Hanover Trust [Manufactures Hanover Trust Company; Manufactures Hanover Corporation].  They used to call it Manny Hanny, out of New York [New York].  And, and he was just a downright, good credit analyst lender.  He could, he could, he could really go into--I don't care what size company it was.  He could go into it and break it down, you know, to, to the, to the level of, of, of you being able to understand what's going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what I'm, what I'm getting at is that did you, did you have a sense of, of, of the sent- the level of prejudice against Jews by the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --whites.
Speaker 2: Yes, because I saw guys who, who had not near as much ability as him.  As we begin to grow, they would start new subsidiaries, and, and he would never even be considered, never even be considered.  They never, ever made him senior vice president until I think I was gone maybe about--after I left the bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] in '76 [1976].  They made him, when when they started--
Speaker 1: But you're saying he earned that long before--
Speaker 2: Oh, long before that.  And then, and, and, and, and that's what was good about him.  Like I say, he's--he knew that he didn't have any chance.  He wanted to be president of, of, of the bank.  And he could very well have been president of the bank, but because he was Jewish, he knew he, you know.  Because, in fact, the guy who was with us--well, the first one was, I worked in the New England division, which, like I said, with seven guys.  This New England division made 70 percent of the bank's profit, this, these seven guys.  This is the group that I was in, you know.  And he was one of the biggest factors in there.  But when it came time to pick a new, a senior vice president in charge of the New England division, he didn't get it.  And, and the minute that that happened, he knew where his chances were, because the guy who took it, took it and, took that position, which I worked for him too when he was there, and he, he kept it for three years, and then he became the president of the bank, see, so.  That, that--I didn't know the level of prejudice that was facing Jewish people, but only thing I knew was there were no Jews in the bank.  He was the only one.  So, there must have been a reason for that, you know.
Story_ID: 622513
Speaker 1: So now this takes us, we're, we're 19--what now?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--well, '75 [1975], '75 [1975] I became the lending officer.  And I got my first lending portfolio--I'll never forget again; it was $19 million.  And, and that was, that was quite a big for a junior lender, you know.  I had a $19 million loan portfolio, which ended up before I left was about $75 million, which was good because Arthur [Arthur Lowenthal (ph.)], who was the, one of the best, his, his portfolio was about $215 million, 20 million.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you start your own business [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.] in seven--about '76 [1976], right?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].  In '76 [1976], I left the bank because I had this customer, and he had like a mini conglomerate.  In fact, what he used to do, his company made all of the Dunkin' Donut--you heard of Dunkin' Donut?
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, it didn't used to be there all over.  It used to just be in new, New England.  What he did was, he, he, he made all of the franchises for the Dunkin' Donuts, and he had the various companies: he had a lumber company; he had a painting company; he had a design company.  He had all the companies that was needed to do all of the various parts of putting together a Dunkin Donuts building, you know, store.  And that's, that was, that was his major customer.  So he was my customer, right.  And, and he was borrowing maybe, a million, two million dollars from us.  And he ca--he took me to lunch one day, and he says (laughter)--Jewish guy, Jewish guy--he said to me, he said, "Can you tell me why the hell you're working for the bank [at Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation]?"  (Laughter) And so I said, "What do you mean why am I working for the bank?"  He said, "Well, you practically run my businesses.  You're the one who decides whether I get money or not.  Why wouldn't you start your own business?"  And I really had never thought about anything like that.  And he says, "Yeah," he said, "if you can run my business, you can run your own." He says, "I would never sit behind a desk like this and work for these people when I can do it myself."  And so I really hadn't thought about it.  He said, "Think about it." He says, "And I'll help you if you need me.  You just ask me what you want."  Okay, so I started thinking about it.  And I think I went through the (laughter), the things that black people first think of.  First thing I thought of was I want to open a nightclub (laughter).  So, well, you know what was good about Dave?  His name was David Freeman [ph.], never for--he was good.  He said to me--he never told me no.  Whatever I said I wanted to do, he let me exhaust my effort to find out.  So, I went through the whole thing with the club, where, where would the, where the club would be, and I was doing all of the stuff and, and getting how many bartenders I would have and how many seats would be in the place and you know, the whole nine yards.  So, we were going over some of the figures, so he said to me, he said, "Okay, you forgot one expense."  I said, "What expense?" "How much are you gonna pay the mafia?"  I said, "Pay the mafia?"  I said, "Come on."  He says, "Oh no, I'm not joking" (laughter).  "How much are you gonna pay them?"  I said, "I'm not gonna pay them anything."  I said--he said, "Well, they're gonna be knocking on your door."  I said, "Well, then I'll just go to the police."  He said, "It doesn't work like that" (laughter). He says, "You've been watching too much television.  It doesn't work like that."  He said, "What they do is this: they will come to you and say, 'We want to give you protection.  It's gonna cost you twenty five hundred dollars a month.'  If you say no, the following week, they're gonna send somebody into the club, two guys, and they're gonna have a fight, and they're gonna take out their gun and starting shooting.  How many people you think gonna come back to your club the next week (laughter)?"  I said, "Whoa, I never thought about that."  He says, "Well, you'd better think about it."  So then I thought about that.  I said, "No, I don't want to do that."  And so (laughter), the next thing I did, I thought about was, "I want to own a liquor store."  So, I went through the motions for about another month or so with the, putting together stuff for the liquor store.  He said, "Can I give you a suggestion?"  He said, "Try to think of a business that you can turn over to your children, and you won't feel bad about turning it over to them; you'll be happy to have them in it."
Story_ID: 622514
Speaker 1: After he told me that maybe I should, you know, get, think of a business that I could pass on to my children, I start--I, I, I went over to the Clary and, and--Heidelberg and Clary [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.], and I told them, I said, "Look, man, why don't we try to think of going into business?"  He [Anderson W. Clary, Jr.] said--he was working with the state.  So he said, "Go into business and do what?"  I said, "I don't know yet."  I said, "But I think, you know, you're a college graduate, and you know, I'm from--I've been to college."  I said, "If, if anybody can do it, we can do it."  And see, he went to Providence College, which is a very good school in Providence [Rhode Island].  So what happen was, I got invited to a party by the guys from the Boston Patriots [New England Patriots].  At this time, they were the Boston Patriots.  They weren't in New England; they were Boston [Massachusetts].  So I knew quite a bit of them, you know, Jim Nance; you know, they had a guy named Mini-Mack Herron [Mack Herron].  You remember him?
Speaker 2: I remember Jim Nance, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mini Mack Herron. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Wasn't Cookie Gilchrist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Cookie--no.
Speaker 2: No, he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  He played with another team.
Speaker 2: Oh, he played with Buffalo [Buffalo Bills]; that's right--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Jim Nance was the man.
Speaker 2: Nance was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Gino Cappelletti was there--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Nick Buoniconti, you know, all of them, you know.  Nick wasn't there then, but he, he eventually came with New England.  But the point was I got invited.  I knew quite a few of the Patriots.  So they invited me up to a party up in Wrentham [Massachusetts] or Needham [Massachusetts] or one of them towns up there.  So, I went--and Andy Clary and I went up to the, to the party.  So, this guy is talking, Mini Mack Herron, he's talking about the government supplying contracts for minority firms.  If they would apply to get 8(a) certification, I think called 8(a) certification, they could do contracts.  And he and some friends of his were gonna start a construction company.  And he had some friends that were gonna allow them to, to, to bid on some contracts, and they were, the friends--the bigger companies were gonna show them how to do the contracts.  And they could make a lot of money just basically being like a front company.  They, they, they would put the minority's name down as a contractor, and they would let him bid to say he's gonna do five hundred thousand [dollars] of the work.  And what happen is they would do all of the work, and they would give the minority guy maybe a hundred thousand dollars, and he go about his business.  So, I came back to--we came back to Rhode Island, and we thought about it, said, "There's got to be something that we can do."  We thought about that, so we said, "Well, let's, let's, why don't we do the same thing?"  But we realized that we didn't want to be like a front company.  What good would it do us to take a hundred thousand dollars?  Because we had found out that most of the guys who did stuff like that, within one or two years, you know, if the, the majority firm move on to another business, the guy who did the hundred thousand dollars really didn't know anything about what he was doing, and he couldn't really carry the business on.  He'd always--
Speaker 2: Temporary, yeah.
Speaker 1: --needed somebody like that.  So, we messed around trying to figure that out, and then we said, "No.  That's not for us."  I, I don't--you know, first of all, neither one of us were engineerer- engineers, knew--we didn't know anything about it.  And what happened was, so, I think we went through about three weeks of me sitting down trying to figure out everything.  And I went to him one night and I said, "Look, man," I said, "if you don't want to get involved with this, good." I said, "Because it seems like I'm the only one here that's trying to put the cut or come up with anything."  I said, "So, if you don't want to do it, tell me now, because I don't need you.  The only purpose for having two heads is that you got two heads who think differently at, but they think as one."  I said, "But if I got to tell you everything to think of and do, well, why do I need you as a partner," you know?  And, and, and so, I think he, he got--I know he did--he got offended (laughter) by what I said, right.  So, he left that night, and like, he never came back again.  I mean, he was gone for like about two weeks.  I didn't know what was happening, so I didn't, you know, I didn't bother him.
Story_ID: 622515
Speaker 1: So, about two weeks later he [Anderson W. Clary, Jr.] came back to me.  He says, "I got it" (laughter).  I said, "You got what?"  He said, "I got a business that we can go in, and even if you don't want to do it, I'm gonna do it by myself" (laughter).  I said, "Wait a minute; wait a minute."  I said, "I didn't say I didn't want to do it.  Tell me what it is that you're gonna do."  So he says, "What we can do is," he said, "we can do environmental impact statements and environment assessments."  I said, "What the heck is that?"  He said, "Environmental impact statements are studies that the, that the government require all people who--according to this new law that they just had, the National Environmental Policy Act [National Environmental Policy Act of 1969], they envir--they, they require all firms that are anticipating construction on any government project must do this thing called an environmental impact statement."  He says, "And it doesn't matter whether they do the project or not; they got to do the environmental impact statement, so you got to make the money whether they do the project or not."  I said, "Well, tell me a little more about it."  So we went through it, and, and, and we came up with an idea of how we [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.], how we could do the studies.  And so, we embarked on a, a mad course after work for the next year putting together the plans of how we want to do that.   We started flying, we flew all over the United States, Colorado, California.  And what we actually did was we set up a cadre of, of consultants at, with specialties in all of the disciplines that are needed to perform an environmental impact statement.  And one of the things that the government had said, which we took advantage of, said that all of the statements that had been done were dead, voluminous, and boring, mean they would, they, they do them big statements.  And what they wanted was somebody to be able to come in and do a, a simple study that was maybe twenty or thirty pages long that the average American could, citizen could sit down and read it and, and if the technical information, engineering reports, bio-seismic readings and all of that could be indexed to a section for somebody who was qualified enough to read it.  But you need to be able to give them this story in a condensed form that, that will prevent projects from being held up because there's a boll weevil end or something that you didn't explain it the right way.  And so, we embarked on that.  And after we finished the plans, we came up with the fact that we needed probably two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to start this company.  So, I had five thousand dollars, and he had five thousand dollars.  So, we said, "Let's go to the bank.  We'll go the SBA [Small Business Administration] to get the SBA to approve a loan for us, and we'll go to my bank that I just worked at [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] to have them approve the loan and then have SBA guarantee the loan."  So he was saying to me, "Do you think the bank's gonna approve it?"  I said, "Look, I've been doing loans for the last nine years."  And I said--I've been in a bank nine years, but I act as--I said, "And don't you think I know how to do what is required, what the bank looks for when you go in to try to get a loan?"  I said, "Well, if I can't do that, then I really had no (laughter) reason being a lending officer."  So, we put together the package and went to the bank, and the bank approved the two hundred fifty thousand dollar loan for us, and we only had ten thousand dollars.  And then but what we--what happened again: we went back to the SBA and told them that the bank was willing to get into the deal if they would extend their guarantee.  Well, the SBA rejected us.  They didn't want to provide the guarantee, which is unusual.  They're our advocate.  They said no.  So what saved us was my friend is from--his family is from Newport News [Virginia], and they are very close--relatives have friends to--they were closely friends with Senator Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke].  He, Senator Brooke, was the first black--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --senator in the U- (unclear) senator in the United States.  So, they told him, "Well, why don't you go see Senator Brooke?"  So we said, "Why would we go see Senator Brooke?"  Said, "Well, the Boston [Massachusetts] office is, is the regional office for all SBAs in Region I, don't matter."  It covers from Richmond all the way up, you know, just like the, the Federal Reserves [Federal Reserve System], Richmond, New York.  So Richmond covered, covers--is Region I--covers Providence [Rhode Island].  So we went up to see Senator Brooke, told him what we were trying to do.  And, and one week after we talked to him he says, "Go back to Providence.  You'll get your guarantee."  He says, "And please, don't go and say anything to the people at the SBA in Providence; don't say a word; just go back.  You got your money."  So, we went back, came back, and we got our two hundred and fifty thousand dollars and we commenced to do--try now, trying to get the work to be done.
Story_ID: 622516
Speaker 1: And what'll happen was we had put out a projection that we were gonna get forty thousand dollars in contracts the first year, a hundred and eighty thousand--figure's still in my head. A hundred and eight thousand the second year, two hundred and forty thousand the third year, seven hundred and twenty thousand the fourth year, and maybe about a million five in the fifth year.  And what happened was, I think the first year (laughter), I think we got twenty five hundred dollars in contracts, and the second year, after marketing, we got--I wrote, I wrote six letters to President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], to try to tell him that we were the only firm in America, minority firm, that was capable of doing this type of project.  And we are trying to get work, and we can't get work.  And, and I wrote him, like, I'm telling you, it had to be seven letters, directly to the president, even though I know he wasn't getting them.  I know somebody else was looking at them, but I kept writing him.  And every copy that I sent him, I sent one to the Wall Street Journal and one to The New York Times.  And my partner said (laughter), he said, Andy [Anderson W. Clary, Jr.] said to me, he said, "I don't know why you keep writing the man.  The man is not gonna answer you."  I said, "He's gonna answer me," you know.  I kept putting in there, "I voted for you, and you," blah, blah, blah, blah, and whatever.  Well, anyway, about two and a half months later, this letter comes in the mail, the White House (laughter).  It's amazing, man.  And you know what I learned about that lesson is this: when that, when the, when the White House writes you a letter, they already know the answer.  They know who you are, where you're from, how many children you got; they know everything about you.  And they wrote us a letter and said the president has received your letter, and he is aware that you have been applying for contracts.  And we understand that the [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency has offered you a contract.  They did; they offered us a (laughter) a contract for $55 million.  (Laughter) I'm saying like, now you know doggone well we could not do a $55 million contract.  And we told him, said that, that's ridiculous, but there has to be something.  He says, "And if you'll respond to that," so I wrote him back and said, "That contract is way out of our league."  He said, "Well, they have another contract that they said if you will submit a bid within the next week, that they will consider you for it."  I mean, this is how the government works.  We, we--he sent it to us, and the next week they sent us back a contract for two hundred and forty thousand dollars and then we were on our way.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the business is Heidelberg, Clary [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.]--
Speaker 1: And Associates--
Speaker 2: --and Associates--
Speaker 1: --Inc.
Speaker 2: --Inc., okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So this is really running concurrently with the Carter administration, '76 [1976] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that's when, that, that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that was the whole thing.  That was the whole thing.  I was writing him every other week I was writing President Carter.
Story_ID: 622517
Speaker 1: So, what, what happened?  And you all had some, you were getting some contracts, but--
Speaker 2: We started getting contracts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: We got another contract with the department of the, the--transportation [U.S. Department of Transportation].  We did the--they were, at that time, the wide bodied jets were coming out.  And in order for a, an airport within the city to be an international airport to take those wide bodied jets, they had to have their runways extended to make sure they accommodate, 'cause those, all those planes need a lot of running room.  So, Green Airport, T.F. Green Airport in Providence [sic. Warwick, Rhode Island], gave us a contract for two hundred and seventy thousand dollars to do an environmental impact statement for the extension of the runways at Green Airport, which, you know, you go and you look in the records they, they study is still up there.  We did, we did a good study, and they got the runways.  And of course, they are T.F. Green International Airport.  And so, we were doing pretty good.  We had like eight people in our firm [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.], and we were trying to get 8(a) certified; 8(a) certified means that the government set asides a certain number of contracts for companies that the Small Business Administration deems are certified to do larger contracts.  And, and, and we had, we had been marketing with the SBA [Small Business Administration] to get into that program, and, and the difficulty again is to get in.  You know, you had to just jump, jump through hoops, and you have to be around.  So, we had marketed with them, and finally we got an entree to the [U.S.] Department of Defense, their, the corps of engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers], who do most of the environmental impact statements.  They do the checking of the environmental impact statements and assessment.  And what they--after they visited us, they agreed to give us a contract.  They wrote us a contract--never will forget it--$1,000,033,000 to do environmental contracts for various defense missile systems that would, that would move from place to place.
Story_ID: 622518
Speaker 1: And so, by this time, we [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.] had, we were in our fourth year, and the two hundred and fifty thousand dollars was just about depleted.  So I went back to the bank [Industrial National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] and told them that we had this contract, and, but we could not make it unless we got, I think we needed about a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to get us three months into the contract, because after three months, you could request a, an advance under the contract.  And so the bank say, agreed to loan us a hundred fifty thousand dollars.  And of course, Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] wasn't around then, and we had to go back to the Providence [Rhode Island] SBA [Small Business Administration], and they rejected us.  In fact, they wrote a letter to the, to the corps of engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers] and said we, we seriously suggest that you withdraw the contract because the financial condition of this company is incapable of performing in under the--I couldn't believe that was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So this is 1980?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is--
Speaker 2: So this Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration there now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, gone.
Speaker 2: --the whole cast changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There was nothing we could do.  So, we had to close up the business.  And I went, and I went, I went to, to New York [New York] to get back into banking.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so you caught up with a bank pretty quick from--
Speaker 1: Right. Yeah.
Speaker 2: You, you're working for the Brooklyn--what is it?  No, I'm seeing the--
Speaker 1: No, Barclays Bank.
Speaker 2: Barclays Bank, right.
Speaker 1: I went to Barclays.
Speaker 2: I couldn't read that, glasses (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Barclays Bank, that's the--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, Barclays' based in London [England], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an, an English bank.  And they had set up a subsidiary over here in America called Barclays International [Barclays Bank International Limited; Barclays Bank PLC].  It's international because they're from England.  And the international set up a bank called Barclays Bank of New York [New York, New York].  They bought eighty-nine branches of a previous bank and set up shop as Barclays Bank of New York.  So they had a fairly large penetration into the New York area.  And most of the, most of the branches in, in New York were really to facilitate English based companies that had American subsidiaries.  So, they, they, they, they were coming into the, to the, to this country on a local basis and impacting it as again like bar, Barclays was the largest bank in England, and at that time, it was the sixth largest bank in the world.  So, I wrote a letter, and it got--because they were setting up a new Manhattan [New York] division to do commercial lending.  And not being from America, they were, they were--they hired me as a, as an assistant vice president and corporate loan officer.
Story_ID: 622519
Speaker 1: There were very many other blacks working for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were none.
Speaker 1: None?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What freaked me out about Barclays [Barclays Bank of New York, New York, New York] was, when I first went in there, the first day of work, all--they had tellers--this, this, this branch was right across from the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] at 50th [Street] and Park Avenue.  And it had, like, maybe twenty-five tellers.  It was, this a big bank.  All the tellers were black.  That blew me away 'cause I, you know, I really didn't know anything about Barclays other than how big it was.  But it has a huge presence in Jamaica.  And, and, and everybody that worked in--the tellers position, they were all Jamaicans, but they didn't have any Jamaican officers.  You know, they were all just basically in the lower positions.  And they were, they were excited as I was to see a black guy that was, like, an assistant vice president, like I said, because there were none.
Speaker 1: So they had Jamaican tellers in New York [New York], but not--
Speaker 2: Oh, plenty of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why I say I was shocked when I went.  I said--
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: --I didn't know they had this many black people.  And in all their branches they had a lot of, lots of black--people of color I should say--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, but they were not American blacks.  They--I don't remember any American blacks working.  They were all, mostly all Jamaicans or, or Africans.  You know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Some of--you probably noticed in New England a large number of people with a bar- Barbados ancestry and Jamaican ancestry in New York (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no mostly, no.  In, in where?
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: In New England?
Speaker 1: --probably New England is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In New England--
Speaker 1: --Barbados it seems like--
Speaker 2: --it was the Portuguese.
Speaker 1: Portuguese?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  And the--
Speaker 1: Cape Verdeans?
Speaker 2: Cape Verdeans, that's number one.  Cape Verdeans was number one, because when I first went to New England, the Cape Verdeans did not identify themselves as blacks.  The identified themselves as Portuguese.  And then I, when I looked up and saw that Cape Verde (laughter) is at, is off the coast of Africa (laughter), and the Portuguese came over there and took all of their, the, the African ladies.  And now all of a sudden you're gonna, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's a mix--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a mixture--
Speaker 1: --it's actually a mixture, but they--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) like this--
Speaker 2: But then when I, I think as I lived in Providence [Rhode Island] for twenty-two years, the more, the more the, the, the, the blacks began to, to demand attention and get better rights in America, then the Cape Verdeans began to kind of come over a little bit to being black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we've interviewed a family that lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and then the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] out--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) in Hyannis [Massachusetts] was a Cape Verdean.
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: So they--
Speaker 2: --right, right.
Speaker 1: --so they are some that did.  But they even discuss how others in the Cape--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --other Cape Verdeans--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --tried to void being black.
Speaker 2: Oh, they didn't want to be black at all, yeah.  So that was, that was interesting.
Story_ID: 622520
Speaker 1: How long did you work for Barclays [Barclays Bank of New York, New York, New York]?  Now, now you did a lot of travel with Barclays too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Barclays.  I went to England.  They took me to England.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was, that was a good trip.  I was over there three years for an international three years--three, three weeks for an international credit course, which was really good.  And it, it was funny because I, I met two or three South African blacks who were assistant vice presidents that were--I think I might have mentioned that.  I was telling somebody--I didn't know if it was you--that when I got over there, you know, they have Barclays--Barclays [Barclays Bank International Limited; Barclays Bank PLC] is everywhere in England.  It, it is amazing.  They have a saying in England: if you can walk a mile, and you don't see a Barclays Bank, you are lost (laughter).  And it's the absolute truth.  They have like a Barclays on every corner seems like, everywhere.  I mean, like I tell people, Barclays had six thousand branches.  That's amazing.  Four thousand were in Africa.  And when the guy took me over there, I remember asking him--he took me to the--they had this condominium building next door to the bank.  And Barclays, of course, had a, had a, had a condominium in there, so he took me over there for lunch.  And you know, and the room is all set up with the alcohol tray.  I mean it was loaded.  So we sat down, and he--it, it was ironic 'cause he ask me, he say, "Well, laddie, have you ever heard of the BI-LO market?"  I said, "BI-LO supermarket [Bi-Lo, LLC]?"  I said, "Of course."  He said, "Well, that's my wife's father's business.  He owns BI-LO."  I said (laughter) there's a BI-LO right on the corner of where I grew up, right.  So, so we, so we started talking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So Barclay's had a long, long reach--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, everywhere.  So he said--I said to him, I said, I said, "So how many black vice presidents are there in Barclays?"  He said, "One" (laughter).  I said, I said, "Really?"  He said, "Well, we have a Jamaican vice, one Jamaican vice president too."  I said, "Well, how many vice presidents do you have altogether?"  He says, "Oh, maybe about twenty-five hundred" (laughter).  That is amazing, twenty-five hundred vice presidents.  Oh, they were huge, man.
Speaker 1: Big, big operation.
Speaker 2: Oh, they were huge.  There was over (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 2: --they had over a hundred thousand employees.
Story_ID: 622521
Speaker 1: Well, you were there 'til 1985, right?  So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so how did you come to leave Barclays [Barclays Bank of New York, New York, New York]?  You went to Banco de Ponco [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Banco de Ponce.
Speaker 1: De Ponce, yeah; I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: What happened was, I would--Barclays had eighty-nine branches in New York.  Out of the eighty-nine branches, they had eighteen corporate branches in those eighty-nine.  Now corporate branch is where there has a vice president in charge of the loans, and you don't have to send any--you, you can make any loan up to two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.  And anything over two hundred and fifty thousand dollars you have to call down to the main office to get somebody to sign with you.  So, the, we had eighteen of those type of branches.  I was eventually promoted to vice president and corporate manager, and my branch was on Park Avenue, 2 Park Avenue.  And I had, like, super accounts, Ralph Lauren.  I mean I, I mean I had some really good accounts, Sterling Publishing [Sterling Publishing Company, Inc., New York, New York], who publishes 'The Guinness Book of World Records' [Guinness World Records] and one of the largest textbook publishers in the world.  I had two countries that borrow from us too.  They were mine.  So, so, inside my corporate branch was a branch downstairs, which was a retail branch with about twenty-five or thirty people.  And I had--I was the manager of the corporate branch and the branch, and there was like, ten people that worked in the corporate branch upstairs.  Now in all of the other seventeen corporate branches none of the corporate managers had the responsibility of overseeing the retail branch.  They all, they all had a manager that managed it, but they didn't have to really interact with him.  Well, in my branch, I was over the retail manager, but I also had to do all of his reviews for all of his employees, which I was really involved with the retail branch.  And I thought though that based on my salary and the fact that I was the vice president like the other eighteen vice presidents, but none of them had the responsibility of maintaining that retail branch.  And for that reason, I thought I should be paid more money.  Well, that was when I found out--I learned my lesson that you can't make demands on (laughter) entities that big.  I said, "If, if you don't give me an, an increase in salary, then I have nothing to do but go somewhere else."  And they said, "Go somewhere else then" (laughter).  And, and I learned that.  I mean, like, I really didn't want to go, but I thought they were gonna react to that, and they did.  But, they don't, they don't negotiate the same way as Americans do, so I, I had to leave.  I couldn't, I could not change my mind and say, "Well, okay, I'm gonna stay," you know, and so I left.
Story_ID: 622522
Speaker 1: I guess it took me about a month and a half.  My daughter got a job as a teller at this bank called Banco de Ponce.  And, and all of that was good because at that particular time, Banco de Ponce is a bank out of Puerto Rico.  It was the largest bank in Puerto Rico.  And they had made a presence because there are a lot of Puerto Ricans in New York [New York].  They had opened ten branches in New York.  And one of the means of growth for banks during that time, and probably still during this time, was what they call the middle market, the customers that borrow--that, that do sales anywhere from say two hundred and fifty thousand dollars a year to maybe about five million.  That's what they call the middle market.  And at that time, Banco de Ponce was trying to make an entree into the middle market to attract American businesses rather than just Spanish speaking business.  And, but they had all of their lenders were Puerto Ricans.  They didn't really have American bankers.  They, you know, the, the Puerto Ricans lived in America, but they weren't, they didn't have the flavor of, of how American banks operate.  So when I applied there, I was perfect for their mix, to, to be one of their regional vice presidents to, to assist with the transition of training their vice presidents how to respond to the Corporate America world.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, well, how did things go at, at--
Speaker 1: Things went good there again, and again, I made a--this is called the, the, the decade of my mistakes.  What happened was, they--I was doing really good, and they were gonna promote me to become the vice president and, and, and credit manager.  They wanted me to take over the credit department and which was good 'cause, you know, 'cause I had an extensive background in credit training.  And none of their officers had ever gone through anything like what I did.  But when they gave--and in fact, he had the, the, the, the gentleman in charge of the bank in New York had to go to Puerto Rico to get permission because they had no American of that, you know, of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Level.
Speaker 1: --level, and they had to get it from the president of the bank in Puerto Rico.
Story_ID: 622523
Speaker 1: Okay, we have to get in the way back machine and go back to Barclays [Barclays Bank of New York, New York, New York] for a minute and--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and there's a story about you being offered shares in the movie, 'First Blood.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You were telling--
Speaker 2: Well, what, what happened was, I, I had some interesting situations as, when I was vice president at Barclays.  One was this, these two brothers whose father worked for Warner Bros [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc.], and so they had an entree to Warner Bros.  So, they had both graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I remember they took me to the Harvard Club in New York [Harvard Club of New York City, New York, New York] to tell me about this deal that they, they did.  They were gonna buy this movie, and they were gonna sell shares of the movie to very wealthy people.  And he wanted us to loan him $22 million to, to buy the, to buy the film.  So, I remember he took me up one evening, up somewhere off of 6th [Avenue], Park Avenue or 5th Avenue, 5th Avenue.  And we went into this place.  It was, it was a--when we got in there it was like a little theater, would hold maybe about forty or fifty people.  And we went downstairs, and he had the wine and everything.  We sat down with--he introduced me to all of his potential investors.  And they showed us the movie that they were buying.  And the movie was Sylvester Stallone, 'First Blood.'  And I mean, and it was an awesome picture.  When we saw it, everybody was so excited about, 'bout that movie.  And he said to me, he says, "If, if you have any sense, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg], you should buy one of these shares."  And the shares were 135 thousand dollars each.  And I, and I, I remember laughing, thinking--I said, I told him, I said, "I work for the bank.  I do not own the bank."  He says but if you want to make some money, you'll buy one of these.  Well, anyway, the deal, we approved the deal.  They ended up buying the movie for 20 million, and they used $2 million to get, to do all the other expense work.  But I think about that because the movie was the largest grossing movie in America.  It cleared $220 million at the box office, just at the box office.  That didn't take into--
Speaker 1: To the--
Speaker 2: --account the cable television--
Speaker 1: --cable (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) stations, the regular television stations--
Speaker 1: --VHS sales.
Speaker 2: --and the V- and the, and the, the video, the video stations.  I mean, and he said, he said to me, "If you, if you buy this you'll be collecting money for the rest of your life."  And, and, and I think about that because before I did that deal, before I responded to that deal for them, they had done the pic--they owned 'Excalibur,' the movie 'Excalibur.'  They, they did that one too.  That was their first one, which was a small one.
Story_ID: 622524
Speaker 1: I mean, I'd--it was fantastic, the opportunities that you have when you deal in New York [New York].  Like I said, Ralph Lauren was one of my customers, Sterling Publishing [Sterling Publishing Company, Inc., New York, New York], who was, like I said, they are the, the, the au- the publishers of 'The Guinness Book of World Record' [Guinness World Records] and the largest textbook publisher in America.  I mean it was--they were just fantastic.  I had a, a physician who was in Time magazine because he was the first doctor to purchase a laser machine, which he, he would do operations on--
Speaker 2: Cataracts?
Speaker 1: No, no.  He did it--mostly, he was a, a gyno- what is that? OB/GNY--[sic. OB/GYN, obstetrics and gynecology]--doctor.  And he was the first one to buy this machine, this, this laser machine.  I think the machine was like, ten thousand or a hundred thousand [dollars].  I can't remember the figure.  I, I don't want to say ten thousand, and it was a hundred thousand.  I think it--some, some ridiculous price.  And they had him in Time magazine because he was the first physician in New York to purchase one.  And ironically, which, which I'll never forget, do you remember when the, the, the Koreans shot down Flight 007 [Koran Air Lines Flight 007]?  Was it 007, when, when they--and came into--
Speaker 2: The airspace.
Speaker 1: --airspace, they shot it down.
Speaker 2: Over North, North Korea?
Speaker 1: No--yeah.  Well, Dr. Truppin [Michael Truppin] was his name.  He and his wife [Jan Moline], we had just--I had just put together a loan package for them for something on a couple of million, something like that.  And so they had worked so much, and he says--I'll never forget because he took me to The Pierre hotel in New York, and he was telling me, he says, "We, we finally have a chance to, to take a vacation.  And thank you for all of the loans that you've given, and we should, we should, we should go--we're going away for a couple of weeks just to relax."  And, and, and, and the president of the bank called me that morn--when I got into the office they said--Barry Schwart [ph.], he was our president of Banco de Ponce--see, he called, and he wants him to call him.  I called him up.  He says, "I'm to inform you--I don't know if you know that Dr. Truppin and his wife were on the plane that was shot down over North Korean."  I, I mean, it, it just--'cause we were so close.  I mean it was like a member of the family.  And he was just saying though, he was saying, "Do we have insurance?"  (Laughter) And so, fortunately when I put the loan package together I had a key man life insurance policy on him to cover the loan.  So I told him, I said yeah, no problem.  But I was, I was really, really upset, because he--you know, we were, we were, we were really good friends.
Story_ID: 622525
Speaker 1: So, you were saying before we had the break that this is the decade where you got in trouble.  So, what, what happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this was my decade of poor decisions I, I would say more than that, not trou- poor decision.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because when I was offered the position as the first African American to be in what you--in a position of senior management, I opted again for the same thing, more money.  What I mean, and both of them were based on money.  You know, and I said to--he said to me, he said he had gone over to Puerto Rico to get me approved.  And so I said, "Well how much of an increase in salary do I get?"  And he says, "There is no increase in salary at this time."  I said, "What?"  He said, "No."  He said, "Right now it's a lateral position."  The guy who was the senior vice president that was retiring. And he says, "What we need to do is to put you in the position, and you know, let's see how you do with it.  I mean," he says, "I think it's, it's, it's a big step for us first of all to just offer you the position."  He said, "But the potential here is, is really great."  And I said, "No.  If, if you're not gonna give me any money, then I don't want the job."  And he tried to convince me, and I said, "No, no, not gonna do it, not if you're not gonna--you got to give me something."  He says, "I can't give you any money yet."  And that was it.  So, after re--turning him down, I could tell by--and because I used to meet with him like almost every day, every day, on loans and what was happening.  He never called me in his office, and I knew that my career at Banco de Ponce was finished, so I just left.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Terrible, terrible decisions.
Speaker 1: This is in 19 what?
Speaker 2: This was in 1989.
Story_ID: 622526
Speaker 1: So I came back to--couldn't get a--after that time, that was the incident where I had an interview with the guy from Bank Leumi [Bank Leumi USA], the, the, the Jewish bank.  And when I got down there they saw I was black and, and re- you know, recanted on the offer that they made to me.  So what I did was, knowing that, I, I said, "Well, let me go back to Rhode Island."  So I went back to Rhode Island, which I had all- already sold my home, and my moth--but my mother's [Lena King Heidelberg] home was still there.  And I went back, and at that time, I was caught in between every major merger and acquisition.  The banks were like merging and, and you know.  In fact, the old bank that I started with, Industrial National Bank [Bank of America Corporation], had changed its name in, in the '70s [1970s] to Fleet [Fleet National Bank; Bank of America Corporation] and had purchased so many other banks and bought the Bank of Boston [Bank of Boston Corporation; BankBoston, Boston, Massachusetts], back to--bought the bank of Hartford, Connecticut [New Connecticut Bank and Trust Co.], bought NorthStar Bank in New York.  I mean they bought--became--it went from like, when I was there the fifty-something largest bank to the seventh largest bank in the world.  And I think when they got to number seven, they were bought out by Bank of America.  So what happened was, I, I had a friend who was a senior vice president at Industrial National Bank who was, had moved over to this small savings bank in Woonsocket, Rhode Island.  And I told him that I needed a job, and he told me the only thing they had was commercial loan review analyst.  And he says, "I don't want to embarrass you because it's only, they only pay forty thousand [dollars] a year."  So I said, "Well, heck, forty thousand is better than nothing."  So I went up to Woonsocket and took the position as the senior loan review analyst.  And I had a portfolio to review annually of about, 'bout two hundred and some million dollars.  And the things was that lasted maybe a year and half because their, their loan portfolio was so poorly collateralized that it put the bank in jeopardy, and the FDIC [Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation] finally end up closing them down in 1992.  So that was, that was really the end of my banking career, and I came back to Virginia in 1994.
Story_ID: 622527
Speaker 1: It was very difficult to get a job at that time, so I did construction work for a little while; then I started substitute teaching for about a year and a half; and then I decided, hey, I never got my college degree in all of this time.  And I had remembered what my coach had said to me.  He said, he said this to me in the '60s [1960s].  He said, "You know," when he was trying to encourage of us to, to, to do our studies and play football, he said, "You know, it takes a--any man can start college, but it takes a good man to finish."  And that kind of stayed on my brain for all of those years.  And so when I came back to Virginia in '94 [1994] and I decided that it was so difficult to get a job, I said, "Let me go back."  And I went back to college.  I went back to Norfolk State [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  By this time it was a university.  And I went and let them look at my transcript.  I had 116 hours.  And I asked them what was the quickest way I could get a college degree out of this, and they suggested I look at the interdisciplinary studies department, which I did.  And when I first went to apply, they said it would--that I could get my degree in about a year.  So I waited around about a month or two, and then when I went back again, it had gone from a year to two years.  I said oh, my goodness, so, but my mind was made up that I was gonna go back and get the degree.  So, I had to take fifty-one courses--fifty-one hours, seventeen courses, and that took me two years.  And I took the fifty-one hours; I took the seventeen courses, and I focused and got seventeen A's and got my degree.  And I felt, I felt good because I had accomplished what he said: It takes a good man to finish.  And I felt like after that I was a good man, educational-wise.  I was--my spirits were back up.
Story_ID: 622528
Speaker 1: What I did was, my partner in Heidelberg, Clary and Associates [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.], Andy Clary [Anderson W. Clary, Jr.], he had come back to Virginia himself.  He had become a minister, and he had become the pastor of the, one of the largest churches in Hampton [Virginia] called Queen Street Baptist Church [Hampton, Virginia].  And he had a, a community, a corporation that was engaged in providing services for, volunteer services, throughout the community.  And he said that he had a pretty good arrangement there, but he needed somebody to run it for him, and he asked me would I come over and would I run it for him and get it, get it on track and get it going.  So, I went over right out of college, and, and, and took over the corporation [Beacon at the Crossroads, Hampton, Virginia], and did quite a good job.  We ended up having maybe about thirty-two employees in the corporation, and we did quite a few valuable things in the community.
Speaker 2: This is like a social service agency, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, basically, yeah.
Speaker 2: And doing nutrition, health education, economic--
Speaker 1: Nutrition, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) development--
Speaker 1: --all of those, yeah.
Speaker 2: --housing and homeland security, okay.
Speaker 1: Yep, everything to help individuals motivate themselves within their communities, to, to get a grip on life and come and, and do some good things.  So, it, it was real good.  It was, it was, like I said, we had thirty-two employees.  And people use, used to think about--didn't think about the fact that these were what we called Avista [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] volunteers.  Each one of them got--we, we got a contract to pay them fifteen thousand dollars a year.  So if you take thirty people, just thirty and multiply it by fifteen thousand, you can see that we had four hundred and fifty thousand dollars' worth of labor that we could employ throughout all the community with no, really no expense to us to provide those.  And we, you know, we did some good things.  We did a truancy program for the City of Hampton public schools [Hampton City Schools], where we went in and provided people in the schools to, to do the calling on delinquent students who were not showing up for class or who were truant, which really was--is, was and is a continuing problem for our, especially our people of color, for not finishing school.  You can't finish school if you're not there.  And so, you know, we did--we had some--we did some home things with them.  I set up a, a home corporation to purchase and build homes within the community, but before I could finish that I, I was given an offer by the treasury of--treasurer of Hampton, Marley Ward [ph.], because she was in need of a, an assistant treasurer and chief deputy treasurer.  And interviewed for the job, and she gave me that job.  And so, in 2003 I went back into the, to the city, and I, I held that job for about three years.
Story_ID: 622529
Speaker 1: And then after three years, I, I think it was nine--2006 I published my book ['The Norfolk 17: A Personal Narrative on Desegregation in Norfolk, Virginia in 1958 - 1962,' Andrew I. Heidelberg].  And so I left the Treasurer's Office [Hampton, Virginia] to embark up on the promotion of my book and on touring the country to speak to youth, and colleges, universities, churches, and the like regarding lessons learned, I would say, and desegregation of education facilities and sports in the South.
Speaker 2: Now, your book is--you self published, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What happened with that was, when I came back to Virginia, I was beginning to listen to all of the various accounts given by the majority race as to what transpired during those turbulent years of desegregation.  And I had written an account, my own account, back in 1967 when I got cut from the Steelers [Pittsburgh Steelers].  You know, like, I was so down, I remember specifically after I got cut by the Steelers that I, I was playing ego, looking for some motivation for my ego to make me feel good (laughter).  And I, I, I was stumbled in my mind on how great it was in, in Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia] and that first year at Norfolk State [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  So that's when I said to myself, I said, "Maybe I ought to write this down."  And you know, just, and I, and I, and I relived that whole year, and I decided to really relive the entire episode from the day I went to the school.  And I wrote it down, and, and you know, in '67 [1967], I started in '67 [1967], and I think I probably, I finished it somewhere around 1972, and I just put it away.  And then after I graduated I, from college when I came back down here, I decided since computers were in and I didn't have to try to transcribe it with a typewriter, that's what I did with the computer.  And what happened was, when I got married the second time to my lovely wife, Luressa [Luressa Heidelberg], the first thing that she did was she read my transcript.  And she said to me, "Oh, my goodness, you've got to publish this."  I said, "Come on."  She, and she says, "Yes, this is really good."  And then, and I thought about all of the, like I said, the accounts that were given that weren't really accurate.  And so, we got together and figured out the, the way to get the money.  And she was instrumental in making sure that the book got published.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it was a self publish, because I, I had offered it to this same company, Dorrance Publishing [Dorrance Publishing Company, Inc.] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And they were gonna buy it, but they wanted all of my rights, movie rights and all kinds of rights, which I at that time did not want to do.  And today I'm still glad I didn't do that.
Speaker 2: Were you offered a whole lot of money, or were they--
Speaker 1: No.  They said they would do it--
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: --and they hadn't made a price (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) just to pub- just to publish some copies of the book?
Speaker 1: No, no.  What it, how that works is they buy the book from you, and they pay you in royalties, you know, like a dollar or two dollars for every book sold.  But at the same time, if the book generates enough interest that somebody wants to make a movie of it, they, again, then own the movie rights; I don't own it.  So, I didn't want to do that, because I knew that the book, it was, it, it, it is a movie.  And so I didn't sell it to them, so I said well, I'll do the self publish.  And, and, and it's really been difficult with the self publish, because without a publisher behind you, you, you're not gonna get it into the major bookstores.
Speaker 2: Dist- distribution is the killer.
Speaker 1: That's, that's it right there.  And they're not gonna take--the, the, the big distributors are not gonna give you that credit arrangement, wherein if the publisher takes the books, the publishers has this arrangements with the distributors, that if they, say they buy a hundred books, and they sell ten, they could send the ninety back to the distributor and get their money back.  But on a self publish, when you buy the book, you own it.  So, they're not gonna take any self publishing books, because they own them, and they don't want to do that.
Story_ID: 622530
Speaker 1: So, that's what's has presented it. But I'm in the process now, like I said, I have an agent, and I've just written 'The Colored Halfback' [Andrew I. Heidelberg], which is the, the sports side of the book in a novel form, which is really about two black kids growing up in the South amid all of the turmoil and racism and discrimination.  So, it's, it's basically the, it's, it's very similar to the book that I wrote, except it speaks in novel form, and you get to interact with the characters that were living during that particular time.  And, and that's where we are right now.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you this, your story, as you told it to us, is about a dramatic a story as I've ever heard.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: And you, you are keenly aware of every nuance of what happened to you.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, things happen to a lot of people, but they're not as keenly aware of the nuances that are going around--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --around them, I mean the, the complexity of, of the things that are happening.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I mean but you have a keen sense, sense of that.  So, I just think that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it doesn't need to be fictionalized so much, you know.  I don't know what you, what the, the fiction version might be great, but I'm, I'm just saying your story straight up is one of the most dramatic I've ever heard, so, and you tell it well.
Story_ID: 622531
Speaker 1: So you went back, at some point, you, you went back to the, across, what's that, the Beacon at the Crossroads [Hampton, Virginia], right?  And--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --are you still working for the--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I gave that up when I, when I published the book.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So have you had any feedback from--
Speaker 2: Well, right now my agent told me that she got some interest from Kensington publishers [Kensington Publishing Corp.], which is one of the largest publishers in America.  She got that right away, but she says to me it's gonna take us some time because she's marketing it primarily to the largest publishers in, in New York [New York].  And so I'm, I'm just waiting, but I know it's, I know it's gonna hit.  It's gonna be, it's gonna be a bestseller, and I'm not even worried about it.  And it's gonna be an Academy Award movie.  You go back and read, read--review this, this tape, you're gonna say, "Oh, he told us that," and we got the tape to show you.  Oh yeah, it's gonna, it's gonna do well.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I wish you the best of luck with it.  I think it, it should, you know, if the, if the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't need luck.
Speaker 1: --think--things are right, you know--
Speaker 2: Prior planning prevents poor performance (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  There's nothing poor about the, your performance in regard to these--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --stories.  So, I think it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's gonna--
Speaker 1: --it ought to do well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 622532
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the things that I look at is this, this lady that a friend of mine--his name is Jim Wyatt [James Wyatt], he's a retired colonel, went to A and T [sic. Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], but he's from Norfolk [Virginia].  He, he introduced my wife [Luressa Heidelberg] and I to Nannie Helen Burroughs.  Do you know Nanny Helen?
Speaker 1: One of the historic figures around D.C. [Washington D.C.].  She was involved in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --women's groups with--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --Ida B. Wells and others, yeah.
Speaker 2: And she wrote this thing about 'Twelve Things the Negro Must Do For Himself' [Nannie Helen Burroughs].  But the one I think that, that takes me is the one where she says that the Negro must see that his problem I, I guess is--I'm, I'm, I'm paraphrasing--he, he must do what he can to resolve ignorance in his race through education.  And, and, and that's one of the primary things that I think we have to address as a, as a race, is, is, is we must get our kids back into school and being educated.  I mean, like I, like, like, you know, I think about myself.  I, like I said, I wasn't necessarily a good example of how to do it, but I wanted to go to school every day, and I loved learning every day.  And in some way, we got to, we have to get back that, that, that desire within our race to, to want an--not for succeeding as much as it is just for wanting to be educated, to be a part of, of, of this thing that we call the American dream, you know.  People have lie--have lost their lives for our ability to vote, you know, for our ability to go to school, for all of the various rights that, that, that we are fighting for and have fought for.  We, we have to find a way to connect.  And I, and I, and I don't wanna sound sexist, but we're losing the male, the black male.  And, and, and, and when I go out and speak to these various colleges and universities, I, I put a lot of emphasis on, on, on the black male because I am a black male.  I can, I can relate to the black male, although my message is to, to all children, black, white, to, to, to understand and know more about your history.  And so, but I, I take a special interest because we're losing quite a bit of our, our young black population to--you know, I, I don't even want to go into it 'cause everybody, you know, black on black crimes or drugs, whatever, and just like now, the sheer fact that, that you could be intimidated because you are trying to learn.  I mean, it was like that a little bit in years gone by because it was always like if you spoke a certain way, they go, "Oh, oh, you're trying to talk proper."  That's what we used to call it in our day, "You're trying to talk proper now," like it was something wrong with talking proper.  You know what I'm saying?  So, I'm, I'm just interested in trying to dispel as many myths and, and, and shortcomings that the people of color have through education.
Story_ID: 622533
Speaker 1: All right, I was asking you some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And had you basically--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, all right.
Speaker 2: --what I want--am I speaking now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they have this program at the high school that I attended to, to get students, black male students, honor students, right now the, the program escapes my mind.  But the point is that they, the title of the program escapes my mind; that's, that's, that's terrible.  But the program is to get as many black males with, with, with an average [grade point average] over eighty, eighty-five or whatever a B grade is, make them B students, to get them and--god, I can't think of the name of the program.  But there's a, they each, each year there's a thirty or forty of these black males that are in this group that graduate with a, more than a 3.0 average.  And that think that's, those are--I mean, I, I, I go over and speak to them every once in a while.  And, and those are the kind of programs where I think I like to see spread throughout not just at Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia] but at all of the schools, to have somebody paying attention to, to, to the male population, to, to, to, to, to promote them to not just stay in school and pass but, but to make good grades, to come out to the point where they can get scholarships, and they can go on, or, or they're in a position to continue their education.  That's, that's what I like.
Story_ID: 622534
Speaker 1: We always ask this question too: when you look back on everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), no, no.  You know, I, I look at it this way: all of the things that have befallen me, the mistakes that I've made and all of that, and wrong directions, wrong decisions, all of them have, have come together to, to make me what I am today.  And sure, I think most people would wish that they hadn't made certain decisions.  But if, if you can look up as I can today and know that, that despite those decisions, those poor decisions, that, that, they, they, they played a, a role in, in getting you ready to meet whatever is coming up the road, and, and, and it has, has, had guided you; it was needed.  You know, it's like you, you couldn't have gotten where you were without that.  I, I think about how the discrimination really, in my estimation, you know, like if I, I said to myself, I used to say sometimes, "Boy, I only played one year of football in high school [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  What would I would have been able to accomplish if I had played four years?"  But, you know, that doesn't matter.  I mean, you got to, you got to, you got to work on that with that 90/10 ratio, 10 percent of what happens to you, you have no control over, and the other 90 percent is, is based on how you respond to what happens to you.  And so, as long as I can continue to positively learn how to respond better to situations that you cannot predict, you know, they happen; 10 percent just happens, and you have nothing to do with it.  But that, I can deal with that 90 percent that dict- that is dictated by how I respond to what happens to me.  And that's, that's, that's the way I look at it, at life now.  And, and I look at it that 90 is still an A in anybody's book.
Story_ID: 622535
Speaker 1: When you look back again at everything you've done in life and all the things that have happened, what do you think today would be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Man, legacy, I don't--see, I, I never really looked at it like legacy.  I, I, you know, I, I look at, you know, like, I don't know.  That's, that's interesting.  It's like a guy who (laughter), who was a sinner, right?  And he never really wanted to really do as good.  I mean when, when, when God spoke to him or however he came about his senses to try to do right, it, it was still, it was a hard decision to make.  It was like he went screaming and kicking.  He really didn't want to be changed, but in the process he got changed.  So, what, what's the legacy?  I don't know, 'cause you went screaming and kicking.  You didn't really want it, want it.  You know, like, it's just like the whole interracial thing, I never opted for that.  I, I, I did that to try to get, to get out of a beating (laughter).  You know what I'm saying?  So I more or less fell in it.  I, I, I don't know if I consider that a legacy.  I look at, now when if you ask me when I look at the group, the Norfolk 17, now I, I guess because it's not emphasis on any particular person.  I look at the group as having done something phenomenal, you know.  So, that is a legacy, because you know, the, Pat Turner's [HistoryMaker Patricia Turner] mother, Dr. Pat Turner that you're gonna interview, her mother [Marjorie Harrison Turner] said to me last year, which I, I, I never thought of it, she says, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg]--" (laughter) she's funny; she's eighty-eight years old, she says, "people always talking about how did they pick y'all?  How did they pick the seventeen?"  She said, "You know what: they didn't pick y'all.  God picked y'all."  And see, so, legacy, it is God's legacy.  It's, it's, it's how he used us as, as an instrument to get done what he needed to be done.  So, if there's a legacy here, as far as I'm concerned, it's how God can use anybody.
Story_ID: 622536
Speaker 1: I think anybody watching this though would be concerned about--now we, we did--we didn't mention, and it's my fault that we did not mention the death of your brother [Melvin Heidelberg]--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which also occurred when you were a teenager--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, at the same time that you--almost--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --the same time that you--
Speaker 2: --when I was thirteen years old.
Speaker 1: Yeah, thirteen--
Speaker 2: Just before.
Speaker 1: --just before you go to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just before.
Speaker 1: --through this experience as one of the Norfolk 17.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know, I guess people would want to know what--because you came through it very, you know, with a lot of strength, you know, when it's all said and done.  How did you manage that?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Was it your family or, or, or the closeness of the--
Speaker 2: What, what--
Speaker 1: --the community or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) flows in my mind, that, I think that, how did I manage?  I mean that I look at the children for today, and I, I wonder sometimes how they make it, because, be, because I had such a good family.  I had a good mother [Lena King Heidelberg] and a good father [Colonal M. Heidelberg]--you know what I'm saying? And who taught us and cared about us.  And then, that this, my early training in, in, in black schools, the teachers were like, man, they nurtured you.  They didn't just teach you lessons.  They nurtured you and taught you about life and, and the whole community thing.  I think about my brother mostly because the last words the, the young man who saved my life, me and another boy named Wesley Overs [ph.], he saved both of us, and I know he didn't have to lie to me after my brother drowned.  But he came to me and he was crying, because he, he had, he, he, when he went to grab my brother, and he was tired, he said he had said, "I had him for like about two seconds, and he slipped out of my hand, and he went under."  And he says, "I never saw him again."  He cried.  I mean he cried because he felt like it was his fault because he missed him.  He said, "I went to your brother first, and he told me, 'Get my brother.'  And I told him, I said, 'He's too far away.'  And I reached for him, and he swung at me.  He said, 'Get my brother.'  And you know, and, and, and I said, I told him again, 'No, he's too far away.'  And he started swinging with both hands.  He said, 'Get my brother.'"  And he says--and he felt bad about that, that he left him, but he wouldn't have been able to tell me the story if he had stayed with my brother.  And I thought about that.  Don't--when I go through things in my life that are not to the way that I want them to--
Story_ID: 622537
Speaker 1: So, we're just talking about the--
Speaker 2: So, I was talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your friend--
Speaker 2: --my brother so, so, when you, when you speak of legacy, you know, that I, I really don't know how to answer that.  I know where you're coming from, and I know that as I talk I talk with my wife [Luressa Heidelberg] a lot and we talk about books 'cause she's, she's written two books, and, and she, hers are self published, and she says it, it only matters to her that she leaves a legacy for her children, you know, and, and I think about that.  So, if there's a, a legacy, it's, it's, it only has a legacy as, it's a, it's a very closely oriented legacy for a family.  I mean that, you know, history will make of it whatever they designate it to be, you know, so.  But I never really thought of myself in that light.  I, I often, like I said, think of the group and that we, you know, we, we did something phenomenal, and it's, it's coming to light fifty years later.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I see it, yes.
Story_ID: 622538
Speaker 1: Now, well, well, tell us about your family as it stands today.  Are your, your parents [Lena King Heidelberg and Colonal M. Heidelberg]--well, what did they think about your later career?  What did, what did they have to say about it, about your banking career and other things?  Did, did they--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my fam- my, my parent, my parent, my mother, she is still alive.  She's eighty-six.  She still thinks I'm the greatest thing in, since sliced bread, so I ain't got no problem with that (laughter).  And I have two, two lovely daughters, Angela Heidelberg Roldan.  She lives in New York [New York].  She's married to Ray [ph.], and they have a child, April [ph.], my granddaughter, the only granddaughter I have.  And April is a model for the Ford Agency [Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models] in New York.  She's bad.  She, she's, she's, she gets work.  And hopefully when they see this film and know that I'm talking about them they'll give her some more work.  If not, I'll give her some in my new film.  But, and my other daughter she's Kirsten Heidelberg.  She's not married.  She lives in Upper Marlboro, Maryland.  She graduated from George Mason [George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia].  And she's been in information technology.  She's, she's the lady that, she's a private contractor.  She provides bis- she provides assistance to business who relocate, to set up their commuter systems and networks; just, that's exactly what she does, so.  They both are doing well, thanks.  And of course, my wife, I'm remarried to Luressa [Luressa Heidelberg] from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And she's a real smart lady, beautiful lady with a, an M.B.A. in health administration.  And she works here in Norfolk [Virginia] with the Red Cross [American Red Cross], and she's doing well.  And she has two sons--three sons--I'm saying two, three sons.  And we do well; we're doing all right.  God has been good to us, and it's getting better.
Story_ID: 622539
Speaker 1: Is there anything you want to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Anything I want to address?  Not really.  I'm not just thankful that The HistoryMakers, like I say, I'm, I'm still in awe, but I'm thankful that HistoryMakers gleaned that I'm worthy to be considered a HistoryMaker.  And, and I'm equally satisfied with who, whom they sent to represent them, both you and Matthew [Matthew Hickey]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who I think have done a great job and made me comfortable and, and, and, and, and, and put me in a position where I don't mind talking about my life.  Thank you (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 622540
Speaker 1: One other thing--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think I'd be remiss if I didn't ask it, 'cause we didn't get this on tape, and that's about the, your family's religious views.  They're, they're, they're, they're not--I mean they're unique.  So I just want--I think you may- should, should talk about that for a second and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well I'm, I'm, I'm the Jewish guy; I'm the little Jewish guy.  My religion is Judaism.  I belong to the Church of God, to Church of God and Saints of Christ, also known by Temple Beth El.  And, and the temple is in Suffolk, Virginia, and our current chief rabbi is Rabbi Jehu August Crowdy, Jr.  I've been a member of, of Church of God and Saints of Christ for, since I was six years old (laughter), except my hiatus for twenty-five years when I graduated high school and got tired of going to temple every Saturday and stayed out until I got a better understanding of what life was.  And I'm, I came back in 1992, and I'm here to stay forever.  But, I, you know, like, when my parents [Lena King Heidelberg and Colonal M. Heidelberg] first joined the Church of God and Saints of Christ, I really didn't understand; only thing I knew was we went to church on Saturday, and everybody else went to church on Sunday.  (Laughter) I did not understand that.  And we used to stay in church all day.  And that was just one of the other criticisms that I got from, from, from, from the whites when I went to Norview [Norview High School, Norfolk, Virginia].  You know, not only was I black and hated, I was also a Jew (laughter), so it was, it was really terrible, man.  And yeah, yeah, you, you find out, as they said it, the Manasseh and Ephraim side of the equation, that the Manasseh side of the, is the, is the understanding.  That's when you realize that you need to understand yourself and life in relation to an absolute truth, which is to me God.  And then there's the Ephraim side, which is the will after you understand (laughter).  And they both really kind of go together.  And, and, and, and, and your life is, is, is to, to get that understanding about, about those two things, because I actually ran from Judaism and, and a whole lot of things, life, until I got to understand it better.  Then once, once, once you get an understanding, then, and then, and, and you got to deal with the will.  You, you, once you, you got to--your will to, to do right and to be right, and, and that's where I find myself.  So, Judaism has played a, a big role in my life, and as, as our prophet says, religion is not something that you get, it's a duty; it's a way, it's a way of life.  And all of them times when, when it seemed like we were different from everybody else, really pays off; it really pays off.  And the fact that I have married my current wife [Luressa Heidelberg] who is also under the same faith, man, it's like nothing, just that's the best of, that's the best life in the world.
Story_ID: 622541
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, how would I like to be remembered?  I think I'll go with the two best of all.  I would like to be remembered as a person that put God first and a person that loved his neighbor as he loved himself.  That's how I would want to be remembered.
Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 622542
Speaker 1: That's the picture that the Richmond [Richmond Free Press]--I forgot the name of the black paper up there--did on me when I completed my season at Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia].  That's my mother [Lena King Heidelberg] and me.  And basically, they were doing it as a historical piece, since I was the first black to play football in, on a previously all-white school in, in the South and in Virginia.
Speaker 2: This is part of the picture of the team, which they always used to say (laughter), the fly in the buttermilk (laughter).  So as you can see, I'm number 33 on the bottom of the picture, Norview High School Pilots.
Speaker 1: This is a picture that Jim Brown took with me.  Probably one of my greatest moments was, was to meet Jim Brown, because I had played at Norview, and during that year, I got no awards for nothing.  I, I often tell people I played in nine games.  One game I was hurt and I missed.  And I never ran the ball more than four times in a game.  And I had two one hundred yard games against both rival schools in the city of Norfolk.  And we played at Foreman Field [Norfolk, Virginia], and I never made--they had an All-Foreman Field team.  I didn't (laughter) make the All-Foreman Field team.  So, the, the black businessmen got together at the end of the year, and because I had accomplished what I did, they had a banquet for me and, and named me the most outstanding African American football player in Virginia.  And they topped it off by having Jim Brown at the award, and he was playing then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the greatest football player in (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Ever, ever.  And that was in 1962.  He was still playing.  And he came in and--
Speaker 2: Was there someone that knew him here in town?
Speaker 1: I don't even, I don't know how they did it, but he was there.  He presented me the trophy and this jacket from Norview Pilots.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken of me and my partner, Anderson Clary [Anderson W. Clary, Jr.], who is on the end, Heidelberg, Clary and Associates [Heidelberg, Clary and Associates, Inc.], when we opened up our business in Providence, Rhode Island.  And standing to the right of Anderson Clary is Senator John Chafee, a renowned senator in this--and of course, Governor Joe, J. Joseph Garrahy, he is standing next to me.  So they came over to welcome us in the opening of our business in Provident.
Speaker 1: That was in 1976.
Speaker 2: This is 1976.
Speaker 1: This a picture of, of, with Governor Tim Kaine when he selected me for a reappointment to the Brown v. Board of Education Scholarship awards committee.  And he invited me up to Richmond [Virginia] to participate in an affair that was going on with some other historical things in the city.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is (laughter) the picture of me after my--no, at the beginning of my season at Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia], my first--Norfolk State College at the time, in which I had a pretty good freshman year, scored a few touchdowns for them.  So, they wrote me up, and I was--along with John Baker was the first player in Norfolk State College history to make a--I was honorable mention all-CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association], so, but that's still an award.
Speaker 1: This is an article taken at the end of my senior year at Norview High School, taken by the, the, the newspaper to highlight the fact that most of my ability to cope with the situation was based on the fact that I learned how to laugh at myself.  And they indicate that the football games that we played, the ten games that we played drew over ninety thousand fans to those games, which was unusual.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me when I graduated from Norfolk State University in 2001, came back thirty-three years later and got that piece of paper.  And of course, both my daughters came down.  That's my daughter, Kirsten [Kirsten Heidelberg], on the left and my daughter, Angela [Angela Heidelberg Roldan], the oldest, on the right.
Speaker 1: This is my good, good friend, [HistoryMaker] Patricia Turner, who started out desegregating and being the mother of the, the junior high students, as she went over to Norview Junior High [Norview Junior High School; Norview Middle School, Norfolk, Virginia], and then the next year came over to Norview with me.  She's one of my dear friends.  And this is an article that was speaking to how, how such a wondrous job she did mothering the, all the junior high school students, including her brother, James "Skip" Turner [James Turner, Jr.].
Speaker 2: This is an article that the newspaper got together and presented me when I returned to Norview High School to speak at one of their events, summer--fall--spring honor awards banquet.  And they also gathered the, the experience that I felt coming back to the school after so many years and, and, and discussing what, what it was like when I was there prior to the integration taking over.
Speaker 1: This is mostly text, but you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This, this, this, this is--yeah, I always cherish this because I often thought about this was the year that I tried out, in 1960, for the football team, and I didn't make it.  And I, I was so shocked that (laughter), that they wrote so much about me because I tried out for the team.  They had articles in almost every paper.  And so I think it's a good piece of history there.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Calvin, C.J. [Calvin "C.J." Zongolowicz]. We call him Zongolez, Calvin Joseph.  We used to call him C.J. or either Zongo, either name.  He was undoubtedly my best friend.  And this is he and I talking after I had run a ninety-nine yard touchdown.  And I always liked the caption.  It said, "Well, it went like this" (laughter).  Supposedly, I'm explaining to him how I ran ninety-nine yards.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This, this, that's a picture of the, the, they call it the backfield in motion, Ken Whitley, who played with me, and I'm on the left.  But Ken Whitley was an All-American.  He, he was my next best friend to Zongo.  He was the fullback and made All-America and was the state heavyweight wrestling champ.
Story_ID: 622543
Speaker 1: This is the picture showing me catching one of the two touchdowns that I made in the first game.  And the heading says that the, "Powerful Pilates Can Rest All-State Star."  It was referring to Ken Whitley, who was, had a sore knee.  And they said after I had performed, well, he can sit down for a while and rest and get well while, while Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Heidelberg] plays (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, they give you four carries a game.
Speaker 1: This is the picture of Norview High School [Norfolk, Virginia], which has since been razed, and they have a school now twice as large as that, as Norview.  But this was one of the most modern high schools in Virginia in 1961 when I played there.  And it was built in 1952, and it, it, it had everything.  And those--the principal, Mr., Mr. Perdue [Charles W. Perdue], and the assistant principal, Mr. Lott [ph.].  It's odd that my principal, Charles "Bolo" Perdue, played seven or nine years with the Pittsburgh Steelers.  Isn't that ira- (laughter) ironic, huh?
Speaker 2: This is a picture that the newspapers usually run when they are celebrating for any reason or, or revisiting the school desegregation and massive resistance problems during Black History Month, which depicts Freddy [Alvarez Gonsouland], Olivia [Olivia Driver Lindsay], Carol [Carol Wellington], and Johnnie [Johnnie Rouse] in front of Norview High School.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is a picture of me and one of my best friends--his name is Malcolm "Zeke" Avery [Malcolm Avery]--on the campus of Norfolk State College [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] when we were there.  I look at the picture and I think (laughter) we both thought we were pretty cool.  So (laughter), so, these are, these are twenty-two year old men, or twenty-one maybe, living the college life.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of a historic walk we did celebrating Martin Luther King Day.  We took the, the, the walk around the sites that the students here did for the desegregation of schools in Vir- in Norfolk [Virginia].
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Olivia and I--she's also one of the Norfolk 17--and members of her family when we did the historic march and came back and, and, and had a presentation in the Chrysler Hall [Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: What, what year was the march?
Speaker 1: The march was, I think it was 2008 or '9 [2009], either one of those days.
Speaker 2: This part, also part of the march, when I was sitting in the First Baptist Church [First Baptist Church, Norfolk, Virginia] enjoying it.
Speaker 1: Is this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the march.  That's, that's--
Speaker 1: --is this?
Speaker 2: --the First Baptist--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --Bute Street.
Speaker 1: That's the--okay.
Speaker 2: That's the church.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is when we stopped in front of the First Baptist Bute Street, which is the church that allowed the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to set up the tutoring school for us when the governor [J. Lindsay Almond] closed the schools.  We, we, the seventeen of us, went to school in their basement.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the picture of Olivia, myself, Alvarez Freddie Gonsouland [Alvarez Gonsouland], Louis Cousins, and Delores Johnson Brown when they gave us the special honor for the fiftieth anniversary of the school closings in Norfolk [Virginia].  That's at the Bute, First Baptist Bute Street Church, where of course we went to school in the basement.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, this is almost the same picture, but there's more.  I just looked.  There's more--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's the same picture, yes.
Speaker 2: There's a lady on this side.  Who, who--
Speaker 1: That's Delores Johnson Brown.
