Story_ID: 109723
Speaker 1: Okay, good morning, Mr. Hill.
Speaker 2: Good morning.
Speaker 1: I'm here on behalf of The HistoryMakers and I first want to thank you for saying yes to our interview.  It's so important that we document the work of the History Makers in the African American community.  We're just gonna go ahead and get started with interview.  My name is Regina Williams, and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  I just wanna slate the interview and throughout I'd like to address you as Mr. Hill, or sir, if that's okay.  All right, and would you please state and spell your middle name if you have one?
Speaker 2: Paul, P-A-U-L, Hill, H-I-L-L, Jr, J-R.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and location of birth.
Speaker 2: November 6, 1945, Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date is--
Speaker 2: Today is March 16, 2004.
Speaker 1: Oh--I think it's St. Patrick's Day.
Speaker 2: Yeah--actually, it is.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) March 17.
Speaker 2: Right, the 17th.
Speaker 1: Yes, they warned me that there is no parking on Euclid Avenue.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: That's the only reason that I know that.  I'm not Irish (laughter).  Okay.  And the location of the interview with the address please.
Speaker 2: East End Neighborhood House, 2749 Woodhill Road, Cleveland, Ohio, 44104.
Speaker 1: All right.  And your occupation?
Speaker 2: CEO President of East End Neighborhood House.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 109724
Speaker 1: Now these questions are not related so much to your work in Cleveland [Ohio], but they're sort of People magazine-ish type questions.  So, if you would please tell us first of all, what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Ah--favorite food, I would say, beans, fish, coleslaw, cornbread or corn muffins.
Speaker 1: Oh, my.  A whole meal.
Speaker 2: I love fish.  I could eat fish every day, beans every day.  I guess, you know, some people would think I'm a (unclear).  (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a lot of protein.  (simultaneous laughter).  Okay, and your favorite time of year--
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, I would say, is fall.  I really like fall.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color--
Speaker 2: Favorite color would be red after Sango.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination--
Speaker 2: Anywhere where there is sun, water, and sand.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: If you don't where you're going, any road will take you there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess the second one would be: I am because we are, therefore I am.
Story_ID: 109725
Speaker 1: Now, the first section of the interview focuses primarily on your family background.  So, I want to begin this section by asking if you could tell me a little bit about your mother; what was her name and where was she born and any information that you have about her growing up.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mabel Craig.  Her maiden name was Craig, Mabel Craig Hill.  She was born in Selma, Alabama, and she left Selma; yeah, she was brought up in Selma.  She left Selma at seventeen years of age.  The Craigs--it was interesting, outside of Selma you have Craig Air Force Base--that are named after one side of the family--you have the white Craigs and you have the black Craigs. But, her family life was very interesting because her father and her mother was a Rayford.  The Rayfords basically lived in Orrville [Alabama].  The Craigs basically lived in Selma and what is known as Marion Junction.  As far as her father's side of the family, the Craigs, they were all educated at Selma University [Selma, Alabama], which was basically a private Lutheran [sic, Baptist] school, and, you know they all went there and it is, you know, a secondary school and, I guess you would, it would also be considered similar to a junior college.  You know, the Rayfords basically were, my mother's side of the family basically, were farmers.  The Craigs were farmers too.  The Craigs at one time owned a lot a land 'cuz my great, great, great-grandfather was a European American and he married his wife, you know, my great, great-grandmother, who was an African American and his family basically, you know, disowned him, but there was a lotta land that he had and once he passed away, somehow that land was taken away from the African American Craigs, but I remember going there as a child and there was a house that I remember that sat up on a hill and all this acreage was around it and all this cattle.  That land, you know, was eventually taken away and the house was burnt down.  My mother, again, left at seventeen years of age and she came to Cleveland [Ohio] and she was raised by my Uncle Robert, who is now deceased, in Clear Creek.  They basically raised her.  My father [Paul Hill, Sr.] was born in Pittsview, Alabama, which is outside of Columbus, Georgia, and then they, at a young age, moved to Birmingham, Alabama, where he was raised.  He left Birmingham, Alabama at about eighteen or nineteen years of age and came to Cleveland.  Both my father and mother, their fathers died at a very early age, so I never knew my grandfathers on my mother and father's side.  My mother's mother, you know, died giving childbirth to my mother's stepbrother, and she died at about fifty-some years of age.  I only knew her for a short period of time.  My grandmother [Eugenia Hill] from my father's side, she lived to be ninety-eight years of age and I knew her very well and she was part of my development in growing up in Cleveland.  My mother had a brother and then a stepsister and then a stepbrother.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There is a step--well, my mother's brother was Percy Craig, and he died at seventy years of age, you know, within the last, past four years and he lived in Miami; Miami, Florida.  Then she had a stepsister and her name was Lois, and then a stepbrother, whose name was Richard; Lois Moore and Richard Moore, and they both lived in Mobile, Alabama and really, as they're really technically my uncle and aunt, but they're younger than I am.  They're both about maybe four or five years younger than I am.  Sometimes, you know, they like to refer to me as their nephew, their young nephew, and then I refer to them as my "younger uncle and aunt."
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your mother was one of three children.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Story_ID: 109726
Speaker 1: And your father, Paul Hill, Sr., was he--did he have other siblings in the family?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His oldest brother was L.C. Hill, who, L.C. Hill Baynes [ph.] passed away.  His second brother, who is still alive--L.C. lived in Chicago [Illinois], I mean L.C. lived in Cleveland [Ohio]--Eddie, Eddie Hill--who is still alive--he is in his eightiess and he lives in Chicago.  And, there was my Uncle Albert.  He's still alive.  He lives in Cleveland.  He's my only uncle in Cleveland of their generation.  And then, Moses Hill, who is deceased, and then my father, Paul Hill, who is deceased; both Moses Hill and my father, Paul Hill, Sr., died in 1998.  Then there was one sister, and her name was Louise Wilkes.  She is passed away.  And then my grandmother, my father's mother, Eugenia Hill, who is passed away, who died at ninety-eight years of age.  She basically, you know, raised, she never remarried.  My father's mother never remarried and basically raised the boys and the one girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--Eugenia--what was her husband's name?
Speaker 2: Her husband's name was L.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, L.C., okay.
Speaker 2: He passed away--
Speaker 1: Initials?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Right. And he passed away, you know, when my father was very young, so my father never knew, really never knew his father.
Story_ID: 109727
Speaker 1: There is a saying in the City of Cleveland [Ohio] that this is Alabama North, and I notice that both your parents [Paul Hill, Sr. and Mabel Craig Hill] are from Alabama.  Can you tell us a little bit about what influenced them to leave Alabama and come to Ohio?
Speaker 2: Well basically, you know, what influenced them to leave really had to do with the conditions in the South at the time, you know, racism, overt racism, institutional racism, you know--lack of opportunities, hard life, you know, for the families, black people at the time.  One thing about both of them, once they left, my mother made me return a couple times.  I think one time, we returned with her.  I think the second time was when her mother passed away.  But she really never wanted to go back.  My father never returned until, you know, during my adult life.  We lived in Atlanta, Georgia.  He visited us, but he never wanted to return because of the memories, you know, lack of opportunities, the racism existing and experiences that they had in the South, you know, were very negative.  Same thing with my uncle.  My Uncle Albert, who is alive now, I was just talking with him a month ago, he said he has really no need or desire to go back South even though he knows it's changed, but experiences and memories that he--negative experiences and memories that he has of the South--he never wanted to return.
Speaker 1: You said your mother was about seventeen when she left?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then what year is that, roughly, when she is coming to Ohio?
Speaker 2: I would say you're talking about early '40s [1940s] 'cause I was born in '45 [1945] in Cleveland.  So really, I would say my father late '30s [1930s], my mother early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: So roughly World War II [WWII] era, wartime migration.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Would you say they were a part of that Great Black Migration?
Speaker 2: A part of that Great Migration where there was opportunity and jobs.  My father's family, one of his brothers, I think, was always arguing between which one, either my Uncle L.C. or my Uncle Eddie.  Basically, I hitch-hiked up here as a stowaway on a train and came up here first because we had uncles up here on my father's side and they were able to get good jobs, so one of my uncles ended up hitch-hiking up here and then the rest of the family followed.
Speaker 1: And you still have other relatives in Alabama though?
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically all the uncles and aunts of my mother and father's generation have passed on, so basically who's left, you know, would be cousins.
Story_ID: 109728
Speaker 1: Now the, as far as the migration to Cleveland [Ohio] is concerned, did your parents [Paul Hill, Sr. and Mabel Craig Hill] share with you any stories about the early years in the city and their coming here as young people?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know, at that time I guess Cleveland was looked upon as, you know, the land of honey and gold and, you know, the opportunities.  Again, you know, during World War II [WWII], before World War II and during the World War II era and the type of jobs that, you know, were available.  I think my father ended up getting a job at, I think it was chasing bronze-- either chasing brass or chasing bronze.  I forget the exact name, but it was a factory job and his uncles already worked there and, you know, he got involved as a union steward.  So, that's really--my father got involved in community activism and, you know, working as a servant for the community on behalf of the community.  He went to the old Central High School [Cleveland, Ohio]--I guess, a number of Clevelanders went to Central High School in the Central area.  I guess that was the area then where most blacks that migrated from the South ended up living.  My mother ended up going to John Hay [High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  My father graduated from Central High and my mother graduated from John Hay.  My uncle and aunt, whom my mother lived with, Claire and Bob Craig, they really never wanted my mother to date my father.  You know, they had ideas of who they wanted her to date and to marry, and so my father basically eloped with my mother, you know, against their wishes, but everything turned out well, I guess, representative of myself and my brothers, then my father and my mother as far as their union and partnership and family life.
Speaker 1: So both your parents are alums of the Cleveland Public Schools.
Speaker 2: Umm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 109729
Speaker 1: And, I heard you say that your mother's family, the Craig side, a lot of them attended the Lutheran school while they were in the South. Was the Lutheran Church an important institution in the family, or other institutions other than the schools in Cleveland [Ohio], was there a focus also there for family?
Speaker 2: I would say relative to my mother, yeah, the Lutheran Church was very much important in her life and the life of her relatives as far as them being able to get an education in a private school.  You know, I think of cousins of, you know, my Uncle Buddy, who was my grandfather's, one of his brothers.  I think of--they had five children, but all of the children ended up, he was basically, I guess what you would call a sharecropper.  Eventually they end up after sharecropping and getting their own land.  My Uncle Buddy is deceased now, but my Aunt Addie is still alive and she lives on fifty acres of land that they were able to purchase, but as a result of sharecropping, you know, they were able to send all their children to school.  All of them have attended and graduated from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama], you know, I guess you would say that would be our family school on my mother's side of the family.  So they all ended up, you know, getting degrees, graduating, and ended up basically in the area of education.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting take on sharecropping because the way I usually present it in the classroom is that sharecropping is the new slavery.  It keeps people at a certain level.  The whites in the society, it keeps them sort of in the overseer role, and the blacks, you know, it keeps them at this subsistence farming level.  But you say that it paid the way for a college education, for a number of people in the family.
Speaker 2: Well I think, you know, the institution itself was, you know, very oppressive and took advantage of people but, again, there were certain individuals, as meager as, you know, the money that they were able to make and save, you know they were very frugal and, you know, spent their money wisely and, you know, the little crops that they were able to grow and opportunities they were able to get out of that repressive sharecropping system, they were able to save and buy land and to send their children, you know, to school.  So, you know one thing I could say about people of African ancestry from the United States, irregardless [sic] of what the system was, you know in slaving and sharecropping, you know, we were very, very clear and reflected certain values that we made the best of what we could relative to that situation and prevailed.  And I guess we're a testament to the prevailing and that creativity or we wouldn't be here doing, you know, what we're doing today.
Speaker 1: I think if the founder of Tuskegee were here, he would applaud what you just said.  Booker T. Washington, I'm wondering if he was celebrated still in Alabama as the great educator that he was through the end of his life in 1915.  Do you remember that through your childhood years?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Yeah, I'm a Booker T. Washington fan as well as W. E. B. Du Bois, because I think both of them were very important, you know, as far as their philosophy.  A lot of times they tend to be, you know, played against one another but, again, both of them were very important as far as African American experience and the philosophy that they represent, you know, for that time and for today.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Washington was still a hero in Alabama.
Speaker 2: Umm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, during your childhood--or, your parents' childhood.
Speaker 2: Parents' childhood, right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 109730
Speaker 1: And then, you were born in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Cleveland, right. At the old Mary B. Talbert Hospital, it's the Salvation Hospital right off of 55th.  They tore it down years ago.
Speaker 1: Now, you said your parents [Paul Hill, Sr. and Mabel Craig Hill] eloped and we know that you're Paul Hill, Jr.  Can you tell me about the other children in the family; if you can, give the siblings names and birth order.
Speaker 2: Okay, next to me and we're fifteen months apart is my brother, Ronald Hill, and then there was Donald Hill, who is deceased.  He died at, I think, twenty-three years of age, and then my younger brother, who is thirteen years younger than myself, would be Victor Craig Hill, so it was all boys in the family.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth again?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is November 6, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 109731
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what are some of the earliest memories that you have of growing up in the City of Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: My early memories are, you know, real positive experiences relative to family life, community life.  You know, I'm thinking of holidays and the family getting together, my father's [Paul Hill, Sr.] brothers, uncles, thinking of my grandmother [Eugenia Hill].  Didn't have too much contact with my mother's [Mabel Craig Hill] family.  Every now and then she would have a cousin that would come up and stay with us and work for a while and then go back.  I think there were a number of cousins that lived with us but, you know, my immediate memories and relationships were with my father's side of the family, which was a very close-knit family and they were, you know, my father's brothers his sister were, and uncles and aunts were very much involved in the community--you know, activism; my father was one of the founders of the Future Outlook League, which was started by John O. Holly in 1935.  My father got involved once he came here during the early '40s [1940s].  But it was an organization and its motto was, you know, don't buy anything from where they won't give you a job, or offer you a job, or where you can't work, and they were involved in picketing and boycotting and one of the memories I have is the Future Outlook League, which was above a supermarket, it was a market on 55th and Woodland, and it was upstairs over that market and I remember my father taking us and I was young, my brother, Ron, myself, to these meetings.  There were meetings with these African American males and females that were involved in, you know, discussions around blacks not having jobs at Woolworth's 'cuz the Woolworth's on 55th--and ninety percent of the business of this Woolworth's was African American, but I think at one time there was one porter who was an African American that worked there.  They ended up letting him go and replacing him with someone white, and how there was a picketing and boycotting of that Woolworth's and they ended up hiring African Americans.  Same thing with Ohio Bell [Telephone Company] at that time.  They didn't have any blacks and I think one of the first African Americans to work for Ohio Bell that ended up retiring from Ohio Bell, but because of the picketing and the boycotting and protesting of the Future Outlook League, but that person was Eartha [ph.] Woods, who ended up being a council person, you know, for the area that my neighborhood center was in as well as clerk of city council until she retired.  She was also a businesswoman but, again, she was one of the products of the efforts of the Future Outlook League, which the main post office in Cleveland on Orange Avenue was named after John O. Holly, you know, because of former Congressman [HM] Louis Stokes, who named the post office after him.  But again, the memories of growing up were, you know, very fond memories of good experiences relative to family life and community life, feeling loved. Father, you know, picnics, you know, out at my Uncle Albert's who has had a large acreage that he owned and he built his own house.  I remember him building his own house, always being built with his hands and my father and my father's brothers, you know, being entrepreneurs.  They had their own trucking business as well as my father worked at the State of Ohio, for a number of years, more than thirty-some years retiring but he also always had businesses on the side, so he did things on the side.  I remember, he had a job.  It was a maintenance job cleaning up, you know, different companies at night.  That was his second job, I remember after school.  My brothers and I used to go with him, you know, cleaning up.  So, he developed a sense of responsibility, a work ethic, at a very young age but based on, you know, my father's efforts and my uncles, you know, they were very positive role models in a good family sense, you know, good male sense, and in good community sense.
Story_ID: 109732
Speaker 1: When I think about the Future Outlook League, I usually think about labor activism or radicalism.
Speaker 2: Right before the Urban League.
Speaker 1: That is--it isn't often associated with blacks in Cleveland [Ohio] when we talk boycotts and pickets.  Usually, for the 1950s, I think folks would probably think about Montgomery, Alabama, or some other place in the South.
Speaker 2: Exactly--but it's really interestin' there's a book called 'The Future is Ours' [sic, 'The Future is Yours: The History of the Future Outlook League, 1935-1946'] and it was written by--I forget the name of the author--I think Charles Loeb, L-O-E-B.  I think he used to be with the [Cleveland] Call and Post, but he did a book, The Future is Ours, and it's really a biography on John O. Holly and talking about the Future Outlook League, but during those earlier days of the early '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s], the memory of the Future Outlook League and what was really positive, it involved men and women; just not men, but women were actively involved in the Future Outlook League too, as far as positions of responsibility in being out on the front line along with the men, but they were looked upon as basically by the status quo black community as renegades.  They got hardly any support from the churches at the time.  The churches felt that they were going against the status quo and, you know, there would be fallouts as a result of their activism, their protesting, their boycotting.  And then again, you know, as a result of their efforts during the late '30s, '40s, '50s, [1930s, 1940s, 1950s], you know, when the civil rights era got underway, a lot of your civil rights leaders came to Cleveland because of the experience in Cleveland relative to, you know, fighting for equal opportunities relative to jobs.  You know, they came to Cleveland to meet with John O. Holly, so he was very influential as far as Cleveland, you know, the state of Ohio.  I'll never forget being in West Africa and running into this individual from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]  and he was of my father's generation and he was talking about how this individual from Future Outlook in Cleveland ended up in Pittsburgh helping them to organize and to protest and boycott, you know, for equal opportunities.  So, it was a very influential movement that predates the Civil Rights era and many of the civil rights leaders ended up one of their most important spots as far as organizing and getting a history of how to organize, it was always Cleveland; you know, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and you know, other civil rights leaders--always part of their--one of their stops coming north was Cleveland.
Speaker 1: I had an opportunity to read Dr. Kim Phillips' [Kimberley L. Phillips] book on Alabama North ['AlabamaNorth: African-American Migrants, Community, and Working-Class Activism in Cleveland, 1915-1945'], and she writes a lot about the Future Outlook League and there's a passage that suggests a lot of the middle and upper class blacks didn't like John O. Holly's style.  I think he was from Alabama, and (laughter) you know, sort of uncouth.
Speaker 2: Tuscaloosa, Alabama, right?  Hale County.
Speaker 1: It pointed out, highlighted for me some of the class differences among African Americans, and sort of cautioned against this monolithic approach to studying the past of the black community in Cleveland, you know, a lot of diversity of ideas and strategies within the community itself.
Speaker 2: You know, his nickname was the little big man, 'cuz he was a short man but very strong as far as his presence and his actions.
Speaker 1: Well, we are coming to the end of this first segment about your early life and I thank you for sharing that information about your fathers and your uncles and the other men in the family and their striving, an upwardly mobile family of Hills, but in the next segment, I'd like to talk about your mother's work with her growing family and in the community as well when we get started with that.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 109733
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself--of a piece of art that my wife [Marquita McAllister Hill] brought from one of the trips that she put together as a culture and educational trip for a group of adults from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and this particular piece which is in the house is a piece from Bahia--Salvador, Brazil.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a celebration that was a rite-to-passage initiation ceremony in which there was a surprise from me recognizing my involvement in Rites of Passage [The National Rites of Passage Institute] over the years that was put together by two individuals that I really turned over a lot of the responsibility of training of Rites of Passage over to, and his name is Sekou, S-E-K-O-U, and Sekou and Zulma, Z-U-L-M-A, Zabala, Z-A-B-A-L-A, they're a couple with a son named Malcolm.  They've basically taken over a lot of responsibilities of the training for the National Rites of Passage Institute.  They're a beautiful family.  They reflect, you know, my family and I, and myself and Marquita and the family and growing up.  They've been married now for about fifty years.  He's a nuclear scientist in an area of nuclear medicine at a local hospital and his wife is a lawyer.  But this is me cutting the cake, you know, in my honor of an event that Sekou and Zulma put together for me about two years ago--Ohio.
Speaker 2: 'Kay, this is a picture of me when I was on a panel at Cleveland State University, you know, a panel during African American History month.  Cleveland State University in Cleveland, Ohio was--
Story_ID: 111487
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Hill, I wanted to talk for a little while about the work of the women in your family, whether it's within the household or in the community.  Can you just tell me a little bit about your mother's work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always remember my mother [Mabel Craig Hill].  She was a fabulous cook.  I mean, she loved her children, you know, kept us well dressed.  I'll never forget, always before school we'd start with doing school shopping.  I always remember that, you know, going out and doing school shopping before school would start, you know, elementary school and secondary school.  I always remember her working in the house and out of the house.  She always had different types of jobs, you know, to supplement income of the household.  Remember, her and my father [Paul Hill, Sr.], you know, having a very good relationship.  You know, us taking vacations and going to visit my Uncle Eddie in Chicago [Illinois] and, you know, going on picnics, you know, Christmas together, Thanksgiving today--together--so I remember that.  And she had jobs where she worked--I remember she worked in a Dairy Queen.  I remember she worked in, she was the manager of what was then called Lawson's [ph.], which sold milk and ice cream, but she ended up working for a number of years and retiring from the post office.  She was a postal clerk for many, many years, and that's what she retired from.  I remember no matter, she would never miss work.  She worked first, second, third shift, and dinner would always be cooked, irregardless [sic] of her working full time.  Dinner was always there, so she was a very hard working person.  She read a lot and, you know, that's really where I picked up reading because of her thirst for reading; you know, reading everything from A to Z, and so, you know, I ended up picking up that thirst and need for reading also, so I'm still an avid reader today, everything from A to Z, but very much involved, you know, in support of my father and his efforts in the community and, you know, supportive of all his business ventures; some that failed and some that were successful.  She was always there.  So, she was a very good role model and, as far as what I looked for in a female and in a relationship, really patterned after, you know, the relationship of my mother and father.
Speaker 1: So, I have this image of this very modern woman, juggling all these responsibilities, something that we usually associate as historians with women's work after the 1970s after the women's movement, but you're telling me your mother was doing this in the '60s [1960s], '50s and 60s [1950s and 1960s]?
Speaker 2: Umm-hmm, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had school-aged children and sometimes a full-time job, and she has a spouse and she still has time to read.  That sounds like she was a pretty good juggler (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was able to, maybe that's where I get that from, being able to juggle or to multi-task and juggling different things because of her.  Now that you mention it, yeah, she was able to do that very well.  She ended up getting breast cancer and had to leave her job at the post office, but even during the therapy that she had, the radiation, the chemotherapy.  I remember her, like working almost up to the end when she couldn't work anymore, even taking those treatments of chemotherapy and radiation, you know, which just amazed me, all the way up to the end.  She was always, always had to be doing things; cleaning all the time, you know, picking up all the time, cooking, working.
Story_ID: 111488
Speaker 1: The--can we talk a little bit about the post office and what those jobs came to mean for the migrants coming to Cleveland [Ohio], and not just in Cleveland, but nationally too?
Speaker 2: The post office was an institution within itself as far as when there weren't the type of opportunities we had today or before those opportunities opened up.  I'm not saying we're there yet, but relatively speaking.  You know, the post office for those that were educated, was where a number of people, you know, be they teachers their second job was at the post office.  Be they lawyers, before they could get their own legal practice set up or work for someone else in the legal area, they all ended up at the post office.  You know, so some of our best, brightest men and women at some time or other worked at the post office.  Some of them end up retiring from the post office, so the post office was very important as far as the institution for supporting the African American family in the African American community.  I even remember I was able, when I was in college or when I was home for Christmas and during the summer, I always worked at the post office, you know, I either worked at the main post office downtown during the Christmas holiday and during the summers I was a summer mail carrier, but because of, you know, my uncle, my Uncle Moses, my father's [Paul Hill, Sr.] brother that passed away in 1998, was a supervisor at the post office, and a number of other people, the Cooper family, one of them, they were twins and one of them ended up being head of the post office in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for that region.  So, as a result of knowing different folks that were in a post office and administrative positions, we were always able, my brothers and I, to get jobs.  But it was very important as far as the monies and opportunities that African Americans within my family and outside my family had because of the United States Post Office.
Story_ID: 111489
Speaker 1: I guess I, we got a little bit ahead of the interview questions, but you talked about being home for summer or over the holiday break and working at the post office, but I need to backtrack a little bit and talk about school.  You said your parents [Paul Hill, Sr. and Mabel Craig Hill] were both alums of the Cleveland Municipal Schools or Cleveland Public Schools [Cleveland Metropolitan School District], I suppose, at that point, but you're also alum, are you not?  Of Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your school years in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Okay, my school years are very fond, fond memories.  I remember when we lived in the [public housing] projects of 55th, and we lived on a street called Case Court, and the first, I think, public school I attended was Outhwaite [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], which is no longer there, and then from there we moved to the union area of Cleveland, on a street called Oakfield [Avenue].  I still remember the address, 12309 Oakfield, right off of Union [Avenue].  I ended up going to Charles Dickens [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], so I was in Charles Dickens 'cuz I transferred from Outhwaite where I started kindergarten, and then I was in kindergarten at Charles Dickens and I was there from kindergarten all the way through the sixth grade and I still remember some of the teachers there and the experiences there.  The school at the time was integrated.  It was pretty equally integrated.  It was about sixty percent white, forty percent black, or seventy-seven percent white, thirty percent black.  All the teachers at that time were white European Americans.  Then I ended up, once I graduated from Charles Dickens, I went to Alexander Hamilton [Middle School], where I was, you know, entered the seventh grade.  I remember my seventh grade teacher being Mr. Roland Morton.  He's passed away now and he ended up principal from the Cleveland Public Schools.  He was my seventh grade teacher.  He had just graduated from college.  Then we moved during my seventh grade year from the Union area from Oakfield, we moved into Lee Harvard, we moved to 515 Eldemire [ph.] in the Lee-Harvard area and then I entered Charles Eliot Middle School, or it was junior high school at that time, in the seventh grade and I was there from the seventh to the ninth grade.  Charles Eliot, again, was about seventy percent white and thirty percent African American.  As far as teachers, there were maybe one or two that I remember as African American teachers; a science teacher, Mr. Osborn [ph.], who ended up working for McGraw-Hill.  I know he's retired since then.  There was Ms. Gordon [ph.], who was a science teacher.  I remember her.  And then, I got very much involved in sports in junior high school, track.  I did real well and then ended up going from graduating in the ninth grade in Charles Eliot, going to John Adams High School, and I was at John Adams as a tenth grader.  I went there from the tenth through the twelfth grade, and graduated in 1964.  And again, John Adams was about sixty percent European American and maybe forty percent African American.  There were more African American teachers there--Mr. Lynch [ph.], I know was a teacher, Gil Blount [ph.] was my PE [physical education] teacher and my track coach there.  There were a number of other African American teachers and I can't remember their names offhand; and all the combination of college prep business.  I like bookkeeping and accounting.  I did a lot of college prep courses also.  I remember taking Latin.  You know, it was required where you had to take a language, either Latin, French, Spanish, or German.  I ended up taking Latin.  John Adams was an excellent school as far as preparing me for college and for life, and at John Adams I excelled and did very well in track, from the tenth through the twelfth grade, very fond memories of John Adams.
Speaker 1: That positive assessment of John Adams High School, especially the curriculum, is one that I hear often.  I've heard it from Judge Pauline Tarver, I've heard it from Donna White, who's the vice president at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio], I believe I heard it from Lawrence Simpson, who is the President of Eastern Campus-Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio], isn't he a John Adams alum also?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, a lot of black leaders--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --have come out John Adams High School.
Speaker 2: Barbara Mahone is a General Motors exec [executive], and she was featured as one of the top 100 black woman in the United States, is a graduate, [HM] Dr. Julian [Manly] Earls, who was the head of NASA here in Cleveland, got his Ph.D. in physics, but a number of individuals have been successful.  One thing about this year, 2004, it's my fortieth high school reunion that I'm looking forward to.  It will take place in August.  Another person graduated there was [HM] Dianne McIntyre, who ended up being a very successful dancer with her own dance troupe, you know, out of, in New York City [New York], so a number of individuals that, you know, have been and are successful, who graduated.
Story_ID: 111490
Speaker 1: There's something else that you mentioned, too, in talking about your school years in Cleveland [Ohio], I just wanna go back to for a minute, and that is the fact that your family starts out in public housing and then you moved to the Union area and then to the Lee-Harvard area, and it reminded me of something I heard about public housing in Cleveland in the early years is that it was often looked upon as being transitional housing, so you rent here for a while and then you get a house, and then you get a nicer house.  But, did you see that happening with a lot of families coming out of, was it, the Outhwaite public housing unit?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  That was a trend and that was the experience.  'Cause even at that time, the public housing, you know, was integrated.  There were white families and black families, but it was more of a stepping stone, you know, of renting before you were able to save enough money to get a house.  I remember when we moved to the Union area.  We bought a two-family house together with my father's uncle, Albert Porter [ph.] and Bessie Porter [ph.], and now Gloria Worthy [ph.], their daughter, who is older than I am.  They lived upstairs on the second floor and we lived on the first floor.  Then when our family expanded, we added a room to the house that my uncles and father built.  And, so it was part of that experience and the families working together, saving together, buying together and then we reached a point where we could move to Lee-Harvard--saved enough money and we moved there.  At that time, Lee-Harvard was a majority European American community.  There were a few black families.  I remember Ruby McCullough [ph.].  I lived right across the street from her, Ruby McCullough and Mr. William McCullough, and their son, Billy McCullough, and Ms. McCullough worked at Phyllis Wheatley [Association] and then was the head of the Harvard Community [Services] Center, and I remember up the street was Jean Clayton, the first African American woman to work for the Cleveland Police Department, who is now deceased.  Down the street was Joseph Stamps, who was an engineer, and his wife graduated from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], and he ended up working for the City of Cleveland as an engineer, and I think one of the buildings [Joseph Stamps Refueling Station] is named after him now, he's passed on.  It is a very close-knit, organized community, you know, the (unclear) Street Club was very active, the community was very active.  It was very important then and now.  It's still a very stable African American community, the Lee-Harvard area, as far as house, home owners.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And primarily, working class, middle class sort of existence.
Speaker 2: I would say, you know, working class, we all had middle class, you know, the family had middle class values even though we were working class, lower middle class, you know, a lot of professionals, college graduates.  It was a real good mix.  It's like the central area, the original area where blacks migrated from the South to Cleveland.  It was a mix of, you know, professionals, nonprofessionals, people of all socioeconomic levels in that area, and Lee-Harvey was a area similar, you know, the next stepping stone from public housing to other areas, and then to Lee-Harvard and, I guess, another area would be the Glendale area of professionals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111491
Speaker 1: So--and just to really get a sense of how significant the movement was; not that you're moving from a bad neighborhood to a good neighborhood, but just from rental property and public housing to the--and finally to the Lee-Harvard area, which sort of borders with Mount Pleasant in Cleveland [Ohio], and on the one end Shaker Heights and then Warrensville Heights, but getting almost suburban, okay (laughter) at that point in your life.  And that happens before you graduate from high school in Cleveland.  That's a pretty significant year in our history, when you come out of high school, in 1964, when we were getting the Civil Rights Act, and Johnson is there, President [Lyndon B.] Johnson declaring war on poverty and I guess this rising tide of expectations is as present or evident in the black community as in other parts of the society.  I suppose President Johnson really believed that he could do away with poverty, or at least he talked about it.  Did you get that sense of, sort of, optimistic approach to dealing with problems?
Speaker 2: Exactly, 'cuz again, my father [Paul Hill, Sr.], as a result of his involvement with Future Outlook League continued being an active individual, working for the rights and opportunities of African Americans.  I remember in '63 [1963], he was identified as a marshal for the March on Washington, and I remember him in '63 [1963], taking me along.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's something I'll never forget, the 1963 March and my father being there and even though I was an eleventh grader, being part of that history, which I'll never forget, and all the anniversaries of that March from '63 [1963] on, I attended with my father and then my children. We were at all of them, so, you know, that was a very important time as far as optimism, opportunities, and it was a lived experience that my father was part of and my brothers and I, you know, we were part of that experience too, which has continued through today, which we will get through but that was a very important foundation, what was goin' on.  I'll never forget, also, when [President] John F. Kennedy was killed.  I'll never forget, I was in Mr. Carroll's [ph.] civics class and I think it was at the end of the day.  It may have been eighth period and they were coming across the loud speaker in the classroom at John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio], at civics class, and how he started crying and it was a cloudy day and how sad everybody was and how I was goin' home on the bus and turning on the TV, but the significance of those experiences, how the community, the black and white community, reacted to that tragedy, and the ritual of the funeral itself and how it really pulled the country together, united the country, you know, around that tragic experience.  I'll never forget that, that day and that experience.
Speaker 1: I can imagine that coming of age in the '60s [1960s] was pretty special, but to be one of the quarter of a million people at the March on Washington and to hear the 'I Have a Dream' speech delivered by [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--was it as powerful then, you know, as you get it first hand, as it is for us as we relive it each August 28th?
Speaker 2: I guess part of the power of that experience was just being with a larger community of African American--I had never been around that many African Americans in a central location at one time together.  It was just overwhelming, you know, just the experience itself and then Dr. King and you the 'I Have a Dream' speech--it was just an experience of a lifetime that really fueled me, motivated me, to continue to build upon the foundation, to build upon the dream, even though I believe, and we'll probably talk about it later, the dream is now in suspended animation and it's really reminisced and memorialized and it's not being built upon or acted upon the way that I think it should be--should have been.
Story_ID: 111492
Speaker 1: When I think about some of the popular themes from that era, there is such an emphasis on the sense of hope, that the doors of opportunity are open and human rights and civil rights where all Americans will be recognized; they will be secure.  You won't have to struggle as much, perhaps in the future, as you're struggling right now as part of the Civil Rights Movement, and so that sort of cautious optimism is there and then that's mingled also with this ever present threat of death and all the assassinations, starting with [President John F.] Kennedy and then with Malcolm X who, at that point in time, in '65 [1965], el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz, and then [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], and so--the escalation of the Vietnam War.  What were you thinking about when you started college [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio] in the '60s, you know, were you convinced that the optimism was gonna prevail?  You know, that things were truly gonna get better, or did you see something else out there on the horizon?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the hope was always there and I guess because of the environment I was brought up in, even though there was an external involvement with the wider community.  My earlier years, I guess you could say, was also a cocoon relative to my family and who I was surrounded with and never really had, that I could think of, any real negative experiences related to what was, you know, going on in the wider community, even though I was aware of them relative to conversation of my family and individuals that my father and mother are associated with, but it was pretty much of a cocoon as far as it was an environment of safety and caring, so it was a cocoon to some extent so we were protected, we felt love, we felt wanted.  We felt part of something larger than ourselves.  So the hope was always there.  It was never a sense of hopelessness in the way that I was raised based on the experience and the conditions of my immediate surroundings so, you know, going in to graduate from high school and to college, again, I went from one cocoon, I guess, to another cocoon because where the university was that I attended, which was Ohio University in Athens, Ohio, was in a very rural environment and at that time when I went to college, there were 22,000 students and, at that time, there must have been only two or three hundred African American students, but we are a very close knit student, African American student body.  It always seemed like there were many more of us than just two or three hundred, and the experiences at Ohio University were positive, even there were some experiences of racism but I think the positive outweighed the negative and even during that period of time, what was going on relative to urban areas, the rural South with segregation, which we were well aware of through the media, through some of the things that we talked about and the various organizations that we're part of, you know, we were basically, I was basically sheltered.  We were sheltered, so that period of time, the four years that I was there, I was growing as far as the classes that I had, the books that I read, the friendships that were developed, the coming home, so it was a time of just development and personal growth but, again, in an environment that was caring and it was a safe environment that was sheltered from what was going on in the wider community.
Story_ID: 111493
Speaker 1: So what's the glue, then, that's holding that tiny, relatively small, African American college community [at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio] together?  Is it fraternal organizations, or---
Speaker 2: Well, I never, I was an athlete and really most of my time was studying, sports because I was on the track team, the social life, so I wouldn't say it was, even though I went to a lot of the fraternity and sorority parties, I think that was important to those that were involved.  There was a glue--there was a Baptist Church there that was very important that was the glue--and there were certain professors there, there were a few African American professors there.  I remember Kermie Price [ph.].  Kermie Price was a graduate student there, but he was also an instructor in the English Department.  He was one of my English instructors, and there were some other graduate African American students that were instructors too that were very important as far as being role models and helping us in our coming of age.  So, I would say it was the church, I would say it was the fraternities and sororities and I would say it was the graduate students that were instructors and then a few assistant professors that were at Ohio University, and being able--you know, the contact with home.  My parents [Paul Hill, Sr. and Mabel Craig Hill] were down there for what seemed like all the time visiting, and we would go back home.  So, even though it was a very turbulent time as far as the United States, it was a very comfortable situation and environment that I was in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're entering college in 1964, and graduating in '68 {1968].  Did you go straight through?
Speaker 2: Well, I ended up graduating in '69 [1969] 'cause I changed my major so it was extended with the additional courses I had to take 'cause I was in business and then I switched to education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so we have come now to another major crossroads in your life story, but also just about to the end of this segment; but, I'd like to talk at the start of the next segment about some of the things that have happened in the world during your college years, from 1964 to '69 [1969] when we start again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111494
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father [Paul Hill, Sr.], who died of prostate cancer in 1998, and this is when he had a episode and was rehabilitating at a rehabilitation center, and in the picture is my brother, Victor, under the balloon and a picture of myself in the middle, my brother, Ron.  Next to my father seated is my Uncle Albert Hill, the only uncle on my father's side that's alive in Cleveland [Ohio] now.  Then, in the front is Ms. Smith, my father's lady friend.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Mabel Craig Hill, and this was at my son, Jason's graduation from high school.  My mother died in 1986 of breast cancer.
Speaker 1: This is a picture at a, what's really a family reunion of the Rayford side of the family.  That's my mother's father, or my grandfather's side of the family, the Rayfords from Orville, Alabama, and I'm in the picture holding something and in the middle of the picture is my mother's cousin, we call her Dieder [ph.].  She still lives in Marion Junction, Alabama and there's a picture of my mother's stepbrother, my uncle, who is younger than I am, Richard Moore, Jr.  This reunion took place in Birmingham, Alabama, four years ago [c. 2000].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself, my nephew, Donald Hill, who is the son of my brother, Ronald Hill, and my son-in-law, Darron Reed [ph.], and this was a picture that was taken in Virginia; Alexandria, Virginia, at my younger brother's wedding, my younger brother, Victor Hill's wedding--
Story_ID: 111495
Speaker 1: And again, I'd like to talk for a little while about what's happening in the world between 1964 and '69 [1969], when you were in that cocoon, as you describe it, at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio, starting in the year of the Civil Rights Bill of 1964, Civil Rights Act of '64 [1964], and then coming out of school just after the assassination of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], and about to go out, I suppose, and take on the world.  At what point in time did you decide, or did you have at that point in your life, a real clear vision of how you fit in to all of that history that was being made?
Speaker 2: I think part of going from high school to college and then through college undergraduate, the transitional period of, I guess, of adjustment relative to being completely on my own, having to regulate my own schedule and certain choices I had to make, we knew there was an adjustment there relative to coursework and just organizing study habits, etc.  So it really took me a good two years to kind of stabilize and adjust myself, so the first two years of college, yeah, they were a struggle, just adapting and adjusting, to be on my own and independence and choices that had to be made.  The second two years, you know, were more comfortable because of the assistance that I had, but as far as what was going on relative to the world, as far as history and events, you know there was a lot that was going on.  I remember involvement and organizing, some student organizations, protest against the Vietnam War being an unjust war, and, you know protesting against the draft, even though I wasn't in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], there were a number of individuals that were in ROTC that ended up graduating, going off to Vietnam.  But my coming of age, again, as far as activism, I could say that I really wasn't active, when I think back upon it, as I would like to have been and it probably had to do with, again, that cocoon I was in and the environment that I was in seemed to protect not only myself but others from what was really going on.  We were so busy dealing with just surviving in the environment that we were in and the transition that we had made from urban environment, urban public schools, to making the transition in college, 'cause even though I did well in high school, I'll never forget some of the "entrance tests" that basically said that I wasn't supposed to make it beyond the first year and, you know, if there was anything that I guess kind of shook me up, because I came there thinking I was pretty hot as far as academics and what I knew, and then to take these entrance tests that they gave us, and then to say that, then didn't do too well on them and then for them to say that you're not going to make it past your first year! So that was like a rude awakening right there; you know, what's going on, but, again, my self-esteem, I always felt I had pretty high self-esteem as far as myself as a student and you really question, you know, who are these individuals that give tests to tell me what I can't do.  And I think I had been prepared based on my experience in family life and community life, whatever needs to be done I could do it.  So, you know I, it was a struggle but I was able to overcome and do it.  So, I really, you know, was really focused on being proficient as a student and very focused on, you know, being on the track team and being a good athlete.  So, that really took up most of my time.  I guess when you compare Ohio University with other campuses during that era, there wasn't a type of, when I look back upon it, there wasn't a type of activism that you found, say like at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], a much larger university, or on some of the historical black colleges and universities.  So, the activism wasn't as great; you know, the synergy for it at Ohio University compared to other universities and colleges in urban areas and at public and private institutes that were much larger.
Story_ID: 111496
Speaker 1: I know, in talking about the 1960s and maybe some of the shortcomings of the era, I can recall that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] said the promise of the Great Society in the [President Lyndon B.] Johnson era was shot down on the battlefields of Vietnam and he talked about the disproportionately high numbers of African American men who were dying in the war, and for those who survived coming home and not always finding the equal opportunities that were being promised in the late 1960s.  Were you aware of that at all, or were you protesting the war as a student as far as this whole student movement and the anti-war movement or were you aware of the racial differences in the war making itself?
Speaker 2: You know, I was really protesting more as a student.  I guess my rude awakening and a phase of my coming of age, had to do when I graduated from Ohio University and ended up at the University of Kentucky, in Lexington, Kentucky, and I never, 'cause I got married in my senior year and ended up doing my student teaching in Cleveland [Ohio].  I got married in Cincinnati [Ohio].  I married Marquita McAllister Hill, from Cincinnati, and so I got married in Cincinnati, then we came to Cleveland, where I did my student teaching and when I came back to do my student teaching, it was at John Hay High School [Cleveland, Ohio] and I remember there was a student protest at John Hay and the students closed down the school and I was very much in support of the students, and you know, was called in the office by my supervising teacher and really threatened; you can't side with a student, you know, I had to make a choice.  Either you're over there or you're over here.  So, behind the scenes I was still supportive of the students. So activism, again, based on the experience I was in, I got right in the midst of it and involved in it but then, leaving Cleveland, because the draft was on me at that time.  They were trying to draft me and I made a decision that I did not wanna be drafted or go fight in this, what I felt, was this unfair war and so I ended up going to the Teacher's Corps [sic, Teacher Corps] and the Teacher's Corps program I was involved in was at the University of Kentucky, so we relocated at the University of Kentucky, and it was at that time it was myself, my wife, and my oldest daughter, Greer, and we ended up living in graduate housing.  I tried to identify a house for us to live in but that was my first direct experience with racism.  As far as some of the surrounding housing on campus and off campus, it was just overt racism to the extent I went to one house, knocked on the door, told them I was here because I was interested in renting some rooms in this one apartment and the woman slammed the door in my face!  Those type of experiences at that time--Adolph Rupp was the basketball coach down there and he went to win the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournament with this all-white basketball team, which he even verbalized at some point during his career where they played at the beginning of football games, they played "Dixie."  So, it was my first experience running into, you know, overt, you know, racism.
Story_ID: 111497
Speaker 1: Even part of the Teacher's Corps [sic, Teacher Corps] experience going out in some of the rural communities doing volunteer work, I remember going to this one community in Breathitt County, which is one of the poorest counties in the United States at that time, and you know, some of these Appalachian white kids said, "look, look, here come the niggers, here come the niggers."  I said, you know, and the conditions that they lived in, I said how could they feel that they're that much better than me and I'm here trying to help 'em.  Also, during that period of time as a graduate student, being, getting involved with the community there, because usually when folks say what do you think of Fayette County or Lexington, Kentucky, I said it's okay if you're a horse, 'cause horses are treated better there than African Americans, because at that time Fayette County and Lexington had all these horseracing farms and breeding horses, but the conditions of the horses and the way that they were kept on these farms and the way that they were breeded, their conditions in many instances were better than the folks that were raised and lived in Lexington, Kentucky, so I got involved with this fellow named Jim Sleet [ph.].  I know he was a community activist and was starting a community newspaper and he needed someone to help him and someone to write some of the articles and be a reported, so I got involved.  It was called the Lexington Voice and one of the issues that we were dealing with, this one area where African Americans live in Lexington, they were paying sewer taxes but didn't have sewers.  So, I remember doing some interviewing and doing a series of articles and organizing the community.  At that time, I also remember it was before Kent State, the massacre that took place at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], you know with the National Guard and the students, but prior to that there was a similar incident at what was South Carolina State in Orangeburg [South Carolina], where the police came in and just ended up killing some African American students that were protesting.  I remember doing an article called 'Colors of Tragedy,' dealing with the oppressive, the results of oppression relative to racism and police brutality.  So, really Lexington, Kentucky was another phase of my coming of age that involved me where I got involved in the experience, the oppressive experiences that were going on in the environment that I was in and got socially active through writing and through organizing in Lexington.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this is happening between 1969 and '71 [1971]?
Speaker 1: This is between 1969 and 1971.
Speaker 2: '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 111498
Speaker 1: And then, I was, you know, I had an opportunity through a Ford Fellowship to go work on my Ph.D. at the University of Wisconsin[-Madison, in Madison, Wisconsin]; so, we left Lexington [Kentucky], my coming of age in Lexington, being very socially active as an organizer in the community was well as writing for the Lexington Voice and working with Jim Sleet [ph.], to relocating to Madison, Wisconsin. And my baptism at Madison, Wisconsin, the first weekend I was there was the blowing up of the math-physics building by the Weathermen on the Madison campus.  The Weathermen were a radical organization that was protesting the war in Viet Nam.  For part of their protest they ended up blowing the math/physics building [Sterling Hall] in Madison, so that was my baptism and welcome to Madison, Wisconsin.  At that time, Madison was considered the Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley in Berkeley, California] of the Midwest, and with the program I was involved in through the Ford Fellowship, the program was with the urban educational policy study program, and I ended up finding--and the difference between Kentucky and Wisconsin was the difference between--night and day as far--you know, it was a liberal campus, very socially active, involved campus against the war, against the draft.  I think at that time Madison, Wisconsin had, they led the country as far as anybody they sent from Madison to be drafted and they would have to go for their physicals in Milwaukee, and eighty percent of them would be turned down.  While I was in Madison at that time, I got a draft letter that I had to report to Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  I'll never forget being in this room, it looked like a warehouse, and there was about maybe 200 or us, I guess, from around Wisconsin and from Madison.  We got a physical examination and, at that time, while I was in Kentucky I was suffering from migraine headaches, and have continued to suffer from migraine headaches.  I made them aware of that and they sent me to a neurosurgeon, and then I was diagnosed as having migraine headaches and it ended up being a medical excuse for not having to be drafter.
Speaker 2: Hmmm.
Speaker 1: I always wondered, you know, what if I had been drafted and was gonna be sent off?  I had made up my mind since I was against the war and I was against the draft, that we would just go to Canada; my wife [Marquita McAllister] and I made that decision.  There is no way that I was gonna go, but I ended up getting that medical deferment and spending my time at University of Wisconsin and involved in the Black Student Union there and then with Kwame Salter, working very closely with him.  He was the head of the Black Student Union; again, continuing to write, be a reporter for the Black Student Union newspaper, and you know, discovering also the pen could be mightier than the sword and, so, utilizing my talents and skills in reporting and writing for that newspaper and being one of the organizers and helping to organize those special events.  During that period of time--oh, I forgot to mention while I was in Kentucky my second daughter was born.  So, we ended up going to Madison.  I had my wife, Marquita McAllister, and two daughters, you know, at that time; Greer, my oldest daughter who was born in Cincinnati [Ohio] and then my second daughter, Courtney, who was born in Lexington.
Story_ID: 111499
Speaker 1: During the period of time I was in Madison [at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in Madison, Wisconsin], I remember getting a phone call and my father [Paul Hill, Sr.] was on the phone crying, my younger brother, Donald, had died.  He passed away and--
Speaker 2: Of natural causes?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  He was, got involved with drugs and it was an overdose and that was a very tragic loss and phase of my life and experience for me, and my mother [Mabel Craig Hill] really never recovered from it.  It always had an effect upon her. I guess with all mothers, losing a child before they pass on is very devastating.
Story_ID: 111500
Speaker 1: And as a result of, you know, some of the problems of adjustment that she was having, I ended up I had finished all my coursework for my Ph.D. at the University of Wisconsin[-Madison in Madison, Wisconsin] and ended up doing--part of that program I had to do an internship, so I ended up--and I had a choice between going to New York City [New York], working in the school system there doing my internship, or Cleveland, so I ended up doing my internship in Cleveland [Ohio] for the Cleveland Board of Education, basically being assigned to work with the Cleveland Board of Education at that time, and work specifically with Arnold Pinkney, who was President of the Board at that time, so we ended up relocating to Cleveland and I worked for the Cleveland Public Schools, made it home for a while with my family and then we found a place on Ashby [Road] that we rented in Shaker Heights while I worked at the school board during my internship.
Speaker 2: And this is early 1970s?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and this is early 1970s.
Speaker 2: And, a lot of history being made in Cleveland in that era.
Speaker 1: Right, because one of the things I was involved in at that time was working for the reelection of Carl Stokes at that time.  Arnold Pinkney was involved in the campaign and I was involved not only working the school board, but also working--I also was involved when Carl Stokes ran for mayor the first time, because my father [Paul Hill, Sr.] was very much involved in his reelection campaign.  Even though I was in college, I would come home during weekends, working the campaign as far as passing out literature, running off literature.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, when you're in high school then you're surrounded by this network of strong men who are very active in the community and working hard, taking care of family, and then you come back after all these Ph.D. studies and it seems like you're surrounded again by men who are doing great things in the community.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Carl Stokes, the first African American mayor for a major urban city; and then Arnold Pinkney, successful businessman, school board president at that point; and here you are, what, all of twenty-seven years old and sort of right in the midst of all of that...(laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, with all of these positive male role models as part of my experience and, again, my father and his brothers and uncles were right there--
Speaker 2: Still there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Still there, always involved, being the street soldiers and providing whatever support was necessary to kind of push us along as a group of people.
Story_ID: 111501
Speaker 1: It's a--I'm thinking now about the Cleveland Schools in the '70s [1970s] and this is a few years now since the Brown [v. Board of Education] decision of '54 [1954] that said that segregated schools were unconstitutional and in '55 [1955] desegregate with all deliberate speed, and then Cleveland [Ohio] had a bout with segregation as well.  Can you tell us about some of the things that are happening in the early '70s [1970s], things that are being said and eventually what the court case, Reed v. Rhodes [1976], meant for those who were students in the Cleveland Public Schools, and also those like yourself, who were working in the schools.
Speaker 2: Right.  You know, during that period of time, racial isolation as far as, you know, really to be honest, you had two separate school systems.  They were separated by the Cuyahoga River.  You had the East Side, which was predominantly then as now, as far as population, that was majority African American, with the West Side of Cleveland being majority European American, and even though there was one school district, there was still racial isolation as far as the majority of your schools on the East Side at that time were African American, and the majority of schools as part of Cleveland Public Schools on the West Side were majority European American or white, and it was even shown relative to distribution of funds.  There was some inequity that existed between the experienced, the more experienced teachers being on the West Side, more money being made available as far as per(unclear) on the West Side versus the East Side.  So, it was, what you had is a situation of racial isolation and separate but unequal under the same school district and that being a serious problem, then there was a suit that was brought and that suit basically, one of the remedies that was looked at to desegregate through the public schools was busing, and using busing to reduce the racial isolation that existed as far as the classrooms were concerned; whereas, during that period of time, whereas Charlotte-Mecklenburg [Schools] in North Carolina, they had a desegregation that utilized a metropolitan county-wide model which was more successful than the type of desegregation model that we ended up coming up with in Cleveland, 'cause one of the things in Cleveland, even though you've got the racial isolation, what you had was a commonality that exists between the East Side and West Side that had to do with poverty and socioeconomic conditions being the same.  The only difference was the racial isolation based on just race, but when it's been determined now and it was really known then, that in order for equal educational opportunities to prevail and to have really what you would call true desegregation, you had to involve the metropolitan area, but no way was that going to happen in Cleveland as far as desegregation that would involve the suburbs.  Because of the status quo and the resistance to that, the best that could be asked for was just desegregating the Cleveland Public Schools and not looking at that county model which, if you really are talking about true desegregation, that's what should have taken place but was resisted and didn't take place.  It is real interesting, they talk about--even though I don't want to be jumping ahead but it's still related to that--you talk about regionalism now and the push for regionalism for Cleveland as a remedy to kind of resolve some of the problems that exist and I tell folks that I'm for regionalism if it starts, first of all, with education.  I mean, if that's part of the process and formula, I'm all for it.  If it doesn't, then I'm against it.  So, there has to be--and it's the same issue relative to wealth.  You know, most of the wealth relative to the area is in the metropolitan area, then and now; even more so than then.  The city has gotten poor as far as socioeconomic conditions now, but there is still a refusal to look at even part of regionalism relative to education, looking at a regional educational system to me, which is the only solution as far as inequities that exist between the city and the surrounding suburbs and unconstitutionality too has been found by the State Supreme Court of school financing, which nothing has been done about so you have these inequities that exist between school systems, you know, like Cleveland School System, say compared to some of the suburban school systems that have more monies that are available through property taxes and able to fund at higher levels, expenditure for the education of children.
Speaker 1: So wait, we have a struggle then, a local struggle in the 1970s and some of the leaders in the struggle are members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I think there was a United Freedom Movement, and a lot of folks drawn into the struggle from various segments of the community, but trying, you know, to sort of equalize access to, they said, quality education.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 111502
Speaker 1: Now, how long did your employment with the [Cleveland] Board of Education continue?
Speaker 2: My internship was for one year and during that one year internship at that time, my brother, Ronald, had graduated--well, he was doing his student teaching and he did it at John F. Kennedy [High School, Cleveland, Ohio], and at that time he had organized a group call SOUL, Students Organizing for United Leadership, and it was during my period of time when I was working with the Cleveland Board of Education doing my internship, and it had to do with because there were some behavior problems and discipline problems at JFK with the Student Body, so he had come up with this idea and then I helped him come up with this idea of organizing athletes in the school to be tutors and to be peer tutors, and to be positive role models for some of the younger students since they looked up to athletes. And, at that time, the Cleveland Public Schools had security guards and even though we had got an informal sign-off from the principal at that time at JFK, there was a resistance to what we were doing because we were successful with this Students Organizing for United Leadership model that we used at JFK from the union of the security guards because they were seeing how successful we were compared to them not being successful in working with some of these acting out students.  So, somehow, you know, my brother ended up getting in trouble and they ended up firing him.  You know, I ended up making it uphill to the school board through Arnold Pinkney, which wasn't supportive of him at all, so I really fell out of grace at that time, you know, with the Cleveland Public Schools because of being part of organizing that youth organization and being supportive of my brother at that time.  So, it was really my first experience with directly going against the status quo and, you know, one of my mentors at that time, being the president of the Cleveland School Board, who was Arnold Pinkney.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to stay with this, the topic of education as we conclude this segment and prepare to move into another one because I know you're a young father and husband, and you have yet two preschoolers, right?  Still two (laughter) at this point by 1972? And someday they'll have to go into schools and so I just want to talk about your feelings at that point about the schools in this area as we start up the next segment.
Story_ID: 109201
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Hill, we were talking about your experiences as an intern with the Cleveland Board of Education at the beginning of the decade of the 1970s.  We know that's a rather turbulent one for school leaders in Cleveland [Ohio], because before we get out of that decade we are going to have a remedial order that's going to include busing for desegregation, and some support programs too to improve the quality of education for all of the students on both sides of the [Cuyahoga] River, east and west.  So, what are you thinking about the schools at that point in your career?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm thinking, you know, when I think of the school situation during that period of time, I think of Carter G. Woodson's 1933, publication '[The] Mis-Education of the Negro,' and there are still remnants of this miseducation of the negro relative to the situation that exists in the public school systems in the 1970s; especially, early and middle 1970s, and part of that, I want to create a backdrop that kinda relates to my continuing coming of age with two other jobs that I ended up having once I left the Cleveland Public Schools, that I want to use as a backdrop to kinda create a frame of reference for what I will speak to relative to public education and quality education.  Also, I would like to say by this period of time, I still have the two children and my third child and oldest son comes in this phase of life I'm getting ready to talk about now, 'cause once I left the Cleveland Public Schools I ended up being offered a job with the United States Justice Department for an agency that's part of the United States Justice Department called Community Relations Services, and I was assigned to Atlanta, Georgia, and I worked in the Southeast region of the United States with the Justice Department, and basically my responsibility there was I was a regional educational specialist for community relation services, and basically responsible for mediation between school systems that were under order to desegregate and the federal government.  So, I went in to mediate any type of problems that they were having in the region at that time, the Southeastern region, was an eight state region, so I was involved in crisis intervention, mediation in Florida, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Kentucky; but again, I was based out of Atlanta, Georgia, and this was during the [President Richard] Nixon administration and, that's when I really got involved.  One of the things I was involved in had to do with one of the byproducts of desegregation.  There were some positive relative to desegregation as far as dealing with racial isolation, and striving for equal education and equal educational opportunities between black and white students in certain areas, rural and urban.  But one of the fallouts and downside of it had to do with the effects of desegregation on African American teachers and administrators that were in these isolated schools, especially in the South, where they were the majority teachers and administrators, but as a result of the order to desegregate these school districts throughout the South, many African American teachers and administrators were displaced, you know, administrators or principals, or whoever were assistant superintendents and superintendents ended up losing their jobs, when the court order forced school districts, or schools, to be segregated, so they ended up principals being teachers, teachers losing their jobs, not having the proper type of educational qualifications to qualify under a desegregated school system for these positions, but many of them having the qualifications but still are being displaced and losing their jobs.
Story_ID: 109202
Speaker 1: So, I did a lot of crisis intervention mediation and, especially at the time of South Carolina State [Orangeburg, South Carolina], which is a black university.  They had a deseg [desegregation] center dealing with the problem of displaced African American administrators and teachers and we worked very closely with them in negotiating with school systems that were going through a court ordered desegregation and the placement of these teachers in positions, and we weren't that successful; but again, that was one of the downsides of desegregation.  Then again, based on my experiences too, desegregation really was one way.  It was a one way; it wasn't a reciprocal process.  You know, it was really one way where you had these African American students in progress of desegregation order that had to fit in, fit in to the system that had been established and set up, bias on bias of the schools that they were part of that desegregation order.  So, you know, there was still a lot of institutional racism within these systems, attitudes and mindsets of European American administrators and teachers.  We had to set up, do a lot of training.  Some of the training was useless.  The only way, because of the mindset of some of these stereotypes they had internalized, the only way that you're gonna deal with 'em is once they retire or they quit, and replacing them, so having to do a lot of work with colleges and universities, especially white colleges and universities as far as their teacher training education programs, as far as getting, as far as the type of courses that would be needed to help teachers and administrators to deal with a diverse student population.  Understand it's their cultural differences that may be responsible for certain behaviors, certain act-that would have to be taken into consideration.  You know, moving away from one teaching method for all students, irregardless [sic] of gender or color, so dealing with a diverse school population.  So that was quite a coming of age and experience, you know, being in the South, dealing with these type of concerns and issues relative to school systems that were under--court order to desegregate.
Story_ID: 109203
Speaker 1: Also, during that period of time, my oldest son was born in Atlanta, Georgia.  Ended up at that job [regional educational specialist for the U.S. Justice Department Community Relations Services] because of the [President Richard] Nixon administration and there was a cutback in federal funds.  I was one of the last to be hired and one of the first to be let go because of the cutback for that particular program, and I was what is called, using government lingo, I was rifted and that basically means I was rifted to another federal organization.  So I ended up getting a job with what was then called United States Health, Education, and Welfare Department, which is now HHS, [United States Department of] Health and Human Services.  Back then it was called United States Health, Education, and Welfare Department, Office of Civil Rights, and I was reassigned to Cleveland, Ohio.  The regional office was in Chicago [Illinois], but I was at a satellite office in Cleveland, and I was in elementary and secondary education division, again, working with school systems that had received Title VII monies and these were monies to help school systems to go through the process of desegregation and to make sure that there was compliance as far as the school district in receiving federal dollars as far as desegregation was concerned.  So, I worked with a number of school systems throughout the Midwest: Indiana, Illinois, Ohio, Wisconsin, dealing, again, in the whole area of just elementary and secondary desegregation relative to receiving federal dollars, and really got involved in becoming an expert in the area of special education; especially looking at the disproportionate number of African Americans and Latinos that ended up in special education classes, what was then called EMR classes, educationally mentally retarded, were segregated classes for these individuals, mostly males, but African Americans and Latinos that had been labeled as educationally mentally retarded, and looking at learning disability classes where a learning disability class is if you were labeled learning disabled, you were mainstreamed.  You weren't segregated into an EMR class, but looking at the disproportionate number of those that were assigned to, based on testing, it's that learning disability classes tend to be mostly white, whereas, again, Latinos and African Americans were in the isolated EMR educationally mentally retarded classes.  So working with school districts relative to the tests that they were using, if any of the tests were culturally biased tests, and helping them to find culturally sensitive tests; they were taking into consideration language differences that were being interpreted or reflected relative to the language that was used on the test that many Latinos and African Americans weren't familiar with and had worked against them as far as doing well on this test that they had to take, and organizing different workshops and sensitivity training for teachers in education. So, so, again over this period of time, I'm very much involved in looking at public education relative to court-ordered desegregation; but, again, looking at schools that were under court order to desegregate still having problems as far as providing education that was equal in all aspects relative to testing, relative to curriculum, relative to just teacher qualification and education; a lot of inequities existed then and still exist today 'cause to me, it wasn't true integration.  It was a one-way process that worked to the disadvantage of poor people and people of color.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 109204
Speaker 1: You've answered the question that I was gonna ask, because this is the fiftieth anniversary year of Brown [v. Board of Education (1954)], a lot of people now are reassessing this whole idea of desegregation or integration, especially in the schools, in the public schools in the country and I just wanted to ask if you thought it had succeeded in equalizing educational opportunities and it seems to me that you're saying no, not yet.  Equality is not yet there?
Speaker 2: Well, not to discount the efforts, the court order of separate but equal as unconstitutional is very important as far as the progress, but we're still not there and we're a long way from being there.  You have African American children now, the majority of them are still in isolated situations where the majority of students are African Americans.  I would say it's as or worse than it was before, you know, as far as isolation and true integration/desegregation, not taking place.  And, it's worse relative in a separate, but equal environment, even though it was always but separate but unequal.  It was never separate and equal.  But there were certain advantages, and you look at, say, the generation of my father and a little bit after, you know, as far as where those African American professionals were educated.  You know, the doctors, the lawyers, the engineers.  You know, they came out of situations that were separate and unequal, but there was some stress and there were some positive things relative to expectations of their teachers; you know, certain basic things that, basic skills that they were provided that were built upon to enable them to be successful in undergraduate historical African American colleges and universities that they went to as well as the mainstream colleges and universities that they went to.  You know, they were able to prevail based on that separate but unequal education that they were receiving in the South and at different places in the North.  But, again, it had to do with the environment that they were in.  To me, that was more conducive for their social as well as cognitive development. Because there were people that cared about them, there were people that had high expectations, and because education comes from the Greek word, educare, and it means bringing out what is already within.  We are born with whatever there is in us to help us be successful, but that must be facilitated by certain facilitators that we call teachers or whatever, in an environment to bring their genius out.  So, I think we did a better job of that in the separate and unequal environment than we are doing now.  And, we still have a very long way to go.  When you look at some of the--relative to the standardized testing or even proficiency testing that takes place, assessment that takes place in public schools.  You look at that, you look at the dropout rate.  I think, even though it's getting better, but it's still below forty percent, something like thirty-nine percent of students, I think in 2001-2002 school year in the Cleveland Municipal School District, did not graduate.  Looking at how they fare relative to the fourth grade proficiency, sixth grade, and ninth grade proficiency relative to the state standard, Cleveland [Ohio] is at the very bottom, you know, very bottom, and then the same thing with standardized testing that you see in public schools around the country, we are not faring well at all; you know, at all.  So, the question is what has happened, why is there this qualitative difference between separate and unequal environment and situation and the environment that we're in now.  I'm not saying everything was positive in that separate and unequal era, but we were able to maximize and take advantage of the supports that were there, and the positive things that were there that we haven't been able to carry forward in our situation now, in public schools in the North and public schools within the South.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 109205
Speaker 1: I hope before we finish our interview today that we can talk about some of those co-curricular activities or complimentary things that are offered here at East End, to complement what the teachers are doing in the classroom, but right now I want to focus on your family, because people who know you in this city [Cleveland, Ohio] and, I suppose, 'cross the country know something about your great big beautiful family (laughter) and you've talked about the first three children who were born in this early period of your career, but I wanted to know if you'd be comfortable for talking a little while about the work that your wife [Marquita McAllister Hill] is doing and how that complements what you're doing, sort of in the public arena.
Speaker 2: You know, for me to have done what I've done and continue to do, it's impossible for me to have done that and to continue doing that without the support of my wife, and she's a person in herself; I mean, with her own mind. You know, a lot of times people, when they think of, you know, it's Ms. Hill, but it's Marquita Hill.  Marquita Hill has her own mind, her own life, and she's always been there for me, for the children, and has been there for herself but, as I said before, she's from Cincinnati, Ohio, and graduated from Walnut Hills High School, which is a real good school.  I mean, the high school that she graduated from, Walnut Hills in Cincinnati, is comparable and it was the seventh through twelfth, is comparable--once you graduate from there, to having a college education, because it is a special school you have to get into, so she did very well there.  Then she ended up going to the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], and studying in an area of psychology and basically opted, once we got married, to stay home and take care and raise the children, but six years ago, she started her own company, Sankofa Tours, and Sankofa Tours is a--and she is a tour operator that specializes in cultural and educational tours to West Africa, South Africa, and Brazil, and this is her own company and she's done very well as far as the number of contracts that she's gotten with the church, and many, many churches that she has done cultural and educational tours for throughout the United States, as well as many colleges and universities she has contracts with. For instance, DePaul University for the past four years.  She has been doing their intersession right after Thanksgiving.  They do a three-week credited program for graduate students and undergrad students in traditional psychology, traditional medicine, that she said (unclear) up with universities and colleges in West Africa and Ghana, as well as the home state, so she coordinates all that as well as leads the tour, the cultural and educational tour also.  So, she has done tours to Senegal, to Benin, to Mali, South Africa, to Brazil.  There was an article that was written up because [HM] Susan Taylor's fiancee went on one of the trips that she organized, Susan Taylor from Essence Magazine, and so she organized a trip for him and a group that he wanted to take over and there was an article that was done in Essence Magazine and the trip was to Mali, that talks about one of the two queens of West African cultural and educational tours, and one is out of Chicago, and then Marquita Hill out of Cleveland, Ohio.  So, I mean, as mother, entrepreneur, businesswoman, basically supporting me and here at East End Neighborhood House, she's had a very full and continues to have a very full and active life; especially now, in our role, in my role and her role as grandparents.
Story_ID: 109206
Speaker 1: You know, we [Hill and his wife, Marquita McAllister Hill] have two grandchildren; one is a boy, his name is Evan, eight months old, and then our granddaughter, Aya, A-Y-A-, who is three years old, and then our oldest son is, him and his wife Andrea, are expecting a child, a daughter, in June.  So her business [Sankofa Tours], being a mother, being a grandmother, being a wife, her plate is full.  Her plate is very full.  Other than the three earlier children--
Speaker 2: And can you give me all of their names in birth order...
Speaker 1: Okay, okay...
Speaker 2: So we can get everybody on record.
Speaker 1: Okay, my oldest daughter is Greer.  Greer is a student at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio].  She was working as an administrator at Myers College [Cleveland, Ohio], but she left that now to just be a full-time graduate student.  She graduated from the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio], also a Shaw [High School, East Cleveland, Ohio] graduate.  Then, my second child is Courtney.  Courtney Hill-Reed, she has been married now for, I think, six or seven years.  They just had an anniversary and she's married to Darren Reed [ph.], and they live in Montclair, Virginia, and Courtney and Darren both graduated from Hiram College [Hiram, Ohio], and then they, Courtney ended up going to the Peace Corps and then after the Peace Corps her and Darren got married and then after the Peace Corps her and Darrin got married and then they ended up moving to Virginia, where she worked for a youth organization called Community Impact and he was a teacher and then became an assistant principal.  Now he's a principal at a school in Alexandria, Virginia, and the both went to [College of] William & Mary [Williamsburg, Virginia] for graduate school in Williamsburg, Virginia.  Then my oldest son is Jason Hill, and Jason was born in Atlanta [Georgia] and graduated from Hiram College; he and his wife, Andrea, graduated from Hiram College and Jason ended up going to John Carroll [University, University Heights, Ohio], where--both Andrea and Jason got undergrad degrees in history and then Jason got a degree, master's in education at John Carroll.  He is now a fifth grade teacher at Beachwood Elementary School, well, Hilltop Elementary School in the Beachwood Public School District.  He is also a swim coach for the Beachwood High School swim team, and also he's the coach for the Beachwood Community Swim Team, and also swim coach for the East Cleveland Community Swim Team.  Andrea is in grad school now at John Carroll and also working on her teacher certification.  Then I have, the next child is Fanon Hill.  Fanon Hill graduated from Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Virginia.  He got a degree in education and now is an after school and before school coordinator for a neighborhood-based program.  He lives in Cleveland, Ohio.  Then, I have my daughter, Mara.  Mara graduated from American University [Washington, D.C.], international studies, and she lives in College Park, Maryland, and she works for an organization in Washington, D.C., called The Gerontological Society of America, where she's a research assistant.  Then, my next daughter is Raina, Raina Hill.  Raina is a student at Salem International University [Salem, West Virginia].  Before that she was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and then she transferred from Howard, where she had a full basketball scholarship to Salem International University.  She's majoring in liberal arts and she will graduate in May.  Then, my youngest daughter, Maren, M-A-R-E-N.  Maren is, she graduated from Goucher College in Baltimore [Maryland], and she graduated with a major in French.  Her senior year, she studied at the Sorbonne in Paris [France], and we got a chance to visit her.  She fell in love with Paris and so did we, because she lived in the Latin Quarter, and now she's in graduate school at Goucher, majoring in education.  She lives in Baltimore, Maryland.  Then my grandson, Evan, again eight months old, and then my granddaughter, Aya, who is three years old, going on fifty  (laughter).  Then, we are expecting our grandchild from Jason and Andrea in June.
Speaker 2: Okay, so seven children, two grandchildren, and a third grandchild on the way.  Okay.  Sounds like a full house (laughter), okay. And I'm sure your wife is very busy in nurturing that family.
Speaker 1: Very busy.
Story_ID: 109207
Speaker 1: So you're back in Cleveland [Ohio] now, after the birth of the third child, or in greater Cleveland, 'cause I know eventually you'll--you make a permanent home for yourself in East Cleveland [Ohio], so when did that happen? Well, we, we've been in East Cleveland.  I moved to East Cleveland in 1981, and before that we were living in Shaker [Heights, Cleveland, Ohio].  We didn't like living in Shaker.  It wasn't--we didn't find people too friendly, at least our experience, and we didn't find a real sense of community.  So, we decided to move to East Cleveland, never regret living in East Cleveland.  A lot of things that people want to say negatively about East Cleveland.  There are a lot of positive things there too.  It's a struggle.  Really, the future of East Cleveland really will determine the future of African Americans in Cleveland as far as I'm concerned, because you really can't separate East Cleveland from African Americans, no matter where they live in the greater Cleveland area, so the success of East Cleveland will be the success of African Americans in order to make it work.  Even if though there are some folks that different from that, you know, based on we've kind of moved from even though there are race issues and concerns that are still there and will always be there; they're just part of capitalism.  But, there's this class, it's like a double-edged--antral data said, the oppression that African Americans suffer from in this country is like a double-edged razor.  You have race on one side, the other side you have class, and one of the things that's really having an effect and interfering with our progress in America and the 21st Century as a people has to do with class issues, where we've become our own worst enemy.  And the class issues were based on education, based on status, that some blacks feel that they're different or better than other blacks.  You know, they don't see our destiny as being tied together.  Even though we were brought here when we were enslaved and kidnapped from Africa from separate tribes, you know, but again being in America, the American (unclear) then, it was important for us to come together as a community, to rally together as a community, you know then and all the experiences that followed that, post-slavery, pre-civil rights, civil rights.  But it was important that we came, even though we were different.  We came together as a community, but we seemed to be moving away from those assets and those strengths that [HM] Robert [B.] Hill talks about in 'The Strength[s] of the African American Family [sic, Families]'--those strengths, strong kinship bonds, strong education achievements, strong religious orientation, egalitarian roles, we've moved away from those and really the move away from those really, to me, took place from 1970 to about now, because prior, first of all prior to 1910, ninety percent of African American families were in situations with the husband and wife.  Family was important.  First thing we did when we got out of enslavement was to get married and to look for those we were separated from, and got together as families.  Robert Staple, who is a black sociologist, said prior to 1960, eighty percent of African Americans were brought up in situations with a mother and a father.  Family was very important.  So, the question is what has taken place from 1970 to the present time, where less than fifty percent of African American children are brought up in a situation with a mother and a father, where family does not seem to be as important and where you have more divorce than marriage?  So, we've strayed away.  Some of the things we've talked about that sustained me and my relatives and ancestors is being around hope, not giving up hope, having faith.  Then you have Cornel West and his book, 'Race Matters,' talks about this nihilistic threat that we have given in to, that our ancestors didn't give in to, where hope was always important, but there's a sense of hopelessness that exists now and this hopelessness has to do with just giving in to this nihilistic threat--nihilism not relative to anarchy but nihilism relative to just hopelessness, you know, giving up hope and part of that has to do with the armor that protected us in the past, that our foremothers and fathers equipped us with, the skin that they provided us to resist having a allergic reaction in a socially toxic environment.
Story_ID: 109208
Speaker 1: All right, Mr. Hill, at the end of the last segment you were just starting to say that often African Americans find themselves in what's described as a socially toxic environment, not necessarily building on the foundation that their ancestors started to lay in the early 20th Century, and if I read the papers in Northeast Ohio, usually your home community, East Cleveland, is often cast in that light, as being socially toxic; you know, the government is failing, the mayor [Emmanuel Onunwor] was the subject of a series of sort of articles of expose about financial shenanigans at City Hall, and then the schools are often dismissed as being failing, but your children, most of the seven, six of the seven, graduated from East Cleveland schools and they did very well, and your other child who graduated from a private Catholic school has done very well.  What is it that we can do as a community then, or what have you been able to do as a leader in the community so that they can enjoy some of those positive experiences, coming out of an environment that's often described that way?
Speaker 2: Well, part of the answer has to do with since this book was written in 1903, it's never been out of print and centennial 100-year celebration of this book was in 2003, but the book was written by W. E. B. Du Bois, and it's called ['The] Souls of Black Folks [sic].'  In chapter one of the book, he poses a question and the question that he posed in chapter one of the book, "What does it feel like to be a problem?"  What does it feel like to be perceived or considered a problem?  He was talking about African Americans in general being perceived as a problem.  So, you know, thinking of that question in 1903, but also looking at that same question being asked in 2003, so what's the difference between 1903 and 2003?  In 1903, we did not see ourselves as a problem.  We had not internalized ourselves as being a problem, because if we did we wouldn't be where we are now.  So, it wasn't internalized.  So, the difference between posing that question in 1903 to African Americans, 'cause that problem is basically perceived and looked upon, or answered, in a negative sense by the mainstream population--is it the way that they viewed us as being a problem?  But we didn't see ourselves as a problem, but in 2003, the centennial anniversary, and 2004, I see us, that same problem being asked by others and ourselves as an African American community and we, the difference is that too many of us have internalized that we're a problem and part of it has to do with the self-fulfilling prophecy.  If you say you're a problem enough, you know, you're a problem, you're a problem, you're a problem, or you're depicted as a problem through the electronic media, through the printed media, everything you hear or see about black folks is negative, then unconsciously we're gonna start, some of us that do not have that skin to protect us or strong self-esteem, will start internalizing that, or in public schools or private schools, or public schools, you know, you're stupid, you're dumb. Or in families, you're stupid, you're dumb. And then being bombarded by the media, you're stupid, you're dumb, something's wrong with you.  You can't govern yourself.  The vote needs to be taken away from you and given to the mayor.  There's something wrong with you.  So, relative to Cleveland Public School District, the vote being taken away for voting for elected school board members and given to the mayor.  That says something about there's something wrong with you.  And instead of the mainstream society saying that, we're saying that about each other.  There's something wrong with us, or we even create a dichotomy between us and them based on class.  And, East Cleveland, I know there's a headline in one of the newspapers--Can East Cleveland Govern Itself?  In other words, can black people govern themselves?  Again, that goes back to the question of us being perceived as a problem.  You know, what's wrong with us.
Speaker 1: And should we say also for the record that East Cleveland is a majority black community, maybe ninety-nine percent or is it quite that high--in the nineties, perhaps.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it's a majority African American community--
Story_ID: 109209
Speaker 1: So folks are sayin' that you have a community that's totally African American that cannot govern itself for whatever reason, and there are certain inequities that are built where East Cleveland [Ohio], to some extent, has been set up.  Some of the blame we have to share ourselves relative to leadership.  Some of the blame we have to share ourselves relative to holding that leadership accountable, some of the blame we have to hold ourselves accountable for as far as not voting in numbers, and again, I'll say the problem in East Cleveland is not just an East Cleveland problem, it's a problem of African Americans in the entire region.  I mean, until it's resolved, until leadership prevails, positive leadership prevails, we all fail and we have to understand that and, but again, raising my children in inner East Cleveland where some people perceive East Cleveland as a problem.  I'll never forget doing some consulting in Cleveland Heights [Ohio], and I even read in the newspaper, they say that some of the problems that Cleveland Heights has, has to do with the students that are coming to the district from Cleveland [Ohio] and East Cleveland, and the particular school.  They said the problem we have in the school has to do with the transfer students we have from Cleveland and East Cleveland.  This was presented to me by an African American assistant principal at this school, stating the problem has to do with those kids from Cleveland and East Cleveland.  Yeah, there are problems we have in East Cleveland, there are problems that we have in Cleveland, but, again, they are family problems, they are problems that we have to all resolve together.  But your question relative to raising my children in East Cleveland, in the midst of what some people see as this chaotic community, this chaotic environment, this socially toxic environment.  It is not all East Cleveland, it's really the United States in general, but it just affects us more severely than other segments of the population because of just melanin and skin color and racism and all the things that go with that.  But, one of the things that I've been able to do in East Cleveland myself, and my wife [Marquita McAllister Hill], and other families too in East Cleveland, for there are some successful children that come out of East Cleveland that do very well in the school and do very well when they go on to public and private colleges and universities in Ohio and out of Ohio, but part of it has to do with, in East Cleveland, one of the things I found in East Cleveland I didn't find in the Shaker Heights [Ohio] when I was there, was more of a sense of community in East Cleveland among African Americans as opposed to Shaker Heights, and even Cleveland Heights to some extent.  You know, there are some advantages to being in the majority; you know, being in a community where you're in the majority.  I remember living in Shaker Heights and there was a fellow that lived next door to us, and he was a retired ophthalmologist, the head of the Ophthalmology Department of Cleveland Clinic, and he would, my kids would come out when they were small, and he refused to speak to 'em.  They would say, "How you doin', Dr. So-and-so?"  He would not even look at 'em.  Refused to speak to 'em.  Like they weren't there.  They were invisible; but again, because of my wife and my family and my relatives equipping our children with self-esteem and talking about his problem, him being an exception because all white people weren't like that, but him being an exception, talking about that and having a discussion about that, but in that type of environment I did not want to raise and bring up my children because you don't know how it's affecting them unconsciously.  So, you know, we made a decision where we found a house that we could afford that was big enough for my family that we couldn't afford in Shaker Heights and we loved this house, even though it's too big for us now, but the house itself; the teachers, I think of some of the black and white teachers that my children had in the East Cleveland Public School, Ms. Bloom [ph.] was one of my daughter's French teacher that was one of the motivators for her to take advanced French and how she organized a trip in the eleventh grade, and this is my youngest daughter, who was just twenty-two, so it wasn't that long ago, and took the advanced French class to Paris and made my daughter decide, you know my wife is French-speaking, but this helped motivate my daughter to want to major in French and to want to visit France again and maybe one of these days live in France, because of Ms. Bloom.  I think of some of the other administrators and teachers in the East Cleveland Public Schools that were very supportive and complemented and supplemented what my wife and I were able to do with our children at home as far as the support that we got within the East Cleveland Public Schools also.  Yes, East Cleveland has its problems; yes, there are some inequities that exist, yes, there are some socioeconomic problems that exist that are part of just being in American but, again, I would say there are some positive things there, too.  And the positive things to me provided what I call an antihistamine that helped my children from having an allergic reaction to the social toxic environment that is not reflective of East Cleveland, but reflective of America in general.  Maybe because of the socioeconomic conditions in East Cleveland, it tends to be more compound but, again, there is, I found and still find a lot of positive things in inner East Cleveland.  Yes, there is some bad leadership, yes, the community is not holding accountable some of the leaders and putting in the right type of leaders, but there is some positive leadership and there are some positive things that are happening now so you have to look at both sides.  I have a real problem with the Cleveland Plain Dealer, always bashing East Cleveland, always talking about the negative and not talking about the positive, not doing balanced reporting of the Plain Dealer, as well as the media, you know, in general.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 109210
Speaker 1: So, there are three things that always come to mind when I think about you and your work in greater Cleveland [Ohio], both in the city of Cleveland and also in East Cleveland.  The first is your family.  We spent some time talking about that family foundation; both for your parents [Paul Hill, Sr. and Mabel Craig Hill], your siblings, and then for your wife [Marquita McAllister Hill] and for your children.  But then, I think too, about East End Neighborhood House, and I guess if you moved to East Cleveland in '81 [1981], that's about the same time that you're becoming director of East End.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, if we can shift gears a little bit and talk about some of the social services and other programs that are offered here at the East End Neighborhood House in the City of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Well, East End Neighborhood House was founded in 1907.  We are located at 2749 Woodhill [Road, Cleveland, Ohio].  We're west of Shaker Square, in the southeast part of Cleveland.  We've been at this location since 1917.  We own the property.  We're on about three acres of land.  The original house itself, you know, is standing.  Then we have a 1949 addition, then there's another 7500 square foot addition that we made that houses our child daycare department, our senior services staff offices, and then some senior rooms, and we have our computer lab, and then a lobby.  As far as services that we provide, we provide services in the area of child daycare, from infants all the way through school ages.  We have 112 children that we provide services for, from infants to before and after school program, with our toddler program and preschooler program.  We are a NAECY [National Association for the Education of Young Children] accredited organization; that's the National Association for the Education of Children and Youth.  We're only two neighborhood-based organizations that have that national accreditation.  We just got reaccredited, so we're real proud of the excellent child day care services we're able to provide and constantly improve upon.  We also have our senior day care program and that program provides, we provide services for seniors every day, fifty-five seniors, we provide them breakfast and a lunch, and different recreational services, social services, outreach, field trips, we have a nurse, registered nurse to come in and help them with their medicine and prescriptions.  We have a lawyer to come in once a month for any type of legal problems they may have.  We also have 200 seniors that are frail and handicapped that we provide meals for; our Meals on Wheels program, so we provide meals Monday through Saturday for them and outreach to them, and those are our two anchor programs, the child daycare and senior daycare, and to me those reflect the two most oppressed segments of the population, the very young and the very old, and if it wasn't for these two anchor programs, a lot of families would not be able to work or to go to school, continue their education.  So, we provide a very caring and safe environment for children, and a lot of our seniors, if we didn't provide these services, they probably would have to be institutionalized, 'cause a lot of them live by themselves.  Now the organization is open Monday through Saturday; Monday through Friday we're open from 6:30 in the morning to 6:00 at night.  On Mondays and Thursdays, we have AA [Alcoholics Anonymous], and it's open 'till 8:00.  And then, on Saturdays we're open till 2 o'clock.  We have a nontraditional day care program with nontraditional hours.  It's open on Saturdays from 6:00 to 12:00, and then we have African drumming that's offered from 12 to 3.  So, we're open seven days a week.  We have a budget of 2.1 million dollars, a staff of thirty-two.  Most of our funding are public dollars from the federal government.  Especially, the majority is from the county government.  We have a contract for our child day care program and our senior day care program, with monies from Western Missouri Area Agency on Aging, and we also have foundation monies from the St. Luke's Foundation and the Cleveland Foundation, the Gunn [ph.] Foundation, the Brewing [ph.] Foundation; I think I've mentioned all of them. And then we charge some fees based on income for the different services we provide.  We also get funding from United Way services; about six percent of our budget reflects United Way, so their dollars are important.  And there are a total of nineteen neighborhood centers like East End in Cleveland on the East and West Side, and we're one of the oldest and the largest of the neighborhood centers.  We have a real good staff, excellent board.  We're approaching our 100th anniversary, which will be 2007.  We have an annual, we just started last year having an annual fund campaign, which we have done very well.  Some of our supporters are Hathaway Brown School [Shaker Heights, Ohio], Hanna Perkins [School, Shaker Heights, Ohio], have been very good supporters of us, and a lot of other individual supporters over the years throughout the community.
Story_ID: 109211
Speaker 1: Can you--let me just pause for a minute--can you tell me how Hathaway Brown [School], a private all-girls' school at Shaker Heights, Ohio, supports East End programs here in the city of Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: You know, we provide a lot of community services, you know, for students at higher education in and secondary.  Hathaway Brown requires their seniors to do community service projects and they went on the website and found out about East End, made contact with us, so for the past four years, the senior students at Hathaway Brown, which is an all girls' school, have done community service here at East End Neighborhood House, providing tutoring for our after school program, and then for some of the in-school programs that we have.  So, they took it upon themselves starting two years ago, the senior class, through a fundraising event, to raise funds for East End Neighborhood House last year and--well--the year before last and last year, and from this one event, the first year they raised $12,000, which they gave to us, last year they raised $20,000, which they gave to us, and now we have used that money to add to our endowment and the money that they've given us, we've earmarked it as the Hathaway Brown Endowment.  But, they've taken on community and social responsibility and have been a real good supporter and partner of us, you know, over the years and we look forward to that continued relationship.
Story_ID: 109212
Speaker 1: --Let me go back and say about social services in Cleveland [Ohio].  These are really some tough times with the decrease in funding, increase in compliance, and a lot of what we do, just to be very perfectly honest with you, is I would say, social pacification to some extent, and we wear a number of different roles as far as neighborhood-based social service, community-based social service, our concern, where we continue to do advocacy and where we used to be provided monies for advocacy in the past, funders now, starting about, I guess, the early 1980s, moved away from providing funding for community organizing and for us to do advocacy, even though we continue doing it.  A lot of corporate Cleveland did not like to see us involved in protesting them as far as certain things that they weren't doing, reinvesting within the community, and certain things that reflected inequities on their part.  So, the result of that, and Cleveland operates a lot like a big plantation.  I'll just be perfectly honest, probably a lot of urban cities function like a large plantation, where you have the status quo, whereas in the past it used to be mostly European American.  Now, you can add because of some of the class divisions, some African Americans that are part of that plantation that basically operate as gatekeepers for the status quo.  They basically work against what I consider that is in the best interest of the majority of the population in Cleveland.  The majority of the population in Cleveland is African American, and part of that has been substantiated by our study that was done that we were involved in by the Ford Foundation that they did about two years ago, where they were looking at how they could better spend their money in the African American community.  So, what they ended up doing was Ford Foundation and they hired this African American consulting company to do the study, but they had these focus groups around the country in urban, predominantly African American areas to talk about some of the problems around leadership and philanthropy within African American communities and they came to Cleveland and East End Neighborhood House was involved with some of our youth, some of the adults, and they had a nontraditional representation that they met with that were part of this focus group, which was a variety; you know, some of the status quo, some of your social activists, young people, older people, private sector, public sector.  But one of the things they concluded, which really reflected the conclusions of these focus groups around the United States relative to the African American community is that within the African American community, there exists a caste system between the black-haves and the black have-nots, and it's getting worse instead of better, where you have the black have-nots that are basically writing off in some of their gatekeeper positions, and maintaining a status quo for the corporate larger city areas, writing off the African American community, and again, like I said it's getting worse instead of better in that even though there have been gains quantitatively in black leadership's political leadership within urban areas and larger cities, where you have large numbers of African Americans, that the conditions, instead of getting better, have gotten worse, even with black mayors and other black elected officials, that there's a little bit of power and redistribution of wealth is limited to whom they surround themselves with, but isn't trickling down to the masses of people, 'cause a lot of them have been coopted, and I guess in order to get an office, there are favors that they have to pay back, etcetera, etcetera.
Story_ID: 109213
Speaker 1: And another person that did a study on this too, is Bill Nelson, who is a retired political science professor from Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], and he did, maybe about ten years ago, a study, a research paper on the 21st district caucus, which was part of a book that he did that talked about the evolution of the 21st district caucus, that was really responsible for the election of Carl Stokes, and other black elected officials, and how it basically formed as a result of blacks not being able to have any type of leadership positions within the Democratic or Republican party, so they created their own party that worked to our benefit to get black elected official star Carl Stokes, elected, so in the Democratic and Republican party, he tells about when Professor Nelson saw how successful it was, they really bought off the leadership of the 21st district caucus and made them part of, really the democratic leadership, and it really diffused, to some extent, the power and potential of the 21st district caucus, and it changed into the 11th district caucus, and now 11th district caucus has gone out of business, so, to some extent, they were, this powerful important organization, just like Jesse Jackson's Rainbow[/PUSH] Coalition, has basically been coopted by the status quo that may benefit a few elected officials, and few black professionals and entrepreneurs to the disadvantage of the masses of African Americans; then again, the masses of African Americans not holding this leadership elected or appointed, you know, accountable but a lot of it has to do with as far as limited information that the masses get.  When you look at the number of African American newspapers in the past compared to today and as far as it's a lack of information that you get from the mainstream media, as well as African American newspapers.  We just don't get as much as we used to get in the past, so you have a misinformed, uninformed community that's really aware of what is going around, and the popular culture plays into this too, you know, BET [Black Entertainment Television] no longer is owned by BET in the news, and with [HM] Tavis [Smiley] being on BET, I'm glad he's on public radio now, you know, there's concerted efforts as far as keeping information, you know, from us.  So, again, that's part of, I got started talking about this relative to social pacification and our role as advocates, even though we're involved, it's been very limited and had to do just with status quo as far as what they will fund, what they will not fund, what they will allow, what they will not allow, and how you're slapped on the hand if you go against the status quo directly and indirectly, by gatekeepers and other folks.
Speaker 2: So, I hear you saying then that even as you deliver all of these important social services, especially to the elderly and to the very young, that social services alone won't solve all the problems of the black community and neither, perhaps, will politicking by itself.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  It's gonna take a combination of our faith-based organizations that need to come together as a community better than they are now, and be more supportive of social service issues.  We need some support from them, so it's going to take all of those institutions and folks coming together as a community the way that we did in the past.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which we're moving away from and we're becoming more tribal-ized and operating as tribes today as in the past.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 109214
Speaker 1: Can we talk for a while then about that cultural component, 'cause I heard you say a little while ago that you also offer African drumming--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --here at East End [Neighborhood House, Cleveland, Ohio], and I know that the [National] Rites of Passage program has been associated with your work in the community for a number of years, and now you've said something about the faith-based initiatives that black people can control for themselves in their own communities.  How has East End sort of figured into all of that, okay, in the near quarter of a century now that you've been here as executive director?
Speaker 2: One of my interests relative to the development of my children as far as the way my wife [Marquita McAllister Hill] and myself have socialized and educated them, you know, the importance of culture; not only knowing who we are as African Americans but also knowing that there is more to us than 1619 to 2004.  You know, there are thousands of years of history and culture who we were prior to 1619.
Speaker 1: And why 1619, what's happening in that year?
Speaker 2: You see, well you know, 1619 is Jamestown [Virginia], the first African American, twenty African Americans who were brought to this country as slaves, so they look at 1619 to the present, which is close to 400 years, but again, that 400 years, really when you look at enslavement, you look at post-enslavement, really you only look at thirty-four years, say from 1964-65 [1965] to 2004, with the third round of Civil Rights legislation, that we really have been "free," "desegregated," only thirty-two years.  So, most of our history within America has been under enslavement, sharecropping, segregation, de jure, not de facto, so only a short period of time that we could consider ourselves in a mode of becoming free, so a lot of that history of what we were relative to strength is part of that 400 years, 'cause there was strength and there was resistance as part of that that's important but also looking at prior to enslavement relative to our African experience.  So, we have always as a family and as a community organization, have seen that as being very important, to look at both sides of our African American experience and our African experience, so we've integrated that within our child daycare curriculum, within all of our curriculum, the importance of Kwanzaa, and being one of the founders of the Greater Cleveland Kwanzaa Alliance that existed for a number of years, African American Family Congress, but our African American history, during Black History Month, we can celebrate Black History Month, but we do it the other eleven months out of the year along with that one month, so it's a very cultural important part.  Rites of Passage as it relates to that is a very integral part of that and an interest of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 109215
Speaker 1: Can we talk, then, as we prepare to start--close out this segment and start the next one, talk in some detail about the [National] Rites of Passage program, because in preparing for this interview I read some materials suggesting it's not just for young African American males, but also there are young women who are benefiting from Rites of Passage programs nationally, so let's talk about that in the next segment.
Speaker 2: Rites of Passage is a word, 'cause if you were to go to Africa now, the continent, wherever, and ask about Rites of Passage, they'd look at you like you're crazy.  Nothing in their language translates into Rites of Passage, 'cause really something that is subsumed not only in Africa, but among indigenous people in other continents, as part of their socialization process.
Story_ID: 109216
Speaker 1: All right, Mr. Hill, I would like to talk with you now about this nationally recognized program, [National] Rites of Passage [Institute], in--that you are responsible for launching in greater Cleveland [Ohio].  It has sort of taken off.
Speaker 2: I'd say, yeah, myself and my wife [Marquita McAllister Hill].  Anything I do, you really can't separate, I can't separate her from, I mean, 'cause her influence is knowledge information, it's all part.  So it's really been co-authored, co-facilitated through the both of us, based on our experience as husband and wife and as parents.
Speaker 1: So when was it founded, and what's the basic content of the program?
Speaker 2: Well again, rites of passage, the term rites of passage was coined in 1907, by a French anthropologist named Arnold van Gennep, based on his research of how indigenous groups socialize their--the different age sets into life passages, the crisis periods that we go through from conception to death.  Usually when we think of rites of passage, we think of it relative to adolescence, but really rites of passage reflect life stages from early childhood to death and even after death becoming an ancestor.  The way that I define rites of passage is it is a process.  It's not a program.  You really have to think of it as a life cycle development process.  It's really a ritual.  It's a human development ritual for dealing with life passages and crises from birth to death, and to me, the way I define it, operationally define it, is a process for regenerating community, 'cause, first of all, we're not born men and women.  We're born males and females, so we have to be socially and culturally developed into manhood and womanhood.  And, in the different phases of a man and woman, you know, midlife, which is really a new Western life phase that we go through midlife, and then you're talking about the onset of eldership, early eldership, and then late eldership, and then death and in transition.  So, again, my purpose for doing it is dealing specifically with what is known specific for is adolescence; helping young people to make it from childhood to adulthood and not having to do it by themselves, but there is a support of adults and community.  But, in order to do that, you can't do that unless adults have gone through that process.  How're you gonna take children through something that you have not gone through as a ritual through ceremony, through initiation?  So, it's been necessary, 'cause African term never develop your shield on the battlefield, so we have found ourselves concurrently having to regenerate the community as well as establish and create the community among adults.  So, there has been two emphases; first of all, to create a critical mass and community of adults that will serve community and serve young people, facilitate the rites of passage process.  And then, the young people themselves, a process for helping them to become men and women and to become adults.  So, the process is--I basically used my own children; some of the socialization informally and formally in raising them, and then based on some of my field study, field research, reviewing the literature, coming up with a reinvented process for doing rites of passage through East End Neighborhood House [Cleveland, Ohio].
Story_ID: 109217
Speaker 1: And first start off with my children again, going back to them, had a program called Simba, Simba Wachanga, which is Kiswahili for the young lions, a program for my sons and their male friends in the neighborhood, and then my daughters, adding them a malaika, a malika component, which is Kiswahili for angels, so it is Simba Wachanga and Malika network that we ended up based on our experience with our own children and their friends, doing it at East End Neighborhood House [Cleveland, Ohio] through the youth that were part of the East End Neighborhood House program, and then, and that really started I guess you would say around the mid '80s [1980s], you know, the mid '80s, [1980s] and really the efforts also being, the rites of passage efforts being an extension of Kwanzaa, the Kwanzaa experience, and because the rites of passage that we do at East End Neighborhood House is really an extension of Kwanzaa and the pragmatic applications of the minimum moral value system that comes out of Kwanzaa known as Nguzu Saba, thank to [HM] Dr. Maulana Karenga and his Kawaida theory that our dilemma is cultural and the importance of culture as an institution added to economics and politics; you know, culture is a base that you have to have part of, that effort.
Speaker 2: So, am I correct then in assuming that this isn't necessarily a religious program.  It's more cultural-spiritual?
Speaker 1: It's cultural-spiritual.  We, you know, I differentiate between religion and spirituality, and you know, my own interpretation of religion has been a work in progress that reflects an attempt to institutionalize spirituality; a work in progress in an attempt to institutionalize spirituality.  I don't believe spirituality could be institutionalized, and but there are some people that are attempting. And then, still have an understanding of our religion, post-modern, pre-modern, what sustained our indigenous ancestors on the continent.  Even if it wasn't considered or looked upon as a modern religion, it was a sense of spirituality where the earth is looked upon as a living, breathing, organism; the closest manifestation of the creation being nature as opposed to some people literally wanting to translate that in Deuteronomy [sic, Genesis] that man should have dominion over the earth, and interpret that as man suppressing, dominating the earth and not really appreciating it as being an extension or manifestation of what we know as our Creator.  So, there is still a lot of work that we have to do around understanding the difference between religion and spirituality, and especially religion as it was practiced in pre-modern Africa, my ancestors there.  A good place for starting with that, especially for Christians, another holy place for us other than the Middle East should be Ethiopia.  A lot of people don't realize that Christianity started in Ethiopia in the fourth century, and the weight of the hands and it continues to be practiced there.
Speaker 2: It is an interesting footnote that you inserted.  I thank you for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I think rightly so, most of African American history starts with West Africa, because it is where most of the slaves are transported from, but there are some very significant cultural things associated with East Africa, and especially Ethiopia.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: A really dynamic culture takes off there very early on in the Christian era, or the Common Era, C.E.
Speaker 1: One of the fastest growing religions among African Americans in this country is (unclear), they are a very fascinating religious spiritual system.  But as far as Rites of Passage, again, it is not a religious movement.  It involves culture and spirituality, and those that are involved in Rites of Passage reflect many denominations and many faiths.
Story_ID: 109218
Speaker 1: So what are the principles, and you mention the principles of Kwanzaa.  Are they basically the principles also stressed through the [National] Rites of Passage [Institute] programs?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I've developed a curriculum called The Journey, that is based on Nguzu Saba, which is Kiswahili for Seven Principles, and those principles have basically been and basically we have each of--the curriculum itself has goals and activities and sub-goals, that are related to each of the principles that can be used, really, for an entire year relative to depth and breadth and what age group that you're working with.  I mean, it is really for young people between the ages of eight and eighteen years of age that this curriculum could be useful, so I have a curriculum which reflects a youth workbook, and an organizational manual for how to utilize the process, and we provide training also, but the principle, the values of the curriculum, basically, the first one would be Umoja, which is unity; and Kujichagulia, self-determination; Ujima, collective work and responsibility; Ujamaa, cooperative economics; Nia, purpose; Kuumba, creativity; and Imani, faith.  But since then, we've added an eighth principle 'cause again, [HM] Dr. Maulana Kaurenga gave us the principles or the values of the minimum moral value system, so we've added an eighth principle, which is called Heshima.  Heshima is Kiswahili for respect, and the reason we added that eighth principle has to do with a lot of the young people that we work with in gangs and not in gangs, a lot of the crime or violence has to do with what they say, "being dissed."  "Dissed" basically being disrespected.  So, the importance of respect relative to young people, you know, having this need for respect.  In order to give respect, you have to receive respect.  But that's why it's important in working with adults that go through our training. You know, one of the sections for the adult training has to do with the understanding of youth culture and the evolution of youth culture relative to their language, relative to their music, relative to their dress.  Looking at rap, looking at hip-hop, I mean, there are a lot of things about hip-hop, some of the videos and things I don't like, but there's a lot of positive things and a lot of things underground that have never been surfaced.  The influence of rap and hip-hop relative to youth in other countries in a positive sense.  Usually we just hear the negative part of it, but there's a lot of positive things.  The evolution of that and where it fits into the continuum of our development as a people is part of that.
Story_ID: 109219
Speaker 1: We know that this oral history interview is gonna be a part of the archive in Chicago [Illinois], a special collection that's also connected to the Chicago Public Library and the Library in the State of Illinois, but if people want to look at some of your publications, articles, books, the curriculum that you mention, what are some of the titles or other writers that they could refer to if they want to get more information about rites of passage, as an ideology perhaps, in the United States.
Speaker 2: What I've done over the years, all my writings and works, you know, I have, they're stored at the Western Reserve Historical Society Black Archives in Cleveland [Ohio].  I also send a lot of my work to the DuSable Museum in Chicago, Illinois.  I do have my book, 'Coming of Age[: African American Male Rites-of-Passage,'] 1992 publication, African American Images out of Chicago, which I'm in the process of updating.  I have a new chapter in a book by Gordon Jacobs, is Africa World Press out in New Jersey.  It's called 'The African Presence in [Black] America,' and I have a chapter in that, that specifically talks about the African Presence in America as it relates to rituals and rites of passage.  That's right off the press, it's brand new.  So, that's available also.  And then, we also have a website, and it's www.ritesofpassage.org [now nropi.org]. And it's, we keep it current, and it has an archives of articles that I've written and other people have written too.  Other folks that are authorities in this area that have done a lot of writing, one of them has passed on within the last couple of years is Dr. Nsenga Warfield-Coppock.  She has been, she was a prolific writer in the area of rites of passage, especially for females.  Lots of--she's done lots of writings and published works but Dr. Nsenga Warfield-Coppock. Also--
Speaker 1: And how's her last name spelled? Warfield, hyphen?
Speaker 2: Coppock, C-O-P-P-O-C-K. And she had a company called The Baobab publishing company [Baobab Associates, Inc.].  Her husband, the family is continuing that work out of the Washington, D.C. area.  Another person that has done a lot of research in writing is [HM] Useni [Eugene] Perkins out of Chicago, Illinois.  He's a, one of the elders and one of my mentors.  You got Hannibal Afrique out of Chicago.  He is now in Port Gibson, Mississippi.  He's another elder in the area.  He's done a lot of writing.  Another elder in the area that's done a lot of writing as a pioneer would be Preston Wilcox, who is now in his seventies, out of New York City, or as he said, "The country of Harlem," New York, Preston Wilcox.  [HM] Haki Madhubuti and his work has contributed to the whole Rites--you know, the number of students that have written dissertations, I could think of four of the students that have gone through our training, Dr. Debra Wilcox, her dissertation is on rites of passage and when you get inside of Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] and there is a, I think it's called MCI [ph.] out of Ann Arbor, where you get all the dissertations and thesises [sic, theses] that have been written and you could do a search on dissertations and these related to rites of passage and they will come up, and again, Dr. Debra Wilcox, her dissertation will come up and there are three others I can't think of off the top of my head that have written on rites of passage and many around the country and outside the united states, so there is some research empirical studies done on rites of passage, and rites of passage is a work, again, a process that's a work in progress.  One of my concerns with rites of passage, you know, in this phase of my life is how do you maintain integrity of rites of passage, 'cause there have been many that have abused rites of passage as a ritual and see it as more of a faddish type of thing that is done through as a microwave program, and not understanding what is out there on rites of passage is a very small amount of information based on our experiences in rites of passage.  Another good person too, I'm thinking of, is Dr. Ron Grimes, G-R-I-M-E-S.  He is out of a university in Canada, who has a book called 'Reinvented Rituals' [sic, Deeply into the Bone: Re-Inventing Rites of Passage'] that focuses in on rites of passage on chapter three in there.  He talks about Rites of Passage program here at East End Neighborhood House and what we've done to the National Rites of Passage Institute, which I founded in 1993, which has trained over 800 individuals, adults from 20 cities, the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], and Toronto, Canada, and we did a survey of those, the impact on children and the number of children that those that have gone through the training are serving, and based on our random sampling survey, it is 15,000 that are being reached by these individuals that have been trained.  But, going back to the point of just maintaining the integrity of Rites of Passage, there have been individuals that have and are abusing rites of passage and the way it's being used.  one of my concerns is around rites of passage and using rites of passage as a cult, or creating it as a cult relative to the community that comes out of it.  There is some abuse in that area that we have to be aware of, so, again one of my emphases now is how do you maintain the integrity of rites of passage in a positive sense in the best interest of those that are alive and the yet unborn, because again, it's an important process that has been used from the beginning of time to the present, even though it wasn't called rites of passage, for socializing individuals into adulthood, manhood, and womanhood, and the different phases of life that they go through, and for regenerating community.
Story_ID: 109220
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Hill, I said earlier in our conversation that there are usually three main ideas that come to mind when I think about your work in the community.  First, your family, and then the work at East End [Neighborhood House, Cleveland, Ohio], and then [National] Rites of Passage [Institute].  First, as a local program and then one that gained national and, perhaps, international acclaim.  And so, that brings me to the end of what I wanted to talk about, but this is your story.  So, I want to make sure that you've said everything that you wanted to say about the significance of your work as an African American man at the beginning, now, of the 21st century.
Speaker 2: Yes, to summarize real quick, you know, as far as the importance, it has to do with the importance of family and community, and family and community is inseparable.  They work, they should work hand in hand.  You can't separate them.  My wife [Marquita McAllister Hill] and I have been successful as a family, but with the assistance of our community, immediate community of kin and blood and non-kin and blood, the importance, too, of just relationships; the relationship between my wife and myself.  Any relationship is give and take.  Most young people today tend to be very rigid and not flexible in relationships and as far as their expertise and it's been a growing process.  My wife and I have grown with our children.  We've grown together.  We haven't stopped growing.  A lot of times, we as males sort of forget our partners, our soul mates, our wives, our girlfriends, and my wife has been very important.  Not only is she a wife, she's a friend and we've grown together, we've developed together, and she's been very important as part of my development of who I am.  I mean, you know, we're basically severed halves and she's been very important as far as my development and what I'm involved in and what I do, adding to what I do, and very important.  The children also; all my children are different.  Sometimes we take them for granted.  We want to lump them all together, but they're all individual.  They have their own unique personalities and all of us aren't perfect, and we have to do the best that we can to understand and respect them as individuals and not be too pushy.  They're not gonna be with us forever.  We have to support them in whatever decisions that they make.  As far as the community, we as an African American community, where we've been, come from, reflects a strong foundation.  We must never forget that foundation.  The importance of culture; there are some things that are good to assimilate in, there are some things that we shouldn't assimilate in.  There are some things that we carry with us that have been good for us, good for the country, good for the world.  As far as what we've contributed to the world, we cannot take that for granted.  We must always remember that, and never let people forget that.  Also, what we do and what we yield in the community is very important.  One of my concerns, again, is this class division that exists among African Americans about better than thou because of education status.  Some of our elders in our community refuse to nurture and bring others along.  They want to die in the positions that they're in.  They don't want to move over and make room for others; especially in Cleveland [Ohio] and around the country.  Cleveland tends to be a very acultural city; you know, we have to do better in that arena of understanding the importance of culture.  Relative to the importance of spirituality and religion, it's been very important in our past and continues to be important today, and will continue to be important in the future.  I believe in a creator, I believe in all religions and denominations.  I'm a little of everything, Islamic, Christianity, even though I was baptized, my grandmother [Eugenia Hill], if she was alive, she would jump on me if I didn't say this, but Antioch Baptist Church is where I was baptized and that's my family church.  But, again, we have to understand the difference between religion and spirituality, understand that, and then the religion that brought us through enslavement, the religion and spirituality that was practiced on the continent of Africa, understand that, not discount that.  Also, it's important relative to, you know, I'm at the end of my career at East End Neighborhood House, and involved in succession planning and developing my endowment; my years here have been very good, East End has been good to me.  My family and I have tried to be good to East End, and we haven't been able to do it by ourselves because the staff I had over the years, the board I've had over the years have contributed to it.  Also, my special interests in areas of rites of passage.  In order understand rites of passage, you have to understand rituals.  Rites of passage is nothing more than a ritual.  A lot of rituals, when we think of rituals we think of something negative, the way that it's been stereotyped within our country during this time and space, but rituals reflect the church, rituals reflect spirituality, rituals respect the law; all of 'em are based on rituals.  So there are some rituals that have been useful for us that we've discarded that we need to get back to, but understanding the importance of Rites of Passage as a ritual.  Rites of passage is important for the future as far as regenerating the community and developing young men and women; but again, it's just not, shouldn't be looked upon relative to adolescence.  Again, you have to look at rites of passage as a ritual, human development ritual from childhood through adulthood and beyond.  Again, what I'm saying, where I am today, to those who have come before us.  I'm committed to those that are unborn and will come after, and doing whatever I can during the period of time that I have left for those that are still alive.  But, we have to do this together.  It's been a real honor and pleasure to be part of this presentation with History Makers.  I think this is important to chronicalize and I want to thank Regina [Williams, interviewer] and Matt [Matthew Hickey, videographer].  I haven't spoken this much and this long in I don't know when, but it's been a real good, true experience.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you for sharing your story.
Story_ID: 109221
Speaker 1: Tell us about this photo, please.
Speaker 2: My children always get a kick out of this picture and others that come into the house, kids seeing Mr. Hill as naked but, again, I'm the oldest in my family and this was, I really don't know how old I was, I would say I'm probably maybe three months in this picture and, again, I was born November 6, 1945, in Cleveland, Ohio, so this is right after I was born, three months being born at Mary B. Talbert Hospital, which is a Salvation Army Hospital in the central area of Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess in this picture I would say I'm either eight or nine years of age and, at that time, I was living at 12309 Oakfield [Avenue] in Cleveland and this was after we had been shopping for school clothes for the new school semester and I have on one of my new shirts that my mother [Mabel Craig Hill] bought me.
Speaker 1: This here is my graduation picture from John Adams High School in 1964, Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is picture of myself, Paul Hill, Jr, my wife, Marquita McAllister Hill, and I would say in this picture, I'm in my late twenties or early thirties.  I would say thirty, 'cause my beard is still black, so I would say early thirties.  I was always prematurely gray and Marquita with her big glasses on, so I would say, yeah, we were in our early thirties.  I was probably thirty, she was probably like twenty-eight.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This photo here is a campaign photo for some campaign literature in 1987.  I don't know if I was stupid or smart, but folks convinced me to run for mayor of East Cleveland, so this was some of my campaign literature right here, a picture of myself and wife.  At that time, 1987, I guess I was in my forties; somewhere in my forties, not exactly sure, haven't been able to do the math yet, but this is in our house at 15030 Terrace Road in East Cleveland, Ohio, in front of the fireplace.
Speaker 2: This here is a photo.  It's about five years, about four or five years old, of my family; everybody including my wife, Marquita, up above her is my son, Jason, then below Jason is myself with the beard.  Below me is my youngest child, Maren, M-A-R-E-N.  Next to Maren is Courtney, my second daughter, Courtney Hill.  Next to Courtney is Raina, R-A-I-N-A.  Raina is daughter number six.  Above Raina is my daughter Greer, G-R-E-E-R, my oldest daughter.  Next to Greer is Fanon, F-A-N-O-N, named after Frantz Fanon, my youngest son.  Below Fanon is my daughter, Mara, M-A-R-A, and we've already talked about Jason, my oldest son.  This is at our home, 15030 Terrace Road, a get together picture during one of the holidays.  Only three of my children in the picture live in Cleveland, the other four live in, well one is in West Virginia, one is in Virginia, and then two are in Maryland.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself visiting my daughter, Courtney, in Montclair, Virginia.  The picture is about a year old, and this is during the summer and I'm holding my granddaughter, Aya, A-Y-A.  That's a Ghanian word; it stands for self, a very determined person and her personality is very determined, but that's my granddaughter, Aya.  I really enjoy being a grandparent, especially a grandfather since I didn't know my grandfathers.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: Yes.  This is a recent photo within the last eight months of the newest addition to our family, my grandson, Evan, E-V-A-N, Evan Paul Hill, and that's a picture of my wife, Marquita, and myself at the hospital in Montclair, Virginia, or Dumfries, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself, Paul Hill, Jr., and Marquita McAllister Hill when we took a family vacation to Disney World in Orlando, Florida.  That was about, probably about six years ago, about five or six years ago.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brothers and my uncle, myself, Paul Hill, Jr., in the very front is my brother, different months different, younger than I am, Ronald Hill, who is Head of the West Missouri Area Agency on Aging here in Cleveland, and then above my brother, Ronald Hill, is Victor Hill.  Victor Hill is my younger brother.  He's thirteen years younger than I am.  He's Assistant Athletic Director at Kent State University in Kent [Ohio]; and then, my Uncle Robert Craig.  He died last year.  He was ninety-eight years of age and he was the one when my mother came to Cleveland that he raised along with my Aunt Claire, and at that time he was living, he was the oldest Uncle on my mother's side that was alive.  This is a picture at my cousin, Dorothy Craig Rambo's, R-A-M-B-O, house in Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Ready?
Speaker 1: This is a Christmas picture, maybe about four Christmases ago.
