Story_ID: 361047
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewing today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My full name is Johnny Holmes [HistoryMaker Sergeant Johnny Holmes], I'm, I'm original, seven, six, one [761st Tank Battalion].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Could, could, could you spell your name for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  J-O-H-N-N-Y, H-O-L-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Alfred.
Speaker 1: Alfred.  Okay.  All right.  Do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, they used to call me Bobo, but what the heck.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, three, twenty-one [September, 3, 1921], Alliance, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Tank commander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's what you used to do when you were in the [U.S.] Army, right?
Speaker 2: When I was in the Army.
Speaker 1: And, and you were a member of the famous 761st (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 761st Tank Battalion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, what did you do for a living?
Speaker 2: Oh, I worked for the Doehler corporation [Doehler-Jarvis Company]--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?  The Doehler?
Speaker 2: D-o--oh, God.  D-O-E-H-L-E-R.
Speaker 1: H-L-E-R.  Okay.  You worked for the Doehler corporation--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Chicago (pause).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Today's date.  Hm.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll tell you, it's the--well, I think it's the 12th, December the 12th.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's right.  2006, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Where are we now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: 2647A, South Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: All right.  Here in Chicago, right?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  Okay.
Story_ID: 361048
Speaker 1: There are five lightweight questions that they ask me to ask everyone and they, they only require a short answer.  First question is, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  What color's that car out there?
Speaker 1: Red.  That's it?  Okay.  Right.  Do you, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I, I, I like hm, my favorite food is--I haven't had it in a long time, so--I, I, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) okay.  You got a lot of favorites?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Do you have a lot of favorite foods?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of 'em.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  July.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  California.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, one of the things that I -- that I like very much, is travel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I love to, to, to travel Southwest [Southwest Airlines Co.].
Story_ID: 361049
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [John Holmes] side, but I'll start with your mother's side of the family, okay?  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Anna Marie Hudson [Anna Hudson Holmes].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sir, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But do you--can you give us a guess, like was she born around nineteen, I mean, 1900 or thereabouts, you think?
Speaker 2: I'd say my mother probably was about 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  'Cause you were born in 1921?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was she about twenty, twenty-one when she had you, or was she older?  Do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, she, she had, she had us about, my sister and I--my sister's dead now--about, I'd, I'd say 1902, 1903.
Speaker 1: All right.  So probably around that time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do, do you know her birthdate?  The month or year, or, or the month or day?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  Was Hudson her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hudson.
Speaker 1: Hudson.  Okay.  What can you tell us about her side of the family and what did--what, what do you know about them?  How, how far back can you trace them, that side?
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, did, did your mother talk about her family at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: On my father's side--
Speaker 1: Well, on your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did your mother--was your mother born in, in Chicago [Illinois], or Evanston [Illinois], or--
Speaker 2: No, she was born in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know where?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But, so did, did she talk about moving to Chicago?  Why she came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: I don't, don't, I really wouldn't know.  I wouldn't know.
Speaker 1: Did she have, have any other relatives here in, in Evanston or Chicago?  Was she--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had an aunt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So she had a sister?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was a great aunt.
Speaker 2: You see she, she would be now, if she was living, she would be--oh, and J--and Jane [ph.] was, she was a lovely old woman too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was your mother's sister or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's sister.
Speaker 1: Okay. Jane, okay.  But did your mother go to school here, or in Alabama?  Did she?
Speaker 2: Ohio.
Speaker 1: In Ohio, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you were born in Alliance, Ohio right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so, so your mother moved to Alliance first, I guess, before you, but you got here, all right.  So did she talk about why she moved to Alliance?  Or, or did, did she have relatives there or something or--
Speaker 2: She--I think it was the Ak- let me see, what would it be now?  Akron Typesetting [Akron Typesetting Company, Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she work for them?  Or does she--
Speaker 2: I don't know whether she worked for them, or whether she sold whiskey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's a (laughter)--did, did she?  Did she sell whiskey for a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So that was the days, during the days of Prohibition, right?  So, well a lot of people made a living like that because, you could.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  It was a living if you couldn't get a regular job, or something else, it was a way to make a living.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 361050
Speaker 1: So Alliance [Ohio] is near Akron [Ohio] then, right.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, uh-huh.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Right near Akron.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You're about twenty, about twenty-nine miles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And I don't know if it's true or not, I'm trying--but I, I think there's a railroad that originates or passes through Alabama that goes right towards Akron and Cleveland [Ohio], I believe.  Is that true?  Did you have a--any knowledge of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, that would be the--oh, that one, that railroad was, it, it, it went from, through Alliance to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.
Speaker 2: Then it would, you, you, you would get off and then you would transfer over to the train going west.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think it originated down south in the--or wait, it went down south through Alabama at some point before going south, going the other way.  I think, 'cause I've heard stories of people, that a lot of people from Alabama, and Cleveland, Akron, and a lot of them in Detroit [Michigan].  I think, it's the same, has something to do with the railroad alliance, but, let me ask you, now did your mother [Anna Hudson Holmes] talk about, did she grow up in Alliance or in Alabama?
Speaker 2: She, basically, she grew up in Alliance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Akron.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And is there a story about how she got involved in bootlegging?
Speaker 2: It was, it, it was the means to an end.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it, it--but I can very well remember from seven and eight years old, she, she used to teach me how to, oh, I'd say, you know, how to be a slicker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember one time that there was, there was a, a, there was a, there was a, a white fellow that, he, he, he was just quite adamant about bootleg.  So he, he, he just decided that he was just gonna get it himself.  Tanked on, on, on bootleg whiskey.  Would you believe it?  I actually took him, I took him for about eight hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: Took him for eight hundred dollars?  Well, how did that happen?  Well, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well it, I know that I got all of his money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he was actually out of Cleveland.
Speaker 1: So, so your mother was, was basically, she had an establishment where they were selling bootleg whiskey and, or, or liquor, and slicking people basically out of--she knew how to slick, be slick.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did she, did she have a place or something of, a, a establishment?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We had, we had a, we had a lovely home on, on Lake Park Boulevard [Alliance, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, siree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I'm trying to think here.  Did she ever get in trouble?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then my stepfather would have to go to jail for her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she really ran the operation, and your stepfather was the guy that would go to jail if there was problems.  Okay.  So that was their, their deal.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did, did she have, I guess when I was asking about what kind of a place she had, did she have a, a, a social club or something for people?  Or did she have some kind of a setup where you could go and get a drink or, or did you--did they just buy it from her, you know--
Speaker 2: Actually, here's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they would stop by the house, they'd get their whiskey, then they'd sit in the front room, and then they would drink and drink until they got tanked.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Then you'd let them out, right?  Or, I guess, I guess.  I mean, is, is that what happened next?  They got tanked and then what?
Speaker 2: Well, you're asking me a lot of questions now that--it's something that you, you don't like to talk about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, okay.  So did, did your mother go to school in Alliance?  Did, was she a, was she a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, was she able to finish high school and all that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 361051
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can, can, can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: John Burnett [ph.] Holmes [John Holmes].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: If he was living today, oh, he would be 100 and--good God--I guess he'd probably be about ninety-nine or 101, or 102, something like that.
Speaker 1: It's 2006 now, so was, was he older than your mother [Anna Hudson Holmes]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he was slightly older.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So he, he was probably born 1990s, I mean the 1890s.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  1880s, 1890s.  You know, okay.  So but, he was older, he was considerably older than your mother, you said.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, yeah, there was a good chance he was born in the 1880s.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so what do you know about your father's family?  What is--where is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His father was, he was Reverend John--reverend, was a preacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So his grandfather [sic. father] was a Reverend Holmes?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know what denomination he was?  Was he Baptist or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist.  Okay.  Did, did he have a church in Alliance [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His church was in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh, okay.  All right.  So was your father raised in Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: Really, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you know where your father was born?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Richmond, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, you know, all of that's not--actually that, back during that time, people could walk from one place to the other.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, hell, well.
Speaker 1: It would take you a long time to walk from Richmond to Pittsburgh or--
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Or to walk, to walk from Pittsburgh to Alliance.  That probably, what, about a week's walk, right?  I would guess.
Speaker 2: About two or three days.
Speaker 1: Two or three days?  Okay.  Okay, so anything else about your father's side of the family?  I mean, what, what, what else did you know them?  He had a father that was a minister, right?  In Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: Bullshit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was slick too, then.  All right.  Okay.  So you have--okay, is there a--so did your father, so he was passing--he came to Alliance from someplace else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he came to Alliance from Richmond.
Speaker 1: Oh, from Richmond.  All right.  And his father was a pastor in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  But he was born and raised in Richmond.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did he have a chance to go to school in Richmond himself or did he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He did.
Speaker 1: So, what did he go to high school, college?
Speaker 2: Now, that I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you don't have any idea how far he went.
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: But he did go to school in Richmond.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when you say, well, he bullshitted for a living, I mean, are you saying that, I mean, what specific kind of B.S. did he do?
Speaker 2: I, I, I'll say that actually he was, he was a slicker (pause).  You know how it is, back when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You guys kind of hustled.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so what kind of--did, did, did he sell bootleg liquor too, or did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: What?  Did he gamble or--
Speaker 2: He was just a--he would drink with the rest of the fellows, and enjoy themselves, and what the heck.  But--so I knew my father.  Yeah.  'Cause he died in nineteen forty--I think it--he, he probably died in 1945 or 1946.
Speaker 1: This was right after the war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Um-hm.
Story_ID: 361052
Speaker 1: What kind of person was he [Holmes' father, John Holmes]?  What did you, what was he--I mean, he was slick you said, but, but what other qualities did he possess?
Speaker 2: Oh, he worked, my, my dad worked for--.  Who the hell did he work for?  He, he, he came to Evanston [Illinois] and you, you know, you, you--he, he came for, he came to Evanston, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he sent for me and my sister.  She didn't come, I did.  So that, that's kind of like, it was a conglomeration of a whole lot of little things that happened.  You, you, you really don't--I can pretty well remember, because that was, that was when I first met my dad, was out in Evanston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you hadn't met him until--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How, how old were you when you, when you met him?
Speaker 2: I think I was about, probably fourteen or fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were, you were almost grown--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you met your father, okay.  Okay.  So he had a job in Evanston?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't really know him, know him growing up or didn't have a lot of contact with him at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he tell you any stories about his family when, when--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 361053
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's kind of mysterious.  So, what--is, is there a story that--did, did, did your mother [Anna Hudson Holmes] or, or father [John Holmes] talk about how they met?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were, did, did they marry?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They were married?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  And they lived in Alliance [Ohio] when they were together?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know why they split up, or--?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 361054
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Early childhood memories.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your first memory.  Do you have an earliest one, the first you remember?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Not, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now, you grew up in, in Alliance [Ohio] in the beginning right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were in Alliance in the beginning.  Now they were--and then you moved to, you, you visited your father [John Holmes] in Evanston [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: But did you grow up in Evanston, or did you grow up in Alliance?
Speaker 2: Actually, I, I grew up in Alliance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, as, as for us being a--(pause) I really wouldn't know.
Speaker 1: No, that, that's a good answer.  That's what I'm asking.  Is, is there a black neighborhood in Alliance (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Is that where the--was it segregated?
Speaker 2: No it was not segregated.
Speaker 1: It wasn't?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Unh-uh.  Black and white went to school together, they played together as children, they--because actually, let me see, there was Nick Popo [ph.], John Bullock [ph.], Marinney [ph.].  Those were, these were, these were white friends of mine.  These people were people that you could--if I had no bread, I could go to their house and get some bread.  It was just a case of--you knew, you, you, you knew your, you knew who your neighbors were.  And when my dad made bread, they had bread.  So it was nothing for that, for, for us to have interrelated neighbors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me, tell me now, what was your neighborhood like in Alliance?  Were there, were, were there white neighbors that you had in Alliance too?
Speaker 2: There were--I, I, wait, what--Marinney, Bullock, Popos, what was (unclear)--Malovich [ph.].  These people were all neighbors, good friends.
Story_ID: 361055
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Alliance [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) You know, you, you, you're asking me to relate backwards.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And, and, and that is something I can't do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can, do you, do you remember what your neighborhood looked like?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is--
Speaker 2: Oh, I took my first wife [Louise Bradshaw Holmes] back to Alliance.  Yeah.  It's--and my second wife [Anne Smith Holmes], too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I showed her where I was born, where I was raised, and what have you.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what it looked like?  Where, you know, what was it like?
Speaker 2: It was, the houses were the same.
Speaker 1: The same as now?  I mean--
Speaker 2: I, I don't--if, if they haven't torn them down, it's the same.
Speaker 1: Were they frame houses or brick or what?
Speaker 2: They, they, they were frame.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Big houses?  Small houses?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We, we--what in the heck (pause)?
Speaker 1: You said your family lived in a big house?  Your mother [Anna Hudson Holmes] had a big house?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, let me see.  We had the front room, the bedroom, the kitchen--the front room, bedroom, kitchen and one other smaller room.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't a big house.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a big house, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But I took my wife there.  I took my--I said, I said, "This is where I was born and raised."
Speaker 1: Were, were there a lot of cars around when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: What kind of cars?
Speaker 1: I'm asking.  I'm asking you.
Speaker 2: You know, I, you had to, I had go to the store to get a loaf of bread.  I had as far to go to the store, as from here to 35th Street [Chicago, Illinois].  Now, you figure that out.
Speaker 1: It's about five blocks, I guess, right?  We, we're at 26th [Street], to 35th, oh about nine blocks.  Yeah, ok.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So that's almost a mile.  Right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that, that--you just go for broke from there.
Story_ID: 350892
Speaker 1: Just give us a good description of your--where, where you grew up [in Alliance, Ohio].  Now, I, I didn't grow up there, and, and people don't have no idea what it was like growing up in the 1920s.
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord.
Speaker 1: So just let us know what was the difference?  You know, did things cost the same, or did they look the same?  Did they have plenty of cars around, or did you have some cars and horses?  Or what, what was it like?
Speaker 2: It--well, hell.  Good gosh.  You're at--like, like, like what do we have, nine, nine blocks.  And those were long blocks from 263 1/2 North Mahoning Avenue to the store on the corner, was a damn good nine or ten blocks.  And, actually, what it was--the, you, you know, how if, if mama [Anna Hudson Holmes] sent you to the store to get a loaf of bread (pause)--oh, and the first time that, the first time I got, I ever got knocked out, was by my sister.  She, she wanted to go and come right back, and I didn't want to come right back.  And all of a sudden, she just went bam, like that there.  Knocked my ass dead out.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Put me on the wagon and brought me home like that.
Speaker 1: That's pretty rough.  How old was your sister?  Was she much older than you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she, she was twenty--she was about two years older than me.
Story_ID: 350893
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little kid?  What kind of little kid were you?  What were you interested in?
Speaker 2: War.
Speaker 1: War?  Really?  Okay.  Did you know any war veterans from World War I [WWI], when you were--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you could, you, you, you--these were people that were actually fighting.  These were black soldiers that were fighting over in France, and Ger- and, and Germany and what have you.  And World War I, good god. But they didn't want--they had nobody to help them along like they do today.  Like you all are interested in us, they didn't have that.  Because, what you would want to know is, but you know I knew many of--when I was over there I, I, I met many black soldiers that would not come back to this country.  They could not only speak the language fluently, they could just, you know, talk just like you and I.
Speaker 1: Spoke fluent French?
Speaker 2: French, German, they, they were well versed in those.  And it was just a, a, a pain in the butt.  I, I, I just could not understand it.  How is it that this country could ask me to sacrifice my buddies, my, myself.  To sacrifice ourselves, to, to, to do the things that we did, the killing.  'Cause, you know, one of the things that I can very well remember [from World War II, WWII], the first day in combat, it was nothing.  I remember Simmons was my driver, and Simmons, he says, "What do we do with this prisoner, Sergeant Holmes [HistoryMaker Sergeant Johnny Holmes]?"  I said, "We'll kill the son of a bitch, that's what we're gonna do with--we, we're going to blow his fucking brains out, that's all."  And what did Simmons say?  "Don't do that, Sergeant Holmes."  He said, "That's murder."  I said, "You gotta be kidding."
Speaker 1: Now, this is in--
Speaker 2: This was over there in France.
Speaker 1: In France.  This was a German prisoner?
Speaker 2: It's a German prisoner.
Speaker 1: Were those your orders to kill them?
Speaker 2: Kill 'em.  And, and, and then when he reached back and took my driver's, took my, you see, when you, you--the tank commander is in complete control of everything.
Story_ID: 350894
Speaker 1: You were telling a story [about World War II, WWII].  We were trying to get you to talk about childhood, but you went into a story about what happened in combat.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and you were talking about having to kill people at the, because of, I mean the, the high, the commander--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, no.  That, that episode, shit.  You know the funniest thing, if you don't do what you're told to do, you eventually will regret it later on.  And this particular episode that we went on to, the, the German, actually, a sniper shot him dead as he got out of the tank.  The tank was hit--
Speaker 1: But this is your, this is his tank, the German's tank.
Speaker 2: Not, this is--
Speaker 1: Or your tank?  Which one?  Which one?
Speaker 2: This was my tank.
Speaker 1: Your tank, all right.  Your tank was hit.
Speaker 2: Was hit.  So he did--he, he, he jumped up, sniper shot him dead right across the front end of the tank.
Speaker 1: The German?
Speaker 2: The German did.
Speaker 1: Okay, the German was shot, or shot someone?
Speaker 2: No, he shot my driver.
Speaker 1: Oh, he shot your driver.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one that was, felt sorry, prior to that.
Story_ID: 350895
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  Well let's, let's back up then and tell me the complete story.  'Cause there's no sense in jumping in different places.  Let's try to--so you were saying that he was a--this German was a prisoner of yours at one time [in World War II, WWII], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And your driver asked what you should do with him.  And you said you should kill him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, what happened after that?  Was he killed?  I guess he wasn't, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, funniest thing.  Retribution is a, is, is, is a hell of a thing.  You don't kill somebody because you feel sorry for them.  You, it, it, it comes back to haunt you some way or other.  So the sniper, when he, when, when, when Simmons jumped out of the tank, when it was caught, when we caught that 88 [88mm] through the front end, he jumped out of the damn tank and the sniper shot him dead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But this isn't the same person that shot him?  You don't know who, you, you have no way of knowing.
Speaker 2: No, I really don't.
Speaker 1: But he was shot by a German.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay. But did you let the other guy go?  The other guy that--did you kill the other guy?  The German prisoner, or did you let him go?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no.  Unh-uh.  'Cause--
Speaker 1: Well no, you did--did you or didn't you?  I mean did, did you?
Speaker 2: Did, did, did we kill--
Speaker 1: Did you kill that prisoner or not?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that common in those days?  That, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was common.
Speaker 1: The U.S.--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because you know, they talk about the Geneva Convention [Geneva Conventions] and all that now and--
Speaker 2: Bullshit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So it wasn't, it wasn't practiced by our allied forces here.
Speaker 2: You know one of the things that--the Geneva Convention is all right for if you're gonna fight a civilized war.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But then again, you have to stop and think, you put yourself in the same category as that next guy.  So if you wind up giving this guy a break, what's going to happen to the couple of soldiers prior to that?  'Cause see, I've seen that shit.  I saw, I saw a episode that we were in one day.  This sniper had picked off about four of our guys.  Now what I, what was I to do when I captured them?  That's what I asked myself.  What was I gonna do when I got ahold of them, and he's killed four of my people?  I didn't think of the color of those guys, or beast, or man, good God.  They, they were in a haystack.  Now, what was I gonna say, "Hey, they were doing their job."  No, unh-uh.  Because what I'm gonna do then now, I'm gonna just blow their damn heads off.
Story_ID: 350896
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back, let's go back to when you were growing up.  'Cause we, this is a life story, so we try to bring you all up through the training and everything else it took to get to where you were just now.  So what school did you go to in Alliance [Ohio]?  What was the name of your school, do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Boy, you ask me some of the damnedest questions.
Speaker 1: But you said it was a mixed school, right?  You went to a school that was integrated in Alliance, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Black and white were in school together.  All right, and did you go to the same school your whole--
Speaker 2: Well, was the Freedom [Freedom School, Alliance, Ohio] was one.
Speaker 1: Freedom?
Speaker 2: Freedom School.
Speaker 1: Freedom School, okay.  And where did you go to high school?  Was there--or did you go to the same grade school all the time, or was it--
Speaker 2: Nah, I went to--I went to ETHS, Evanston Township High School [Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Evanston Township High School?  Okay.  Okay, so when you were about fourteen, you moved to, to Evanston [Illinois] to live with your father [John Holmes].  And did you graduate from Evanston Township High School?  Okay.  Okay.  So when did you come out of high school?  What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938] or '39 [1939].
Story_ID: 350897
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, was there, was there a big difference in Evanston [Illinois] and Alliance [Ohio]?  I mean, did you like Evanston as compared to Alliance?  Or did you like it better or not as much, or what?
Speaker 2: Oh, one of the things that you have to remember is (pause)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  My pen ran out of ink.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: One of the things that you have to remember is the time (pause).
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what were the times like at--
Speaker 2: You, you didn't--you know, the funniest thing, I don't, I, I--when you, when you're young coming along, you don't stop and think of the--I had white girlfriends, just as well as I had black girlfriends.
Speaker 1: Oh, in, in the 1930s?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's kind of unusual in the United States, but Evanston was a different place, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And you, I--the funniest thing.  I remember the names of most of--Maleva Malovich [ph.].  Maleva was a girlfriend of mine, what was the name of the other girl?  I have to back up some.  'Cause I'm talking about prior to Maleva, was--
Speaker 1: Well, that's not important about the name so much but, but, you said, so nobody criticized you for dating white--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They didn't threaten you or get angry or anything?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.  No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or nobody--
Speaker 2: Only time that we had any anger was when we had the, the, the white southerners that came up during the time that we were going to school.  This is what happened.  I was never called a nigger until we had a confrontation with the white southerners.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then they came in and they put shit in the game.
Speaker 1: So white southerners in Evanston?
Speaker 2: Yes, siree.
Speaker 1: I mean, okay.  So why were they there, were they coming there for jobs or something?  Or work, or--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they're, they're like--they came, they, they came into Alliance, Ohio, and then they--but all of a sudden, as you know, start their same shit that they were used to down south.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying that the, the white people in the North, the different white ethnic groups didn't have the same mentality as the southern whites that came up for jobs during the, that same period.  So, the southern whites brought their prejudices with them when they came up.  But, what was your personality like when you were in high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]?  What did you like to do?  Did you have a favorite subject in high school?  Favorite teacher, or--
Speaker 2: That would depend on who you were and how smart you were.  The only time that I actually encountered--the difference between black and whites was--problem was, it, it was, I didn't realize it, but there was as much prejudice and hate, from where blacks were, the same as whites.  And if you were white, and I was black, if this girl was somebody that I wanted, then what you gonna wind up doing is just going--you're, you're gonna wind up going to school, or hate everything else that you are against.
Story_ID: 350898
Speaker 1: Just to change the subject for a second, I mean, for a minute.  Did you have a favorite course of study in high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]?  Did you, did you like history, math, what, what did you like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved history, math and basically, I did pretty well.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a, were any special teachers or mentors in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Um-hm.  Particularly out there in Evanston [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  You, you, you had to be a, a, a mixture.
Speaker 1: Did you play sports in high school at all?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did you do?  Or what did you play?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved basketball, broad jump--
Speaker 1: So, were you on the track team, or basketball team?
Speaker 2: Track.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you play football at all?
Speaker 2: Nah.
Story_ID: 350899
Speaker 1: Now, how did you like living with your father [John Holmes], I mean, in--
Speaker 2: I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And your mother [Anna Hudson Holmes], did, did your mother stay in Alliance [Ohio]?  Did she still live in Alliance when you were in Evanston [Illinois], or did she move to Evanston too?  So when, when you were in Evanston, was your mother still in Alliance, Ohio?
Speaker 2: My, my, my mother was in Akron [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Akron, okay.  All right.  So she was still living in Ohio (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 350900
Speaker 1: So what did you want to be when you were in high school [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]?  What did you want to, what did you, what did you envision for a career when you got out of school?  Did you have any idea?
Speaker 2: I had an idea that dammit, I'd like to be president of the United States.  But then it, then it dawned on me, why in the hell can I be a president of this country?
Speaker 1: Did you have real good grades in school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Make A's, or?
Speaker 2: A's, Bs, I didn't never go anything below a B.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you, did you graduate with honors or anything, or did you--
Speaker 2: No.  I tell you what.  When I, when I graduated, I was graduating with a B.  But I didn't finish.
Speaker 1: Oh, Okay.  All right.  So what happened?  Did you join the [U.S.] Army before you--
Speaker 2: I did.  There you go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I said I'm, I said I'm going.  My mom said to me one day, she said, "Well son, what are you going to do now?"  I says, "Well," and now, this is my stepmother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I said, "Mom," I said, "I tell you what I wanna do."  I said, "I wanna go to Army," I said, "because it doesn't make sense for me to stay here and, you know, filch off of you."  It didn't make sense to me.  So back during that time, it was, oh, it was nice to be kind of thinking of, on, on your own.  So she says, "Okay."
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people, a lot of teen, teenagers moved from high school to the Army, rather than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But let, let me, is, is there a reason why you left home?  I mean, did you get, not get, was it conflict with your father [John Holmes] that, that made you drop out of high school?  If your grades were, were good then, why did you drop out of high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, I dropped out of high school because I thought it was the right thing to do.
Speaker 1: In what sense?  I mean, because of what?
Speaker 2: Back during that time, forty years ago, forty-six years ago, whatever the hell you want to name it, it was the right thing to do with, with--when I went into the Army, there was no such thing as a black tank battalion.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 350901
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, how did you find out about that?  I don't, we, we know that the [U.S.] Army was segregated in World War II [WWII], so you joined the Army.  Where, where were you stationed first?  Where did they station you?
Speaker 2: It, they stationed us in, no, hold on (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just, just take us through the whole thing from beginning to, yeah.  Take your time.
Speaker 2: What they did, they, they, they sent us to Custer, Michigan.  When we left out of Custer, Michigan, we were assigned to the 758 [758th Tank Battalion].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that a infantry division, or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  It's a tank battalion.
Speaker 1: 758?  Okay.  Now how did that happen?  Because they usually didn't assign black people to tank bat- did you have any idea of, of how that happened.  Was there, were there politicians pushing for that, or how did that happen?  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] pushing for it, or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well tell us.  I mean, just don't, you know--
Speaker 2: You know who, who, you know who was, who was behind that, was Mrs. Bethune Cookman.
Speaker 1: Oh, Mary McLeod Bethune.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: What actually--she was a, a, a staunch believer in integrating the Army.  Now, you might think that Truman [President Harry S. Truman] was actually the guy that was behind, the, the person of blacks fighting in World War II, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: That's not true.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was done actually by Mrs. Bethune Cookman.  Her and her, her and Eleanor Roosevelt.  They were very much interested of us being integrated.  You gotta fight together, goddammit you're gonna, you're gonna die together.  That was it.
Story_ID: 350902
Speaker 1: So you were in Custer, Michigan first, and then they--
Speaker 2: Custer, Michigan, then we went from Custer, Michigan to Fort Knox, Kentucky.  That's with the 758 [758th Tank Battalion].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, with the 758, we branched out from 758 to form the 761st [761st Tank Battalion].
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this: now, the 758 Tank Battalion, now that's a black tank battalion too?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, they would have to be in those days.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, they, they formed the 758 first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: No, actually, it was the 78th Tank Battalion.
Speaker 1: 78th?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then we went (unclear), we got in five hundred more guys, and they made it the 758.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then 758.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, was there a special selection process for the men who were gonna fill this unit out?  Did you have to take a special test or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause a, a tank battalion is different from the regular infantry.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You have to pass a cert- I mean, tell us what happened, how did you, how, how were you selected?
Speaker 2: Actually, you're selected because of what you have up here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, actually, they would, just some type of rigmarole that they would use.  I, I know one damn thing, when they gave me my examination, what I did was just figure out, well, what the hell now.  First, they made me a staff sergeant, and then when they formed 761st, I had, we had moved out from--
Speaker 1: From Fort Knox to--
Speaker 2: From Fort Knox to Camp Claiborne, Louisiana.
Story_ID: 350903
Speaker 1: Where did they train you?  Where did you receive your tank training, your, your specialized training in the--
Speaker 2: Camp Claiborne, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And was there a certain model of tank that you were trained to operate?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what, what model was it?
Speaker 2: It was the, the, the M, M4, oh M4 [sic. M3]--it's the 37mm tank gun (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tank.  Okay.  All right.  So you would, so how long--what was the training like?  What was the training like?  What do they, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, the first, before--prior to that, if you weren't bitten by a damn rattler, or something down there, like some of the fellows were--
Speaker 1: Oh, in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was another, actually, they would put us out into the--on bivouac, we got out on that bivouac, you had the coral snakes to worry about, you have the rattlesnakes to worry about, and you hoped like hell that you didn't get hit by one of those damn rattlers.
Story_ID: 350904
Speaker 1: Now, I heard, I mean, I, when I saw the movie 'Liberators' ['The Liberators'], the movie about the 761st Tank Battalion that was produced by public television [Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)], back in '92 [1992], I think, '91 [1991], '92 [sic. 1993].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There was a, if I remember correctly, they, they stated in the movie that, that a man--at least, well there, there was a lot of conflict between white people on the base, and the black soldiers on the 761st.  They didn't want them to be tank, in a, in a, in a tank unit.  And when some of the fellows would go into town, there was a lot of conflict with the townspeople.  And that one fellow was actually lynched in the town.  Did you, can you, is any of that true?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what happened, I mean, I--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Don't ask me what happened because I was not there when that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, that actually happened while I was in either Alexandria, Virginia; not Virginia, Louisiana [at Camp Claiborne].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or else, I, I, I do know, I do know that some of that happened while I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I heard, I remember the story, if I remember correctly, was that a man was killed and his body was drug through the streets (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On, on rail, on, on, on the railroad tracks, so that it would seem as though a train had hit him.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So, now how did that make you feel, going into, here you were trying to, you know, I mean, what did the [U.S.] Army say to you?  How did the Army explain that?  And what did they do about it?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: Did they even try to explain it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope.
Speaker 1: Or say anything about--
Speaker 2: Nope.  They didn't try to do nothing.
Speaker 1: Well, how did that make you feel?  Did you feel like, hey, I don't--did you feel like you still wanted to do it?  To be a part of this, or, or not?  I mean that, when that, that kind of thing, you know.  I mean, that's pretty dramatic stuff.
Speaker 2: I know.  But one of the things that when I went into combat, one of the things that I wanted to do was be a soldier of fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And to me, what better thing was it than to be a soldier of fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were thinking that, even though you trained in the U.S. military, and you, and a lot of people in the U.S. didn't want you in France, though you were being trained, the training itself might be valuable to be a soldier on your own?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In someplace.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm just saying, a mercenary.  If nothing else, you, you would have the training.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is that what I'm--am I getting this right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. Okay.  Now, what--did you feel, I mean, was the way you felt shared by a lot of your, the other guys in, in your outfit?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Like, like, oh what's the name of the guy, with the, was, what, what where is the, one of the pictures you have over there.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He, he was, he was the same way.  He was like me.  To, to--self preservation, that's the name of the game.  What you do, is you, you, you have got to learn to be a soldier.  A soldier is one who, like, well like, for instance, with every damn conflict that I was in, I thought of me.  Maybe, I think that, maybe a lot of soldiers today, if they thought like I did, you would be, the country would be better off.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In what sense, I mean, what would they do if they thought like you that they're not doing now?
Speaker 2: What, what, what are you asking me now?
Speaker 1: No, you said that if they were, they were more like you were, and thought more of themselves, that it wouldn't be the way it is now.  And I said, well what, what would they be doing differently if they--well, what are they doing that they would have to change?  What's the difference?
Speaker 2: I, I, I think that it would be a better country.
Speaker 1: So are, are you saying that you think that soldiers today are too--I mean, they, they are sold a bill of goods or something, when they go to war and they, they don't look out for themselves like, like they should, or what?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah.
Story_ID: 350905
Speaker 1: So you were trained in Louisiana [at Camp Claiborne], and so where did you go from Louisiana, what, what, are there, there any stories you could tell us about what happened in Louisiana that stand out?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There's some hell of some damn stories I can tell you about Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, tell us a couple.  You know, 'cause we're, well we'll never know 'em, you know?  Unless you tell us.  Can you sit back?  'Cause you get out of the light when you sit forward.  There you go.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually, actually to be a soldier back during that time was about a bitch.  There were times that we didn't go to town for months.  You just made your own recreation.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do for recreation?
Speaker 2: You took your girlfriend and go, and, and sometimes you'd meet, meet her somewhere.  I, I actually, let me see, what was the name of my girlfriend?  I can't, you know, it's the funniest thing, I can't remember her name now.  But actually, I, I don't, I, I, I can't get it all together now.  But, but I do know this much, if I had to, if I had to do this all over again, I don't think I would miss one damn minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, where did you--so you, how long were you in Louisiana?   I mean, where did you go after Louisiana?   I mean, what was the process, where, where did you go?
Speaker 2: Hood, Texas [Camp Hood; Fort Hood, Texas].
Speaker 1: Hood, Texas?  Okay.  All right.  All right.  So, I think, I think Hood, Texas is where they, they lynched the man, I think.  That's the one, that's what I think I, I remember.  Hood, Texas.  Okay.  All right.  So, how long were you in, it was the--let me ask you this.  'Cause the Tuskegee Airmen tell me, that the government kept training them as long as they could so they wouldn't have to send them into combat.  So they kept training them over and over again.  Did you have that same sense, that they were, you were being--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they were stalling and, stalling to keep you here?  Without sending you to the front?
Speaker 2: Yep.  That I agree with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So, so after the Germans decided to bring into the conflict the 7th tank battalion [7th Armored Division], and it kicked the United States' butt, until they just got tired.  They got places over there right now, particularly in Bastogne [Belgium], they got a tank right there in the middle of Bastogne.  I think it's still there.  That tank had got ran into a hornet's nest.  And, actually, that tank got hit from the rear, with the 88 [88mm], because they didn't have to level down on nothing.  That 88 was a bad mother tupper.  Boy, I'm telling you, the best thing that you could do with a 88 is to shoot, to, to hit it with, hit it with every damn thing you had prior to going in.  You had to be able to use tree bursts, everything.
Speaker 1: This is an American tank you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's one of the damn things that I could not figure out.  Why would they give us the, the, the dregs of the [U.S.] Army, to go into combat, why give us something, we had no goddam defense against?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  I'm, I'm misunderstanding.  You're, you're saying that the equipment that you all had, the tanks that you had were not as good, or were they as good or what--
Speaker 2: It was not as good, and it wasn't even worth it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, that, that was--
Speaker 2: I lost four of them over there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what tank were you all assigned?
Speaker 2: Company C.
Speaker 1: I mean--no, what tank did you all have to use as, as, as equipment.  You said it's inferior to--
Speaker 2: The M, the M--
Speaker 1: The M4 [sic. M3] that you were talking about, the one that you were trained on?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the best tank was 88 you said, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: But they let you all have those.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, those, those were Germans.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Germans, all right.  I'm trying to sort it all out.  I don't know, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Germans, man they could take one German tank, with hull (unclear), shit you had, he could pick you off man at three thousand yards.
Speaker 1: So, the U.S. Army was out, out, I mean, the equipment, the German Army's [Heer] equipment was better.  The U.S. had tanks that weren't as good, and that goes across the board then for the United States.  Not just black soldiers had the, had the bad tanks, the whole U.S. Army had tanks that were inferior to the German tanks, you're saying.
Speaker 2: Actually, they could take one German tank and put it in hull (unclear), and if he had a, if he saw you coming across a certain area, if he knocked out that first tank, the rest of them behind was named mud.  They was just damn poor equip-, poorly equipped.  That's why they, that's why they put us in.  Because we not only had the, we had the speed, that's what was important, the speed and maneuverability, with, of, of the high, high velocity 76 [76 mm gun M1].  So if he, if, if, if you had the ability to know what the hell you were doing, you put a tree burst over an area where they are, they ain't got a chance.
Story_ID: 350906
Speaker 1: When were you shipped to, overseas [during World War II, WWII].  I mean, how long was it before you, I mean, you know, what was the interval of time between--
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went into the [U.S.] Army when?  Nineteen--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940].  So it's four years later, you were actually shipped overseas.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So all that time, from '40 [1940] to '44 [1944], were you being trained?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that is a long time to train somebody, isn't it?  As a--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know. And I'm sure you knew what you were doing by, by then so, '44 [1944] you shipped over and, are, are you shipped to France first, or--
Speaker 2: France.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, tell us what happened from, from the time you got to France.
Speaker 2: Well, they, they sent us to Nancy, St. Nicholas [Saint Nicholas de-Port, Nancy, France]area, and from there it was hell to tell the devil.  We lost about, oh I'd say, about seventeen tanks on my first episode.
Speaker 1: Did they have, did, you--were you aware of the names of battles you were in, in those days?  I mean, were you were in certain battles that, that people could identify by name right now?  Or just different skirmishes along the way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what battles were--I mean--
Speaker 2: The Battle of Toulousse [sic. Battle of Tillet], the Battle of Metz (pause). Actually, these were some hell of a damn battles.  You know, it's funny saying, we, we, we not only had the, the actual battles that we were in, but did you ever see a P-47 [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt] get hit?  You haven't, you never seen that?
Speaker 1: Not in real life, of course, no.
Speaker 2: No.  Actually, what they would do, the Germans would do, they'd level down on that first plane coming in, and if, like in, in, in the Battle of Metz, I've seen a plane man actually hit like here, and over here, and he would take out a whole level of planes and German artillery.  But what he would be doing, he would sacrifice his life to protect the guys down below.  They would actually level down on that plane man, and it would take out a section of, of, of force, particularly at the Battle of Metz.  They would take out a whole section of planes, artillery.  Actually, they would just literally obliterate it.  So that's all I'm gonna tell you about that.
Story_ID: 350907
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got there in what month in '44 [1944] did you get to France?
Speaker 2: Oh, in Metz [France]?
Speaker 1: No, I'm just talking about your tenure in France.  You got there in, in '44 [1944], right?  Was it in, in early in the year?  Later in the year?  When was it?
Speaker 2: I'd say it was around the middle of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In June or so, or--okay.  And so it was summertime.  Okay, so you all were pushing, I guess, east right?  Towards Berlin [Germany], or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Towards the heart of Germany.  And what is the, maybe it's too, I don't know if it's too soon to answer this question or not, but I've heard now that, that it's been, and this is the controversial part, the people claim, that it's controversial.  That, that the black tank, unit 761st [761st Tank Battalion], though not operating as a battalion at the time because they were split up,  I heard they were split up amongst other tank units--but the black soldiers in the 761st arrived at concentration camps before anybody else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about it.  What happened?  What did you, what, what, what happened?  What's your story?
Speaker 2: (Pause) My, my, my conception of that, is that we were sacrificed.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us what happened first.  And then, you know, then we'll do an analysis.  What happened?  From your perspective, what happened?
Speaker 2: When you sacrifice, what they don't tell you is the actual, shit that went down, prior to that battle.  So it doesn't make them any difference whether how many tanks that they lose, or what went down prior to that battle.  But they don't do that today, now.  I got a buddy over there now.  He's in a tank battalion over there now.  I used to, hey, as a matter of fact, he is actually, he's a first sergeant now.  But why is he, I said to him, I said, "Why in the hell," I said, "Why in the hell are you over there now doing what you're doing?"  He said, "The same like you were."  But the thing about it is, he had a job.  The job was to knock out so many tanks or what's there, whatever they put him up there to do.
Story_ID: 350908
Speaker 1: Tell us what happened.  What was it, what happened the day that you arrived at a concentration camp?  Tell us what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, we had tanks go into a, a, a configuration--you, you actually don't believe what you're looking at.  Actually, what you're looking at is death beyond it's, or--
Speaker 1: Well, take it in small pieces for us.  Let us see what you saw.
Speaker 2: This is what I saw.  You would, you would not believe what you were actually looking at.  You were looking at what the Germans were doing to prisoners that they had.  They, they were actually murdering thousands upon thousands of people.  It's nothing to them.  You take a bunch of German soldiers today, they have the same mentality of kill or be killed.
Speaker 1: But what did you see that day?  That's what I want to find out.  What did you see that day?  Did you see them actually killing people that day?  Or what did you see?
Speaker 2: We saw, actually--the, the, the murder prior, as you're moving forward, you could actually see the prior battle carnage that actually happened.
Speaker 1: You, you see the remains of what happened before you.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But not of--okay.  So, so what was the, when you got there, I mean, tell us about approaching the camp, the concentration camp.  Which one was it?  Do you, do you know now which one it was?  Or which ones?
Speaker 2: I think, I think that one was Wels, Austria.  Wels, Austria was one.  It didn't make that no damn difference what it was.
Speaker 1: I know at the time you probably didn't know which, which one was which.  But as you, but tell me about what, what--tell me the story.
Speaker 2: What--as, as, as you were approaching the camp, they would take up a bunch of people.  So what they would do is try to figure out what ones would actually be willing to sacrifice themselves.  They'd ask you, you what, what the hell were you fighting for?  Don't let, don't, don't give the wrong answer, because you were lined up and you were shot.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  What the German soldiers were doing?  Now, let me, I'm, I'm asking you, what you saw when you were coming up there.  You, you couldn't have seen that, probably.  'Cause you would have had to been with the Germans, I guess, to see that.  But what, what did you see from your perspective approaching the concentration camp?  Did it look like a concentration camp?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Did you know what one looked like?  Did it smell?
Speaker 2: To high heavens.  I actually saw, from here across the street, what actually they did, they would actually put X number of prisoners--now, I'm not talking about black, I'm talking about white.  They would whip, they just would gun 'em down.  Because number one, somebody in there had to be guilty.
Speaker 1: Well, who, who gunned, who gunned them down?  The U.S.?  I mean, who gunned who down?
Speaker 2: The Germans would gun, gun, gun down the--
Speaker 1: The prisoners that they had already?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: As you all approached the camp?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 350909
Speaker 1: Course, we could never tell which one it was.  So actually, what I would do, try to find out took, who, who gave the order, who did what. So you--what you do is try to tell them, this guy did it, okay.  Blow his brains out, that's all.  Back during that time, I've got news for you.  Americans were very naive, I guess.  He could--this guy, he, he, he could look at the guy being killed next door to him, and then, and, and then when we drop a high explosive in there, they come out with their hands up.  Who ordered that shot?  So the Americans, what do, what do they do?  He did.  It's nothing to them, to blow your head off.
Speaker 2: So as you approach, you find out who was, who's shooting at you and take 'em out, huh?  Who, who gave the order?  Who?
Speaker 1: Who gave the order?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, you're trying to determine who gave the order so that, that came from the other side, you know, and take out the person who gave the order.
Speaker 1: And it was nothing for them to, to, to blow your brains out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They actually would just obliterate you.  That, that's it.  As simple as A, B, C.
Speaker 2: Did you lose, did you lose a lot of friends in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, quite a number.
Story_ID: 350910
Speaker 1: Have you been back since--did, did you go back?  I know some of the veterans have gone back to the sites.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I've been back to Germany twice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do people in--now, when, when I saw the movie 'Liberators' ['The Liberators'], I saw that there were certain Jewish groups in New York [New York], I know especially, that were--they're groups who are composed of peop- people who were in the concentration camps who are now here, living here in the United States.  Who recognize that some of you, some of you members of the 761st [761st Tank Battalion], you know, were the ones who liberated their camp.  And their re- they had a reunion, you know, I think, with Alexander Scott [William Alexander Scott III], I think was featured speaking to a group in, in Upstate New York.  Have you ever been to any of those reunions?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know.  My, my, my--was it my first wife [Louise Bradshaw Holmes] or my second wife [Anne Smith Holmes]?  Whatever it was (pause), I've been, I've been to several of them.  I went to the one in (unclear), I went to the one in New York, and, course, you know, when you're a guest speaker, they want to know what did you see (pause).  What did you do (pause)?  One of the things that I did was that, in order to keep from getting shot, was to take the turn of your tank, swing it toward the enemy, and then take the--your, your, your use your shield--and you ever had a, you ever, you ever have a ship, a, a, a tank with--after the Germans have discovered that they have been discovered, then all you got to do is level down on that area where they are, they come out (speaking German).  You know what you do?  In order to keep from getting shot, what you would do is, take the, take your shield that the thirty-one caliber that they use, is--bring it up, stop him from, from shooting at you, 'cause he, he, he, there's no way in hell that that gun that they have, is going to penetrate the shield that you put up there, in front of him.  It's gonna piss--It can't.  They haven't made one yet that can penetrate the half, half inch of armor that you have shielded against them.  You can bring a lot of damn Germans up, hands up (speaking German), "Hande hoch."  Oh yeah, when he realizes that you know where he is, he's gonna, he's gonna come out.
Story_ID: 350911
Speaker 1: What are your reflections on the, on the war [World War II, WWII] now that it's, that it's been over so many, over fifty years ago, almost sixty now.  It is sixty years, yeah, sixty something years now.  Over sixty-two years ago.  What, what are your reflections on the war and what, the treatment of the black soldiers and the 761st [761st Tank Battalion] then and now?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Oh, to all you that tell them, say go out there and do, do, do such, such a thing, how about this.  How about the guys over there in Iraq and Iran right now.  Just tell me.  If you can show me anything that's different now than it is back during that time--the only thing that's gonna bring the Germans, or the Iraqis, or you name it, that's gonna bring them to their senses is to put enough fire power in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're, you're--are you, are you in favor of the current war in Iraq [Iraq War], or do you think it's a good idea?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yes and no.  The only thing that I am in favor of now, is Americans going over there, and fighting over there, and it doesn't make any difference to me whether they're black, white, blue, or green.  It makes no damn difference.  They're gonna die if it's got their name on that bullet as it's fired at them.
Speaker 1: So you think this is like a fatal, kind of like, I mean, it's like it's all preordained, or something like that?  You're either gonna make it, or not?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 350912
Speaker 1: What happened at the end of the, of the war [World War II, WWII]?  I mean, did you come back immediately?  Or did you--I mean, when, when did you come back to the United States?
Speaker 2: I came back in 1945.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did you receive any citations or anything over there?  Okay.  Did the unit [761st Tank Battalion] receive any, or?
Speaker 2: But what they did though, rather than give us a president unit citation [Presidential Unit Citation], they gave it to us thirty, thirty some years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, rather than give us credit, for the number of POs [prisoners of war] and et cetera, they gave it to us thirty-seven [sic. thirty-three] years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what exactly did you get thirty-seven years later?   What did they, what was the name of your--
Speaker 2: Presidential Unit Citation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Who was president then?
Speaker 2: Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Carter.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what did you do after the war?  How did you--were you able to adjust well to civilian life when you came back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much so.
Story_ID: 350913
Speaker 1: Did your experiences in the war [World War II, WWII] affect your attitude about civil rights when you came back?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah.
Speaker 1: In what way?  What way?
Speaker 2: Number one, it--what was I over there fighting for?
Speaker 1: Well, they, they said it was freedom right?  For the world and all that, right?
Speaker 2: Oh they're, you know how, you know how, you know how it is man, my God.  You gonna do with the thousands of soldiers that we're fighting for?  How many men did we lose in, in, in the Korean War?
Speaker 1: I don't know that.
Speaker 2: Fifty-some thousand.  I think there was something like fifty-one thousand dead.  Lost their lives, for what?  So that somebody like me can sit down and recount to you what actually went down?
Speaker 1: I don't think that's why they lost their lives.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: No, I know that's not why they lost their lives.  But, but how did, did it affect how you felt about, you know, being a citizen and being an American when you came back?  Did you, did you, did you have, did you feel--
Speaker 2: Vindicated?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Tell me, I mean--
Speaker 2: Do, do you know we have a, we have, we have a bond right now, we've got a bond with destiny.  We actually have a bomb that right, anything.  Look what they, look what, okay.  Hiroshima [Japan], Nagasaki [Japan]--we could wipe any of those countries right off the map.  Well, what are, are, to me, what in the fuck are we waiting around for?
Speaker 1: What, in terms of today's war?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Tell me, why are we, why are we piddling around, just sacrificing lives, to do what?  (Pause) I really don't know.
Story_ID: 350914
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's, it's confusing, you'd have to say.  What's going on now is confusing.  Well tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: For the black man right today?
Speaker 1: No, to, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today.
Speaker 2: Is perhaps maybe, somebody is going to eventually be black, white, blue, or green.  It makes no difference.  We are going to have to do something that is going to be paramount to the, the upkeep and the liberation of this country from its bad ideas.
Story_ID: 350915
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done at this point--now, what did you, you say you worked for Doehler corporation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Doehler Jarvis corporation [sic. Doehler-Jarvis Company].
Speaker 1: You worked for them your whole--I mean, is that the only place you worked when you came back?  Did you retire from there or what?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I retired from the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you worked for the City of Chicago [Illinois], too?  Okay.  Well, what did you do for the city?
Speaker 2: Driver.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you drive trucks, or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Whatever they told me to do, that's what I did.
Speaker 1: You were, you were, did, did, did you work for streets and sanitation [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So you, how long did you work for streets and san?
Speaker 2: Thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you retired from streets and san, and--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 350916
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that's happened since, I mean, what--is there anything that you would do differently if you, if you had to do it again?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, likewise, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 1: Really, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Take care of your family.  I have a daughter [Anita Holmes Berlanga] that lives in Wyoming, Illinois, I got a son [Michael Holmes] that lives in New Orleans [Louisiana], man, yeah, New Orleans.  Little bastard, he ain't got sense enough to pour piss out of a boot.
Speaker 2: He's still in New Orleans (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) directions.
Speaker 2: He's still in New Orleans?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  But he doesn't know, and he doesn't know, realize the, the shit that I went through, to make it better for him.  And he's got a son [John Gerard Holmes].  And he doesn't know.  And I said to him, I said, "My God," I said, "look what I have done for you."  But--
Speaker 2: So that's your, your family, you've been married twice now, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You said twice?  Okay.  And, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my first wife died [Louise Bradshaw Holmes] in '85 [1985], my second wife [Anne Smith Holmes], she's now incapacitated, on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 350917
Speaker 1: What advice could you give young people today who are interested in joining the [U.S.] military?  Do you have any advice that you would give them?
Speaker 2: Yep.  The advice that I would give to young, a young man or woman, is be a good soldier.  If you're gonna be a good soldier, that's all that matters.
Story_ID: 350918
Speaker 1: So is there anything that you want to say before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's nothing I've left out, there's nothing you want to talk about before I ask my last question?  Okay.  The last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a guy who believes in his country, what it stands for, that's to me, you can't do it any better than that.  Believe in this country and what it stands for.
Story_ID: 350572
Speaker 1: This picture here was Anne [Anne Smith Holmes], Anne and I were, well, shortly after we were married.
Speaker 2: Okay.  About what year was that?
Speaker 1: This was about nineteen.  Let's see, I think this was about nineteen--
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], '79 [1979]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, somewhere around along in there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I met you.  She had just remarried when I met her.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: This one here was a picture taken of me shortly after I got out of the [U.S.] Army.  This used to be a, a, they called it a bevel frame across the top.  Yeah, uh-huh.  So actually it was, this is not the original-
Speaker 1: Frame.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the picture is.
Speaker 1: Ok. Tell me this now, since we're, this is--you were in the special unit.  You were part, part, part of a very special unit.  What do these insignias mean and are they--on your uniform.  How about this one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: That one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: These are your sergeant stripes.  Is there something that identifies the 761st tank unit [761st Tank Battalion]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what, which one?  The top of the shoulder.  Is this it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Does this identify the unit?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is for 761st.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: And what are these decorations?  This right here?
Speaker 1: Those are, damn.  The Purple Heart.
Speaker 2: So you were wounded?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You didn't tell us, you didn't tell us that story.
Speaker 1: Oh, but--well, but what the heck.
Speaker 2: Well it's a, it's an important story when you're talking about a soldier getting wounded is something that I'm sure you remember.  What happened to you?
Speaker 1: You, you, you--hell, don't ask me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You just were kind of hurt?  You don't remember what happened?
Speaker 1: No, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: I understand.  Okay.  So this is the unit's designation right here?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  We'll get a close up on your jacket too.  What about these on your lapel?
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now, how did the--let me ask you this since we're still rolling tape.  How did the unit get its name, the Black Panthers?  How--who came up with that?  During the war or after the war?
Speaker 2: During the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, who came up with the name?  Do you know?  Or just happened, people just started saying it?
Speaker 2: That happened down in Louisiana [at Camp Claiborne].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Then actually, it was something that was just like hung onto us.  You know how old I was when that was taken?
Speaker 1: I can guess, but tell us.
Speaker 2: Guess.
Speaker 1: Well, I know that you were, let's see, 1924, you'd be about twenty-three, I guess?  Twenty-two?  Is that it?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four.
Speaker 1: Twenty-four, okay.  All right.  My father has a gold tooth on his, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, he does?
Speaker 1: That was in the style in those days.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he was--he received the Medal of Honor [Congressional Medal of Honor].  He was a member of your unit?  Okay.
Speaker 1: So this commemorates Ruben Rivers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who was a staff sergeant of the 761st.  Was, was he killed in combat?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What battle was he killed at, do you know?
Speaker 2: This was the Battle of Tillet.
Speaker 1: Oh, Tillet.  Okay.  Who are some of the other figures?  Are these the other veterans of the, of the unit?
Speaker 2: The guy over Ruben Rivers there--
Speaker 1: Right there?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  He was a--I am just trying to recall his rank.  I think he was a sergeant, also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good.  And who is this?  This isn't a member of the unit, is he?  Is that a senator or politician or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
