Story_ID: 325977
Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Charles F. Harris, that's C-H-A-R-L-E-S, F, the F stands for Frederick, F-R-E-D-E-R-I-C-K, and Harris is H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 2: Your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: My date of birth is January 3rd, 1934, and I was born in Portsmouth, Virginia.
Speaker 2: And your, today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is June 8, 2005.
Speaker 2: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 1: The location of this interview is 1900 Broadway in Josephina's Restaurant [Josephina], New York, New York.
Speaker 2: And your occupation?
Speaker 1: My occupation is book publisher.
Story_ID: 325978
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna start with five very People magazine-ish type questions, very pop culture questions, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't particularly have a favorite food except I love seafood, coming from the tidewater area of Virginia; I think that that's a major issue.  And I'm a great lover of blue crabs from the Chesapeake Bay.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think that the spring fall may be my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't, I probably don't have a favorite color.  If it's anything, it's probably a business suit gray.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite, I have several.  I, I have a great fondness for Paris [France], but I also love many things about Miami, South Beach.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have a, a particular favorite phrase or saying, perhaps the world is a wonderful place.
Story_ID: 325979
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother, what was her name and spell it out for me.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Annie Eula Lawson Harris.  And my mother was born in King William County, Virginia on August 28, 19, 1891.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that name, her name for me?
Speaker 2: Her name is spelled A-A, A-N-N-I-E, E-U-L-A, L-A-W-S-O-N, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And she was born 1891?
Speaker 2: And she was born in 1891 in King William County of which that part of it she didn't know very much about it, because as, at the age of about three or four her father who worked for the Southern Railroad [sic. Southern Railway] was asked to go to Portsmouth, Virginia in a section called Pinners Point and open, be the head of the at the time the Negro workers who were there.  He was the head of the Negro workers all of the Negro workers in Portsmouth.  And so that's how she ended up going to Portsmouth.
Speaker 1: Now she was born, was she born in Virginia, was Kings--
Speaker 2: She was born in King William County, Virginia, which is not far from Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: And this is 1891?
Speaker 2: Eighteen ninety-one [1891], so I think it was 1895 when they came to Portsmouth.
Speaker 1: So did your mother have any siblings?
Speaker 2: My mother, yes she did have siblings because her father had, had children older than she by a previous marriage.  And she had some adult siblings that I actually knew.  The oldest of my grandfather's sons was named Wallace [ph.], and he, he was probably like twenty years older than my mother or maybe more.
Speaker 1: So what do you know about your mother's background?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I know my mother's background, I know the family, the, the--her mother's [Queen Vashti Pitt Lawson (ph.)] maiden name was Pitt.  And, their, her my mother's grandfather's name was Carlo Pitt [ph.] and that was the father of the nine girls.  And so there're people named Pitt in Philadelphia in, in Pennsylvania, in Providence, Rhode Island that I've never met, but I know who they are.  But you can go to a church in King William County called Third Union Baptist Church [King William, Virginia].  And that church has the records of all of the people who were born in that county and also the descendants, including me and--Francis [Harris] and his brother [HistoryMaker] Charles [F. Harris].  So they keep track of these kinds of things, in fact, I took them to a reunion maybe like ten years ago, and we were, before we were properly introduced, one of the, our cousins whom I did not know, said, walked up and said you, you're the ones who moved to Virginia.  And that was true, I moved down to Portsmouth and, and they came up and introduced themselves. But I was amazed that, that he could remember that.
Story_ID: 325980
Speaker 1: I used to go to King William County [Virginia] when I was a boy, sometimes during my father's vacation, my father worked for the Southern Railroad [sic. Southern Railway] also.
Speaker 2: What was your father's name?
Speaker 1: My father's name was Ambrose Edward Harris [Sr.], A-M-B-R-O-S-E, Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 2: And where was he born?
Speaker 1: My father was born February 14, 1889 in Portsmouth, Virginia.  And my father's father was named William Francis Harris, and he was born January 3rd, 1854.
Speaker 2: He was born into slavery or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was not a slave, we, we that's something that could never be able to document because he had to give somebody a part of his earnings.  But he was never; he never lived on a plantation or anything, there no plantations down in that part of Virginia.  The biggest industry in that area at that time was shipbuilding.  The biggest employer now is probably the Norfolk Naval Shipyard which is in Portsmouth [Virginia].
Story_ID: 325981
Speaker 1: Getting back to my mother's [Annie Lawson Harris] family, I knew my mother's aunt, one of her older aunts who lived to be over a hundred years old.  She was like a hundred years old in eighteen, 1954, I'm sorry in 1944, when I used to go there in the summers.  And she was blind and she could carry on a conversation and somebody read the newspapers to her, she was very articulate.  So it was a, it was a very unique experience, but I didn't realize at the time, but I did know some of my some of the other aunts as well.
Speaker 2: What was that aunt's name who lived to be 100?
Speaker 1: Alice.
Speaker 2: Alice?
Speaker 1: Her name was Alice Morris, Alice Pitt Morris.  And she has relatives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I that I know as well, some of them I've met.
Speaker 2: What kind of stories can you remember her telling you as a child, what did she talk about?
Speaker 1: I can't, I can't much recollect what she talked about as a, a telling of stories as much as I can remember her cooking and--she never, she never talked anything about slavery or any of that.  I never heard my family talk very much about slavery, in spite of the fact that they must've or somebody must've been slaves.  But my family in King William County [Virginia] owned a lot of land and then built farms, they were not sharecroppers.  So they were, the people who went to Portsmouth [Virginia] had mod, more modern amenities in the beginning, but the people who stayed there were very successful farmers and lived very well.  Owned proper, owned homes and modern appliances and all of that sort of thing and tractors all of this, so it, it was it was a solid family.  And they had a connection, the family was, was very supportive of people, the family members going to college.  So it became a very well educated group of people.  The big setback for those of who in Portsmouth as well as the ones in King William County was the [Great] Depression of course.  In which my, my Grandfather Lawson owned a dairy and we can't to this day, we try to track down how he lost the dairy.
Speaker 2: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 1: My name, his name was Joseph Lawson [ph.], I did not know him.  As I, he, both of, he died in January of 1934 and that, my mother's grandpa [sic. Harris' maternal grandfather] died in January 1934 the month I was born.  And my father's father [William Francis Harris] died the Fourth of July 1934.  I don't remember that of course but it's I felt was such a coincidence with regarding my life.  So I come into the world and they lose two people close to them you know.
Speaker 2: So you said that your [maternal] aunt cooked a lot, what do you remember her cooking, what sort of things did she cook?
Speaker 1: She cooked, they, they killed their own hogs and had their own smokehouse, I was fascinated by that, she could navigate all of that, she could walk into the smokehouse and get something and know where things were.  She could get up to the cupboard get per, certain kinds of dishes, she could turn, turn on the gas stove, turn it off.  She knew when things were done and I, it was, I was just amazed at it, she'd make biscuits or she could bake bread or pies, you know all of that happened while we were there.  It was just a great time, I mean as a kid and they had horses and, I was always fascinated by, by that.  I mean they had horses, because they used them in plowing and other you know farm work.
Speaker 2: So they were pretty well to do to have a smokehouse, to have horses, and then to have the entire hog.
Speaker 1: Yes, well they had, they had pigs so that one of the thing that must've been sort of a moder- a moderate family reunion.  Because I could remember my mother going to King William County when it was hog killing time others one, other her cousins.  All of those, all of the nine sisters of her mother, her eight sisters, they all had children my mother's age.  And so that, they grew up together, so they stayed in contact un, un- I knew them as a man you know.
Speaker 2: So when it was hog killing time, what did they go and do what was the ritual?
Speaker 1: I never went, I guess they killed the hogs I could hear my mother say that they would, they would shoot the hog in the head but or something or hit him with an axe or, she was, what she couldn't stand to look at that.  And she didn't like, she didn't like to be around it but I think it was the camaraderie and the family togetherness that she liked.  And they were fond of her; I mean they treated her very well.
Story_ID: 325982
Speaker 1: Before the [Great] Depression, my older siblings told me that they lived very well in Portsmouth [Virginia] because the section of Portsmouth in which we lived was called Mount Hermon still, it's still there.  And it's a, a solid community with a lot of black professionals in it, when I was a kid.  So our teachers and lawyers and doctors all lived in the community that I grew up in.  And I mentioned that because it had a particular bearing on my, what I've done with my life in getting a certain kind of encouragement.  And being around people, my family as well as the other people, that showing you what possibilities can be.  And so you can dream big and you got people encouraging you and you got people giving you guidance.  And so I got it at home through my older siblings, most of them didn't live with us by the time I was a kid, I mean you know elementary school [Mount Hermon School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  They had families of their own, but they lived, we lived in the same community.  So my elementary school was maybe four short blocks from where my home was.  And in the process of going back and forth to school all kinds of neighbors saw you and the teachers would come by your house and if you did something improper.  It wasn't a distance, and the church [Mount Hermon Baptist Temple, Portsmouth, Virginia] wasn't that far away either, so and we lived in our own house.  And my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] bought the land and had it built with a black construction company and the person who negotiated the deed was a black lawyer that he had gone to school with.  And so it, it was, it get--instilled a lot of pride in us, and so we never had this conception of ourselves as being inferior.
Story_ID: 325983
Speaker 1: So going back to your father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] you said that he worked in some sort of Negro (unclear)?
Speaker 2: He, he worked as a railway clerk for the Southern Railway, but wouldn't call it, wouldn't give him that kind of title.  When the freight comes in Portsmouth [Virginia] is like a railhead because the trains and Norfolk [Virginia] is a, is an island almost.  So the trains stopped in many cases stopped at Portsmouth.  And so then the freight has to be shipped and all that, and some people are shipped, on, on freight handlers.  And some doing the clerk and all that, all that kind of support services, but all the executives were white.  And so no matter how long they did their work they never got promoted, they never got any higher than what they were.  And so it was something that offended my father, and I can vaguely remember them having a big, there was a big issue when the union was formed.  And my father became a, a member of the Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks [Freight Handlers, Express and Station Employees; Transportation Communications International Union], at much regret of the Southern Railroad.
Speaker 1: What year was that can you remember?
Speaker 2: It, I, I think, it was during the war [World War II, WWII], because it was when a lot of labor unrest was, was going on, because it was about that time that John L. Lewis and the United Mine Workers [of America] were gonna strike and A. Philip Randolph, I can vaguely remember the conversations about that.
Story_ID: 325984
Speaker 1: The other key issue that--why I can remember that so well is my family carried newspapers.  We had about two hundred customers in, in our community, and it had been started by my--one of my oldest brothers Francis [Harris].  And each one of us took the, as they, they went into adulthood each one of us took the paper route.  And what that did was it provided us with first of all with reading the newspaper every day.  And, and being challenged on vocabulary by my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.], all of us were challenged by that.  If you read the paper and you didn't know what a word meant, he would he would you know tell you that's not the way to live your life.  But you shouldn't be carrying something around that you can't read and don't understand.  So and then we have vocabulary games and all that kind of stuff at night you know sitting around doing homework and stuff like that.
Speaker 2: Was it a black newspaper?
Speaker 1: No it was the Norfolk Virginian-Pilot [The Virginian-Pilot] but we did carry a black newspaper too, the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal Guide], which I ended up later doing some writing for as a college student.  Getting back to, to carrying the newspaper might've been one of the reasons that I became so interested in journalism.  There was a man in our neighborhood named John Jordan who worked for the Norfolk Journal and Guide which was a very prominent newspaper at that time.  It was just as prominent as the Baltimore African Afro-American [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers], Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and we had all these newspapers available to us on newsstands in our community.  So we were diligently reading all of these things, and so that's that gave us a strong connection to African American sports.  My father was a great lover of sports as well, so and my older brothers were, and one of my brothers (unclear) was always an avid boxing fan.  And but we, but that forced us to read the papers all the time, so by reading the newspapers I became fascinated by that.  So as a high school student I start, when I got to high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], I started working on the newspaper.  And I guess my second year working on the newspaper I became the editor of that paper as a junior in high school (background noise).
Story_ID: 325985
Speaker 1: Do you remember when your father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] started to instigate this Negro union concept?
Speaker 2: He kept--they would--the men would come to the house and they'd sit in the kitchen and talk and close the kitchen door.  And I can remember there was a lot of whispering and so forth and so on, and then they felt that some of the people who worked there couldn't be trusted, there were some people who didn't want the union.  Same thing was true of the Atlantic Coast Railroad, Atlantic Coast Line Railroad where my mother's [Annie Lawson Harris] brother worked.  Some of this is in a book that published by the Harvard University Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts] that I can't remember the name of it now.  But, but it came out maybe four years ago about A. Philip Randolph coming through that area organizing unions and, and by and also going to Richmond [Virginia] to organize union.  And even my uncle was being quoted in there about why we should have a, a labor union, why black workers ought to have a labor union.   And I never thought of him this my mother's brother, I never thought of him as a protest kind of person at all.  So (laughter) just let's, let you know what you don't know about people.  And all the people at that time that share a lot of information with, with younger people, that was grown people's business.  And so I could only remember the caucusing and I could remember them threatening to layoff all of the men and my father talking about that.  But I think the war was on and they couldn't, they couldn't, they needed the trains.  And the trains had to run, I think that's the same thing that John L. Lewis felt too.  Because of the, if the trains didn't run I mean if the mine workers didn't put the coal up on the trains then you can't get the trains to go.  So and they have huge coal piers down at tidewater where the coal comes out of the mountains up in Virginia and West Virginia and stuff and comes down.  The tidewater be loaded on ships that go up and down that, the Atlantic seaboard.
Story_ID: 325986
Speaker 1: So your mother [Annie Lawson Harris] had nine siblings.  How many did your father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] have?
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother had.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother had nine siblings.
Speaker 2: Right my, my mother was the only child of the union between Joseph Lawson [ph.] and her mother Queen Vashti Pitt Lawson [ph.], that's my mother, grandmother's name.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name again?
Speaker 2: Her name was Queen Vashti and her maiden name is Pitt.
Speaker 1: So can you spell the Vashti?
Speaker 2: V-A-S-H-T-I.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother was born when, do you?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact date of my grandmother's birth but I could, I could have it, I mean I have access to it.  I don't recall that as much as--the only reason I can remember my maternal, my paternal grandfather's birthday is that it's January 3rd.
Speaker 1: So your father had how many siblings?
Speaker 2: My father had, my, my grandfather had three sets of children, and my father had three older brothers, of which I only knew one well.  And they one, one died before I was born, one lived in Norfolk [Virginia] that I did not know very well.  And one lived in Portsmouth [Virginia] that I did know and his name was Frank Harris [ph.].
Speaker 1: Frank Harris?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what do you, what do you know about Frank Harris?
Speaker 2: Not very much, but he was a trustee of one of the oldest churches in Portsmouth, black church called Zion Baptist Church [Portsmouth, Virginia].  He was a, a very elegant man he was retired most of the time when I knew him, so I don't, I don't recall where he worked.  But I would see him quite often at, at civic affairs or some culture event or something.  And I don't recall him coming and visiting my father, and I think they had too different mothers, and I, and I think that might've been the issue.  And my father has a, has a sister named Mary [ph.] that died probably when I was like two years old I didn't know.  Then he had a sister that I knew very well named Gertie.
Speaker 1: And can you spell Gertie's name?
Speaker 2: G-E-R-T-I-E, and her last name was Salley, now S-A-L-L-E-Y.  Now she died a few years after my father, but I knew my first cousins, her children very well.  And at one point she had fifty seven grandchildren, so you can see how many relatives (laughter) that I have.  She had eleven children herself, and they all had children, and so many of them moved away but I, I knew a large number of them.
Speaker 1: So do you remember anything at all about your, and do you know anything at all about your ancestors, people that perhaps were not alive or that you didn't, that you never had the opportunity to meet or see?  But that you heard stories about you know something about them?
Speaker 2: We, we don't know, because my brother James [Harris] who's next to me in age, I am the youngest of seven.  My brother has done some research and he discovered in the census of 1870 that our grandfather William Francis Harris lived in a household with his father.  But it doesn't list the, the woman as his mother, and she could not have been because she was a little, she was a little bit older than he was.  She was in her twenties and so in 1870 he would've been sixteen, and his father's name was David Harris [ph.], and so we have the date, that I can't recall the date right now, the date of his birth.  But it was when slavery was going on, but that's about all I know, I know the names of the of my grandfather's siblings.  My father say he knew maybe three of them, but they left Virginia when he was a boy, and so he hardly ever saw them.
Story_ID: 325987
Speaker 1: What sights and sounds and smells remind you of being a child, your early childhood in Virginia?
Speaker 2: Well it wa- many things.  We, we never we never ate store bought bread, and never had frozen food or ate out of a can.  Or we never had fish that weren't caught the same day of being on the, we lived not far from the waterfront.  So and men went fishing but also down at the, at the river, the Elizabeth River which separates Norfolk [Virginia] from Portsmouth [Virginia].  But I was a boy the fish boats came in everyday that supplied the fish markets.  So you could go down there and buy at the wholesale place and buy fish you didn't have to go to your local fish market.  But even then the fish were delivered every day, and so at the end of the day, if he if the fish market hadn't sold its fish sometimes they would just reduce the price.  And everybody knew that so they couldn't keep them the next day, didn't want to even though they had, they had refrigeration.  But I can remember those kinds of things very well, and I can remember people having grape orchards and growing their own fruit and growing tomatoes and stuff like that.  So we got things from other people in the neighborhood, sometimes somebody had an abundance of butterbeans or something like that, so it was, I can remember that.  I can remember the smells when I was carrying newspapers on Sunday mornings and people baking bread or frying chicken as you go from house to house.  We used to collect on Sunday mornings, because it was easier because in the other days of the week, we hadn't finished our paper routes.  It would probably be like 7:30 or eight or quarter to eight, because we had to be at school at nine, so and the school--we had to catch the bus downtown to go to school.  So that usually took maybe twenty minutes, the bus ride, so we woke up every day at like 5:30 so it took certain kind of discipline.  The only time that you have off is the day after Christmas, you, the papers is delivered every day except one day and that's December 26.
Speaker 1: So you said you had to collect on Sundays what, what did you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well you carried the papers to the, to the, your customers, you put them on the front porch, and then on Sundays they knew you were coming by to collect for the meek's--week's paper.  Which was something it might've been you know fifty cents, but (laughter) you had to pay the, the general manager on Monday who came by your house to get the papers that you'd already that they had delivered to you.  You had a record of how many they delivered every day, they drop the papers, they wrap in bundles of wire around them, you had to have wire cutters to open them.  The first thing you do is count the papers, to make sure they delivered the numbers that they said they delivered to you.  Because the slip may say that they delivered two hundred papers, or the bundle may have fifty papers in it, but you have to count them.  And then if there's a shortage you have to tell them.  If you don't count them, you have to pay for the papers that's on the, what the list says.
Story_ID: 325988
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of your childhood in Virginia?  The very earliest memories you have.
Speaker 2: I, I guess, I guess, I don't know, I can remember things like we cooked our own crabs, you could go catch crabs.  You could go to the fish market and get ten cents' worth of fish heads and buy a piece of string and stand on the pier and drop the string down with a net.  And you have this wood basket and just catch a fish take him and put it in the backyard, start a fire with some kindling wood and some little pieces of coal.  Take like an old blanket or old rug and put over the top and a modicum of water because the crabs had water in them anyway.  And so that you just steam them and it may take you like two hours to do that.  That's one of the cheapest meals you can get, you know.  So it was a lot of fun you know, drinking lemonade and eating crabs, and we could do that for hours.  Or the other thing is--
Speaker 1: Well before you go to the other thing, we're gonna change tapes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Is that good (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I was gonna just say the, the you know eating the cold watermelon, melons in the summertime--
Story_ID: 325713
Speaker 1: Good morning, I'm Shawn Wilson the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Nick Burghelea [Neculai Burghelea] the videographer with The HistoryMakers.  We're continuing with [HistoryMaker] Charles [F.] Harris on tape two.
Story_ID: 325714
Speaker 1: We left off last time you were talking about the sights, sounds and smells of growing up in Portsmouth [Virginia].  You just talked about the taste and the, of fresh cold watermelon.
Speaker 2: Well yes, in my neighborhood there were fresh air markets and it was quite common for them or for people to come by on trucks with watermelons packed in ice.  And so on very hot days when I was a kid, I mean that would be one of the delights to the--in some places they would let you plug the watermelon before you actually bought it.  And so you can see how plentiful they must've been.  So that was one of the great, great joys and of the summers in Virginia and, long before I was completing elementary school.  So this had, we did this all the way up until the time I went to college, I mean we have this sort of feast on watermelon so.
Speaker 1: So where did you go to elementary school and what year are we talking about?
Speaker 2: I went to elementary school in a, in a section of Portsmouth called Mount Hermon, and the elementary school was about four blocks from my home.  And it was the same elementary school that all of my siblings went to.  So you can see what kind of stability that they gave us, and I grew up in, in a neighborhood where most of the people, it was a black neighborhood.  Most of the people owned their own homes, and so there was a church about two blocks from where my home was called Mount Hermon Baptist Church [sic. Mount Hermon Baptist Temple, Portsmouth, Virginia].  And that was like a block from the school, so I had to pass the church in order to go to the school.  And all along the road to going to school, you saw neighbors sitting on front porches and you had, had to go directly to school.  Because somebody would see you if you wandered off the path you were supposed to be on, and, and call your mother.  And, and tell her that you were going in another direction you weren't supposed to be going in.  So it was, it was another kind of form of I guess helping the people in the community helping raise the children. Everybody was known and just was; I went to school with other people who had siblings who were ahead of them who were in class with some of my siblings.  And so it was quite a stable environment.  I went to Mount Hermon School [Portsmouth, Virginia], I have a strange situation because I went to kindergarten when I was four and so I went, I went twice, I was, they had no place to keep me because I, I could almost read before I went to school.  That has a lot to do with my, my parents [Annie Lawson Harris and Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] and, and my siblings, and so I, I went to kindergarten which was about a block and a half from where I, I lived.  And, and I went twice and so after that, my mother wanted me to go to school with my--I wasn't old enough to go.  So another person in my community who was born five days before I, I was, was allowed to go school in that September when, when that person was five.  But turned six before, before the next year started, my birthday is the third of January, so legally I wasn't allowed to go.  So I didn't go, so I started school in February of the next, the next semester.  So I never went to the first half of the first grade.  The, the upside of that is it made me, I'm always the youngest person in my class, and most cases I was always one of the smallest people in the class as well.  Because they, most of the kids were over a year older than I, but it worked out fine academically.  I might not have been as mature socially as the other students but academically I excelled.
Story_ID: 325715
Speaker 1: Now this community that you went to school in what street did you live on do you remember the name of the street?
Speaker 2: I lived at 2731 Queen Street [Portsmouth, Virginia] that was a home that my parents [Annie Lawson Harris and Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] had built in 1926, and I was born there.  This, this portions where we lived was not rural at all, it's all city blocks, and most of the people that had their homes built long before I was born.  And I think that that brought about a certain kind of stability to the neighborhood.  Before I was born, they say a block from me there was a pharmacist; there was a doctor a few doors down from the pharmacy.  There were two doctors really in that same general area; this is a block and half from where I lived.  And then another two blocks away there was another doctor, there was a lawyer, so the professional class lived with the people of all levels of social economic status.  And, and I think that had a lot to do with the, the stability in the community and the--he had a leadership class in the community.  And you had people who were post worked for the post office or they worked in the shipyards and they had positions that perhaps in some other segregated societies they did not have.  Because the biggest employer in Portsmouth [Virginia] was the Norfolk Naval Shipyard, the Norfolk Naval Shipyard is Portsmouth.  And that's a historic thing because of the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard [Portsmouth, New Hampshire] is older, the ports in New Hampshire naval shipyard is older than the one in Portsmouth.  So it goes back I think into the 18th century.  The one in Portsmouth is much younger so, not a lot younger, it, it existed during the Civil War.  But because you know that the ironclad ships had a battle in the Civil War not too far from Portsmouth.  So that the shipyard and the, and the railroads were the, were the strongest employers and paid the best wages.  And then you had the mission of the professional classes, and you had people who could gage, who engaged in apprenticeship programs in the shipyards.  Like for like your electricians and carpenters and plumbers and all these skilled positions they could do that.  And, and partly because of the government.  Before I was born, my father was a policeman in the shipyard in the South which is a sort of an unusual thing because people think it comes after World War II [WWII].  These, his, his difficulty was that when [President Thomas] Woodrow Wilson became president, Woodrow Wilson then put into the civil service system discrimination against blacks.  And so a lot of blacks who were in this system lost their jobs or were just laid off.  My father was very adept in taking the civil service examinations and he was always in the high 90s of, for the post office or the shipyard.  But he'd ended up staying at the railroad [Southern Railway] because it had more stability.
Story_ID: 325716
Speaker 1: So who are some of the other community leaders in the community [of Mount Hermon, Portsmouth, Virginia] at that time?
Speaker 2: Well there was, there was the pastor of Mount Hermon Baptist Temple [Portsmouth, Virginia], his name was Reverend O.C. Jones, he, I think, he finished Virginia Union, Union University [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] before, close to like 1900.  And he must have been lived until he was ninety (laughter) he was a very astute man and he was a theologian.  And he, although it was a Baptist church, it was much more structured than a large number of Baptist churches.  And the church was the center of the community to great extent, because we didn't have a community center.  The city would build recreation centers in white neighborhoods but not in the black.  So we, the only thing we had was what they called a colored YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] which was downtown.  You had to catch the bus from where we lived to go downtown to that.  But we had baseball fields and the, the basketball courts were, were outdoors on concrete, you had tennis courts that were on concrete, because of the weather the city was saving money.  But you asked me about this, the leaders, they were they, they were people who were working in politics getting out the vote, my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] was one of those people.  And then of course there was always award healers and stuff like that, there was always conversations about politics, history in the barbershops.  There were several barbershops in the immediate neighborhood, and anytime you went there to get haircut, you could hear all kinds of things.  There were men there who had been World War I [WWI], men had been in World War II [WWII], there were pictures of, of famous all black outfits that had fought in World War I.  The man who owned the barbershop had been in the [U.S.] Navy, his name was Jesse Stevenson.  So that was the, that was the center of a lot of the pol- political and civic discussions.  And so you could hear almost anything.  And also they played checkers in the back of the barbershop; they had it cut off from the front, so the people who didn't want to play checkers.  And I think older men played whist and you know.
Speaker 1: What played what?
Speaker 2: Whist.
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: It's a, it's a southern game (laughter) a card game I don't know how to describe it.  It's regular whist and, and it's played by four people, partners.  And you have to win, you have to get I think it's thirteen I think in, in order to, to beat the opposition.
Speaker 1: But it's a card game?
Speaker 2: It's a card game, it's for recreation.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And it's played widely in the South.
Speaker 1: What about other sort of institutions that were in the community at the time?  You talked about barbershops or place where people congregated.
Speaker 2: Masonic halls, there was a Masonic hall there which had before I was born was used as a school for certain number of grades in the school, but not when I was born.  The biggest, I guess the biggest fraternal organization was the Masons, and they owned their own building, and they were Prince Hall Masons.  That--I think that's the biggest: the school, the church and the and the Masonic Hall wa- were the biggest institutional structures there.
Story_ID: 325717
Speaker 1: There were several churches in the neighborhood incidentally.  Mount Hermon [Baptist Temple, Portsmouth, Virginia] was not the only one.  There was there was Celestial Baptist Church [Portsmouth, Virginia] which was about three blocks from my home.  There was a church on the corner from my home that we didn't attend; it was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church.
Speaker 2: Did you attend church?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Which church?
Speaker 1: I attended church on a regular basis; we all belonged to the Mount Hermon Baptist Temple except, except my mother [Annie Lawson Harris].  And the ironic part is that the A.M.E. church founded by Richard Allen and Absalom Jones well my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] grew up in a, in that kind of Methodist church which was structured much more educated.  The, the minister could not be someone who had, didn't have a degree; his mother had been a member of this church, which is, which is a landmark.  It was built before the end of slavery, it, it's called Emanuel AME Church [Portsmouth, Virginia] and is on what was, they changed the name of the streets now.  But it was on I think London, London Street which was probably twenty or thirty city blocks from where we lived.  So we had to catch the bus to go there, but when my father built the house in Mount Hermon [Portsmouth, Virginia], he thought we should go to the church that's in the community.  However, my mother didn't go to that church, except when sometimes she didn't feel like going to her own church.  But every, all the rest of us went to that, attended that church, and we were active in the church also.  By going to Sunday school and going to B, BTU [Baptist Training Union], which was held on Sunday afternoons, for about an hour or something like that.  Be all kinds of discussions that took place, sometimes it was a religious discussion.  And there were members of the community who were like counselors or, or they were generally supervising the young people who were carrying on the discussion.  It was, it was a wonderful thing on a Sunday afternoon and it didn't take much time, and you saw all the people that and many of the people you went to school with.  And, and it was, it was rewarding from an ed- educational standpoint, so it's so it, that's spilled over into other kinds of social activities.  Because after that, we would go to someplace in the drugstore and have ice cream and a lot of that was homemade at the time.  Everybody'd congregate there, and it was just a community hangout.
Story_ID: 325718
Speaker 1: So at this time Virginia, Portsmouth was legally segregated?
Speaker 2: Portsmouth was legally segregated. I went to, I think the year I went to school [Mount Hermon School, Portsmouth, Virginia] was 1939.  Portsmouth was legally segregated then till I left and I left Portsmouth in 1953 when I went to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And I never, went to college, and I never went back to live, but it was segregated when I was there.  And we could not go to the public library, we had, there was a, a what they call a colored branch of the library.  That was about maybe a little larger than a one bedroom apartment; it had some books in it.  It didn't have the, the people who supervised the purchasing of the books, didn't allow certain kinds of books to be there.  But we did have Richard Wright and Langston Hughes, and Frederick [Douglass], 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass', in fact, I can remember first seeing it there.  But we had books in our own home.  My father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] had been an avid reader, was an avid reader and I never knew exactly how we got the books.  Because I didn't start going to bookstores myself until I and bought books myself until I finished high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Story_ID: 325719
Speaker 1: How would you say you were involved in the neighborhood at that time?
Speaker 2: Well I was involved in a lot of school plays and, re- memorizing poetry [Langston] Hughes, [Paul Laurence] Dunbar, people had what you called sometimes like when I was ten I could remember going to what they call a tea, Sunday afternoon tea.  And somebody would, they, they served tea not to us, probably some grape juice, but the older people would have that, have tea.  And somebody would recite a poem somebody would play some music and they'd play some black composer's music like [R.] Nathaniel Dett or a popular American music.  People would play and somebody sing a solo and then some several people recite a poem.  And but my family, my, my older siblings of several of them were, had been in oratorical contests and before you know that I wasn't even going to.  I could only remember going to them when my younger sister whose seven years older than I when she was on the debating, I mean a give oratorical contest.  And it was a lot of preparation of the speeches and delivering them at home and, and then you, went out public, publically and spoke.  But this was encouraged in our home and by coming from a large family, we always had debates with each other about words or if you used a word and you didn't know what it meant and because we carried newspapers.  We carried the, the most popular newspaper in that area which is the Norfolk Virginian-Pilot [The Virginian-Pilot].  And it was started by a brother of mine who's deceased his name is Francis [Harris].  And he started the paper route and then each one of us carried it as he left, so we had about two hundred customers.  And on Sundays, my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] would help us and sometimes my brother Francis who had a car would help us because the papers were so thick.  So he carried them to a cert- certain location from the house and he would just leave them on the corner and we pick them up.  You could see what kind of society that was, you could leave the papers on the corner and nobody would take them.   But we all carried the newspapers and as a result, early in life we developed a habit of reading the newspaper.  And so in the course of that, my father would always challenge us and he'd ask you about some story.  And you discussing the story you start using words that you know what they meant, you get challenged on that.  So we, the dictionary was always right at hand encyclopedia was right at hand, so it developed a habit of just words, all the time about words.
Speaker 1: So in the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What it mean and how to express yourself and you know.
Speaker 1: So when the time came for you to go to first grade, you were pretty well-read.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I had, I must've been books from my siblings and, and the other thing is that people in the neighborhood shared books.  If someone had a child other than you and if the child had finished with the book, they'd give it to you, you know.  Somebody see you they would go we're out walking carrying newspapers or something and wo- would tell you, tell your mother that I want you to come back and get these books, you know it would be that.  And I'd go home and tell her she, we'd go back and get the books.
Speaker 1: So it's a very close knit community at that time?
Speaker 2: Sure, I mean, I mean yes, yes.  Because before, long before I was born, my grandfather [Joseph Lawson (ph.)] had a dairy and they carried milk.  But in the [Great] Depression he lost the dairy but they carried milk before they carried the newspapers.  And so we were an integral part of the community as far as building the house, and then my grandfather who died the same year I was born, that both of them died the year I was born.  He, they were pillars; my mother's father was a pillar of the community that we lived in and a, and a businessman.  So that, I think that made a difference and it set a tone for us as well.
Story_ID: 325720
Speaker 1: What do you remember about the first grade, about elementary school [Mount Hermon School, Portsmouth, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well I, I can remember, I can remember my first grade teacher; her name was Miss, Miss Bessie Pitt Harris [ph.].  And she taught there seven of us and I think that she taught all of us except my oldest brother.
Speaker 1: Now was she related to you?
Speaker 2: No she was not, no.  Her maiden name was Pitt, her husband was another branch of Harris' that my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] was friendly with.  But he, Otis Harris was his name, her husband, and he was a high ranking black man in the, in the shipyard [Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And by high ranking what, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well he (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the shipyard?
Speaker 2: They had they had people worked in groups that maybe like a squad in the [U.S.] Army like twelve people carpenters or twelve plumbers or whatever.   And then they'd have what they call a lead man for the small group and then above that, for, for the like forty people would be like what they call a quarterman.  And then the higher than that would be plant supervisor, but he was like a quarterman so which made would him very high ranking person that, and made him well to do.
Speaker 1: So was Miss Pitt Harris your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well no, they were all, I mean I can remember (laughter) almost all of them, she was the first grade, she was very nice.  And she was warm and the families knew each other and she had a very large family, she came from a very large family herself that my parents were very friendly with.  And she was a very good teacher, and she just stayed differ, taught first grade forever.  And the lex- the next grade was Miss Goode [ph.] and the third grade was Miss Pairum [ph.] and then fourth grade was Miss Felton [ph.] I think I got that right.  Miss Royston [ph.] was the fifth grade, Miss, Miss Felton was the sixth grade and Miss Brothers [ph.] was the seventh grade.  So and I can remember (laughter) I can remember, but they all taught all of us, the same teachers.  So when you walked in the class, the teacher said this is what I expect of you, and that, when, and that went on through high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 1: So can you remember some of the things they would say they expected of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they expected you to achieve and have your homework and to you know they'd let you know that and then come to your house if they thought that you weren't studying properly, or you could do better.  Let's say you got a B in something and they think you should get an A, then they go tell your mother that.  That you're, you not concentrating as much and then there were parent teacher's sessions about every six weeks or something.  Then you would, you would dread that to go, your mother go out there to the school and she has to hear some negative comments about you.  Which my deportment was one of my problems I didn't have any problems with my grades.  But so that would usually end up with making me have to stay in and not go out and play or something because I was disorderly in the hallways or something like that.
Story_ID: 325721
Speaker 1: So what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a very good student, I was, I was, you know, I was one of the top students in my class, in every class I was in.
Speaker 1: What about extracurricular activities in school, what were you a part of?
Speaker 2: Well we, we had school plays sort of same thing like in the church [Mount Hermon Baptist Temple, Portsmouth, Virginia] we'd have a school play or we'd have some assembly program where in the auditorium where everybody would have something.  A poem to say or recite something from [Henry Wadsworth] Longfellow you know, it was always something like that you know.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On special days, like if we had, at that time we had Negro History Week [Black History Month] which was very strong in, in our community.  Because you know Carter [G.] Woodson came from Virginia.  And because the school system was segregated, I don't think that the white supervisors may not have known.  We had The Negro History Bulletin which was like eight and half by eleven and it, it was like four sheets, and it would have quizzes in it.  It would have you know it would have probably the teacher had lessons that she could give, but it had you know the famous inventors, or, or military people or things, things that you see people studying now we had that in our schools.  It wasn't nationwide but we had it in our schools, and we read this right along with Junior Scholastic.  And so we even had devotionals for in the morning, somebody said a Bible verse or something like, but you can't have that in school now.  Or recite the Lord's Prayer or something like that, they were doing that, that was the South and nobody thought anything about it.  Because I guess it was a much more homogeneous environment from the standpoint of culture and race.  So what that did was it gave us, I think it gave, I know it gave me a different perspective, but like the barbershop and like my home.  There were certain things that we were taught that was said the textbook is wrong.  And we had such faith in what my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] would tell us what we believed what he said.  And as it turned out he was right, I mean these things are now in the textbook.  A lot of them are and this only comes about after the civil rights, during the Civil Rights Movement.  But our perspective was always different.
Story_ID: 325722
Speaker 1: And in Virginia you asked me about politics, when I was growing up they had a poll tax.  And what that meant is that when you became twenty-one and eligible to vote, you had to pay a tax.  And if you didn't pay the tax if you decided when you were twenty-six that you want now want to vote, then you had to pay the tax from the time you were twenty-one.  And the whole thing was designed to discourage people of the social economic level from voting.  So that gave the people who voted, gave them a lot of strength so the people, the civic leaders and mayor and all these people, the city councilmen, they knew who voted, you know.  And so or they knew who was encouraging people to vote because they also had people in our community who were sort of like, what should we call them?  Spies that tell the, the leadership, the white leadership which was all the, the city council was all white when I was growing up.  And the way they were able to do that is every city council person had to run at large, so, so between the poll tax and running at large, it, they were able to keep blacks from getting elected.  Because they didn't have, blacks couldn't win citywide because the white people wouldn't vote for them.  So they could carry all the black wards but they couldn't carry the white ones, and the white wards outnumbered them.  I think black people may have been I, I would guess 25 percent of the population of Portsmouth [Virginia].
Speaker 2: So that was happening when you were elementary school [Mount Hermon School, Portsmouth, Virginia]?
Speaker 1: That was happening when I was in elementary school or, or it was happening when I was in high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] as well.  It happened when I finished college [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], they had, I think they had gotten rid of the poll tax.  But the problem was you didn't sometimes when too many blacks showed up at the place to register to vote, they'd close down and go to lunch or do something (laughter).  So that you'd have to come back again or something and assuming that you have to take time from, from your job to go to register and vote.
Speaker 2: So when you were in elementary school and a lot of this stuff was happening around you, were you aware of it?  Were you aware of some sense of, of race or inequality in Portsmouth?
Speaker 1: Well sort of yes and no.  I mean I knew when we got on the bus that we couldn't sit up front, but we had black theatres so we didn't have to sit in the back there.  They were downtown, we had to catch the bus to go to the movie theatre, and they were like three of them.  Shopping we didn't have problems with that; we didn't have problems going into the department stores and stuff like that.  And Norfolk [Virginia] was much more open than Portsmouth was, and at that time, the tunnels between Norfolk and Portsmouth didn't exist, so we'd catch the ferry and go to Norfolk.  And the stores were much larger; they were places like F.W. Woolworth [Co.] where you could sit at the counter without having to be segregated.  You couldn't do that in Portsmouth because they didn't have a, a counter for food and stuff for shops in Portsmouth.  There were some restaurants that we couldn't go into, but then there were black owned restaurants that we thought were better anyway.  So to that extent I don't think we thought much about segregation.  It was the buses; the public accommodation, the library which I think infuriated most people.  And the fact that our high school didn't have a gym that when Woodrow Wilson [High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] I had to--when I went to high school, we had to catch a bus and pass the white high school to go to the black high school.  But when the, when they wanted to get a new gymnasium for the white high school, Woodrow Wilson, they--all the students in town engaged in raising money.
Story_ID: 325723
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape three, we were speaking about Woodrow Wilson [High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and raising money for the gymnasium.
Speaker 2: Yes my, my, my brothers, my brothers and sisters were involved in that more than I, and the, the way they tell the story is that all of the students in Portsmouth [Virginia] were raising money to help build this new gymnasium.  And then because it was supposed to be open to the black students as well.  But after they built the gymnasium, they wouldn't allow the blacks to use it.  So and when I was in high school, most of our games were played at the Armory, [U.S. Army] National Guard Armory [Portsmouth, Virginia].  That--I went to [I.C.] Norcom High School [Portsmouth, Virginia], I think it was, I was in the first group of people in the City of Portsmouth to go to the eighth grade.  All of my siblings went seven years, elementary school and four years high school.  When I finished elementary school, they had added an eighth grade but they put it in the high school.  So it, what that did was it afforded us an opportunity to mingle with the high school students, without physically, without let's say from a grade standpoint being in high school.  So I think the year was probably 1947, that's about right, I finished in 1951.  But getting back to, to the elementary school situation, we had, we had other students who came from a section of Portsmouth called Pinners Point.  And they only had, I think it was three grades there in Pinners Point and then they came to Mount Hermon [School, Portsmouth, Virginia], they would have to come oh I guess in many cases they could walk.  But in most cases it was bad weather and so forth, they'd take the bus.  And that afforded us a larger sphere of, of friends and competition, and we played against each other in softball games and--we hadn't started playing basketball competitively then but we had, this is still in elementary school.  We had a small football teams and stuff like that; where we played against the people in Pinners Point.  There were some of the people from downtown or there were several other black communities.  Truxton [Portsmouth, Virginia] was a black community, Brighton [Portsmouth, Virginia] was a black community, and they were other parts of the City of Portsmouth.
Story_ID: 325724
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school again?  It--
Speaker 2: The name of my high school is I.C. Norcom High School [Chestnut Street School, Portsmouth, Virginia], Israel Charles Norcom.  And Israel Charles Norcom was an educator, he had gone to, he had become formally educated a number of, more than one college.  And I can't recall the specific names of those schools now, but one of the people that he taught is a man named William Henry Lewis.  And William Henry Lewis became an All-American football player at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], this black man.  But I.C. Norcom had educated so many people and when he passed away the honor was to name the high school after him.  And I think it might've been called Chestnut Street School [I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], because it was on Chestnut Street before he died.  But he had such a great influence on educating the black population in that area, in Hampton [Virginia] and other parts of Virginia.  That and when he came to Portsmouth [Virginia], he had such an influence of the, on the community they named the school after him.  So when I went to I.C. Norcom, one of, his son was teaching then, not only his but his grandson was teaching there too, James Norcom [Jr.].  And James Norcom is still alive, and James Norcom was the age of some of my older siblings.  But I'll come back to him later, because he plays a major role in, in my development as a writer.
Speaker 1: So in high school, who were some of your favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: Well the, I guess the, it jumps ahead of the story but one of she wasn't my favorite teacher when I was there.  But because she was, she was my, she was the chief librarian and she was the advisor on the newspaper [Norcom Gazette].  And she was, she had been an English teacher to my older siblings, and so, she had been outstanding with them.  I to, to go back to some of the situations I experienced in elementary school [Mount Hermon School, Portsmouth, Virginia], when I went to high school, the teachers knew who I was, because I, I think my mother [Annie Lawson Harris] was always going to parent teacher's meetings for my older siblings.  And on top of that my mother belonged to the same church as some of the, the teachers on the faculty in high school.  So she would see them when she went to church so we'd go to one church, and when we come home from church to have Sunday afternoon dinner, she might've gotten a bad report from others.  And we could tell when she walked on the porch we could tell (laughter) whether or not something went wrong.  But I had a math teacher by the name Miss Branch, Miss Mary Branch [ph.], who taught algebra and she taught calculus and she had taught all of my older siblings.  So when I walked in her class, she said, "Okay [HistoryMaker Charles F.] Harris, you gonna, you'll not gonna get, you can't get less than a B in here."  And she meant it, and she was very stern, she hardly ever smiled, but she was not mean.  She was demanding, she was precise, and this was the case with almost all of my teachers, my English teacher was a woman named, and she was my homeroom teacher, Miss Olivia Anderson.  Was a graduate of Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], a lot of my teachers had master's degrees when I was in high school.  And one of the reasons for that is that they weren't allowed to go to graduate schools in the State of Virginia.  And so the state would pay their tuition for them to go out of state to get advanced degrees.  And also at the time there weren't many jobs for those formally educated blacks, so teaching was probably the best thing that they could get.  And I'm talking leading up to the '60s [1960s] maybe because it doesn't open up until the Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 325725
Speaker 1: But my teachers that you can see that if they taught my older siblings so you can see what age they were by the time I got there [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  So they had to be probably late fifties or sixties if not older.  So Miss [Mary] Branch [ph.] was the math teacher which I took two years of algebra and then I had year of geometry and the teacher her name Miss Williams [ph.].  Who also had gone school with one of my sisters, the English was, was very good.  I had a Miss Mamie [S.] Vick who taught me English, I think that was when I was a junior.  A Mary Norcom taught me English when I was a freshman; she was the daughter, granddaughter of I.C. Norcom.  So she and her brother [James Norcom, Jr.] taught at the same time, and her father [James Norcom, Sr.], so the father was, taught what we all had to take was manual training.  So you had to, it was like woodworking and all, you had to be able to work with your hands and that came from the whole concept of Booker T. Washington started that.  You could be formally educated but you had to be able to do, you had to be functional with your hands, so we could, I could do, I still know how to do some minor carpentry and stuff like that.  Because you had to take that, you had to take a year of that, of course you had to take physical education as well, even though we didn't have a gym.  So (laughter) which is ironic, but my science teacher was the football coach and his name was John McGriff who was in my oldest brother's class.  He was also a tennis champion and he plays a role in my knowing who Dr. Whirlwind Johnson [Dr. Robert Johnson] was who was Arthur Ashe's and Althea Gibson's coach in Lynchburg, Virginia.  Well John McGriff was a tennis champion; the science teacher was a tennis champion, on the American Tennis Association, that was a black organization.  And so he's the singles and doubles and his family had professional treated tennis courts in the back of their house.  And so people came there and played you know, played tennis in the, in the summers, in the spring until it got really cold, yes.  But so he was my science teacher, my chemistry teacher was the basketball coach, his name was A.T. Edwards, and he was very good teacher.  And my biology teacher was, was a Miss Chapman [ph.] and I took physics and that teacher's name was Horace Savage.  And Horace Savage had been a football player at Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and he also was the assistant football coach when I was there.  And he also during the summers supervised the recreation area in the park in the neighborhood where I grew up.  So they, the city paid for supervisor would be like three workers there to have the activities for the children in the neighborhood in the summer.  So he was, a couple years, he was the head of the, of that recreation area.  So we, I stress this because I interacted with these people in other areas other than school.
Story_ID: 325726
Speaker 1: I started working when I became a freshman in high school, it might've been '47 [1947], I started right, I was working on the school newspaper.  As just like a cub reporter sort of thing--
Speaker 2: What was the title of this, what was the name of the school newspaper?
Speaker 1: The school newspaper was called the Norcom Gazette.  And I worked in a number of jobs at the newspaper which everybody is to do when you first start.  But by my junior year in high school, I had become the, I was made the editor of the school paper, voted by my classmates, people on the paper.  And it coincided with; I started sometimes writing stories about the in the paper about the football team.  And so I would go to during the pre-season I'd go out and sit around and go in the locker rooms and stuff like that and just write for the school write in the school paper about what was going on.  Well in 1950, and I think that, yeah, 1950 the spring of 1950, I just wanna make sure I have the years right.  It was 1950; my high school ran the fastest mile relay at, at Pennsylvania Relays [Penn Relays].  And one reason our team, our high school track team went to the Pennsylvania Relay is that the principal, William [E.] Waters, was a graduate of Lincoln University in, in [Lincoln University] Pennsylvania.  And that's, a big deal in Pennsylvania going to the Penn Relays, and so he had also along with John McGriff knew Walter, I mean William Whirlwind Johnson [sic. Robert Johnson].  Whirlwind Johnson also went to Lincoln University and he was a doctor in Lynchburg, Virginia.  And he had the same kind of tennis courts that McGriff had, if not better.  And he had a summer camp for young African Americans to come there to learn how to play tennis.  Well Waters and Arthur [Ashe], I'm showing the linkages Waters knew Johnson, McGriff knew Johnson and so when my, our high school ran the fastest mile relay that year; the local papers were caught off guard.  And the stories appeared to be appeared on the Associated Press and UPI wire services about this team from Portsmouth [Virginia].  And so they were embarrassed, so the local paper, the Portsmouth paper called The Portsmouth Star came to the, the high school.  And talked to Mr. Waters and then talked to the coach, James Norcom who was teaching at high, I.C. Norcom [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], that's I.C. Norcom's grandson, James Norcom, Jr.  He was the coach of the track team, he said you have a student travel with the teams we will run the stories on the sport pages.  And up until that time other than a crime story about a black person, the only place in the news about black people appeared stuck near the classified section it was called the colored notes.  And it was written by a well-educated, well-spoken man called Lee [F.] Rogers, and he covered all kinds of social events in the black community.  And he wrote two or three times a week what was going on and somebody you know won a debating contest or the positive things that was taking place in the black community.  Well this was a breakthrough because that the, the track team, I start traveling with the track team immediately.  And they won the, the state championship that year, and that became a front page story on The Portsmouth Star on the sports page, the lead story.  And with the next year, well they covered the football team, but the football team wasn't that successful, and that's the fall of '50 [1950].  But the basketball team won the, the Eastern District Championship, and that was a, a front page story, and they won other track, the track team won other track meets.
Story_ID: 325727
Speaker 1: The next thing that occurred is that there was a basketball scandal following CCNY [City College of New York, New York, New York] winning the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and the NIT [National Invitation] basketball championships.  And the scandal came about, about point fixing because there was a player named Junius Kellogg who is from Portsmouth [Virginia] and went to I. C. Norcom High School [Portsmouth, Virginia] and he was playing for Manhattan College here in New York [New York].  And he was asked to take a bribe of a thousand dollars and he turned it down and reported it to his coach, whose name was [Kenny] Norton.  And the coach reported it to District Attorney Frank Hogan and the basketball scandal broke because Kellogg told that this was being offered to him and they made them look into it.  And they found out it was some of the CCNY players had been offered bribes and they did not report it.  So in the process of Kellogg turning down the thousand dollars, the, some of the people in the, in Portsmouth and especially one of the--sports writer's a man named Pete Glazer, the, the sports editor was named Pete Glazer, and the deputy editor was a man named Howard Jacobson.
Story_ID: 325728
Speaker 1: So when I traveled with the teams, they be, plays they either played Saturday, Friday night or Saturday afternoon.  I would then write on letter, yellow legal pad, sometimes on the bus coming back and then I'd leave the team.  When they got back to the school, I'd leave the team and go downtown to the newspaper [The Portsmouth Star].  And, and where's Lee [F.] Rogers office was not in the main building where the rest of the newspaper people were.  He had a room on the other side of the loading dock filled with all kinds of books and where he held court.  But he for some reason or another I guess because he was black, he couldn't sit in the main newsroom.  But they let me come into the main newsroom to deliver my stories, and so they would, after doing it in longhand, I never learned how to type when I was in high school.  Because we always looked down on that you know, that wasn't a manly thing to do, which is such a, it turned out to be such a big mistake.  So I would write out in longhand and they having a rewrite man go through it and then they give it back to me and then I worked on it and give it back to them.  And then it would run Sunday in the Sunday pages, and so it was Pete Glazer or Howard Jacobson also said why don't we, why don't we come together and let students raise this thousand dollars?  So at the same time that I was the editor of the paper [Norcom Gazette], that spring, I became before my senior year, I became the president of the student government.
Speaker 2: Before we go on, I just wanna get something clear.  When that story ran in the Sunday's paper, did you get a byline?
Speaker 1: Yes I did.
Speaker 2: So you're getting a byline and the--
Speaker 1: And the main part--
Speaker 2: --pap- paper, as a teenager in high school?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay continue.
Speaker 1: Ever since you know I see Norcom [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] win Eastern District track championship by [HistoryMaker] Charles F. Harris, yes.  It was pretty heavy stuff, but I, I was so excited about having the opportunity I don't think that, I don't think that I realized the impact of it.  'Cause I was so into sports and, and trying to do a good job and you know making sure I don't make mistakes and, what, what was the time really you know.  You had to go to the people who were, were the timekeepers and all of this and get the official scores of, of records and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 325729
Speaker 1: So you were voted student body president?
Speaker 2: After being the editor of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After being the editor of the newspaper [Norcom Gazette]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And talk to me about the thousand dollars.  What were you raising the money for?
Speaker 2: We were raising the money in order to give it to [Junius] Kellogg, since he turned down a thousand dollars, the bribe, we were raising the money.  So Pete Glazer or Howard Jacobson wrote a story about it and told, and said people if they wanted to give they could send it to the newspaper [The Portsmouth Star].  But what happened is we gave all kinds of students and I.C. Norcom [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] gave all kinds of rallies and like washing cars and selling cookies, everybody got involved in it.  And we raised the thousand dollars, but we got maybe like, we got like eight hundred [dollars] something and some anonymous donor put in the rest of it.  And so Kellogg was invited back to the City of Portsmouth [Virginia] and on the I.C. Norcom school grounds there was a big ceremony and I presented him the thousand dollar check.  And the mayor was there, the police chief we hardly ever saw them, I'd never seen them there in, in at a black high school before.  But it was a big event it was covered by the papers, I didn't write that story.  But it was a big event and Kellogg gave the thousand dollars to his mother.  And Kellogg came from a very large family and it was a wonderful day, it was a wonderful gesture, and it was a great historic moment.  One of the highlights in my life look, looking back on it, I was just so happy to know Kellogg, Kellogg had been in class with my brother next to me, James [Harris].  So we all knew each other, I mean he didn't, he didn't know me personally, but I was in class with one of his brothers too.  So the families knew each other.  So it was, it was a great event and people from all over the city came.
Story_ID: 325730
Speaker 1: So that propelled you into your college years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me how it developed and how did you decide to go to Virginia State University [sic. Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Well I didn't decide to go there.  At the time that I was doing this writing, Carl Rowan, who was writing for The Minneapolis Tribune [Star Tribune].  He was one of the people that who had gone to journalism school who was writing for white newspapers.  And not necessarily black or what they called at the time Negro subjects, he was a full fledge reporter.  I think it was The Minneapolis Tribune, and, and then there was Ted Poston here from the New York Post which at the time was a liberal paper, not, not the conservative paper it is now.  So that's Ted Poston and I knew of them because of Mrs. the librarian Mrs. Barn [ph.] who was the advisor the school newspaper [Norcom Gazette], was also very exacting.  And so you know she had been an English teacher and she also made sure that I got to read books about journalism.  And I must say that a couple times I had some discipline problems in class and the teacher would put me out, and so they sent me to the library.  And you know I must've been thirty-five years old before I realized that it was on purpose they were sending me to the library.  And that as soon as I got there, and I opened the door to walk in, Miss Barn beckon for me to come to her section of the library.  And, and she said now what did you do now, and I'd have to tell her because the teacher that expelled me said that I better tell her or else they will send me to the principal's office.  And how would that look you know the editor of the paper you know getting into trouble you know.  I happened to be in a class with some very smart students, my classmates they were like three or four classes of maybe thirty-five students all in, we all in the same year.  And I mean some of the students finished like with 99.9 [percent] averages and stuff like that, in my own class.  And some of the, the competition between us all the time, a friendly competition to see who could beat who.  And but, I think I probably did exceptionally well in English and that, because I think that's where I always getting expelled from class.  And I have to go to the library and this Miss Margret Jackson Barn was the librarian.  And she played this big influence in my life in a way that I didn't even realize by talking to me about newspapers.  Read this book [HistoryMaker Charles F.] Harris and give me extra assignments and stuff like that.  That she was instrumental in getting me admitted to the University of Minnesota [Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and what they were gonna do is to do the same thing that, that been doing for people who want to get advanced degrees.  U, University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] had journalism, but Virginia State didn't, and so under that kind of, of situation I could've gone to Minnesota and the State of Virginia would've paid for it.  But I was offered a scholarship there through Mrs. Barn and, and Mrs. Barn helped me with the filling out the applications and stuff like that, and suggest I had the catalogs and so forth.  Various schools of journalism and there were two that I remember distinctly and that's the University of Oregon [Eugene, Oregon] and the University of Minnesota.  And at the time, my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] was working for the Southern Railroad [sic. Southern Railway] and he had what they called a foreign pass.  That a foreign pass mean that the employee of the railroad or members of his immediate family can ride on another railroad line free.  And so that's what I wanted to use to go to Minnesota but my parents felt that I'd be too far from home and if something happened, and so they just thought it was a bad idea.  And they, they and Mich- I mean Oregon was just out of the question, that was way too far.  So I, I really thought that I wanted to major in journalism but in talking to, to other teachers and so forth and talking to some other public people in journalism they said you have to know something.  Journalism is a technique; you have to know something about content, and to know what to write about.  So while all of this indecision on my part was going on, I was wondering what I was going to do, a man named Dr. Lyman Beecher Brooks who at the time was the, I forgotten the title of it now.  But it might've been like provost or something of the Norfolk Division of Virginia State College [Norfolk State University, Norfolk Virginia].  That was located in Norfolk [Virginia] and it was a commuter school, and only people who lived in the, in the dormitory were the athletes who were on scholarship.  So he came to our high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and said talked to us my class graduating class and telling us the kind of education we could get by going to the Norfolk Division of Virginia State College.  And I ended up going there and I think the tuition was seventy-five dollars a semester, and that was the fall of 1951.
Story_ID: 325731
Speaker 1: Before we go on, during that time that you're considering University of Minnesota [Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and [University of] Oregon [Eugene, Oregon], what had inspired you to want to become a journalist?
Speaker 2: I think the big thing was I had gravitated to it so much by working on the school paper [Norcom Gazette] and writing.  I mean I really, that's when I got that ink in my blood I think.  And I was writing on a regular basis, I was doing my homework and I didn't realize in today's students get paid as an intern or something for doing what I was doing for nothing.  But I was so thrilled to have the opportunity to do it, and I guess you know a lot of celebrity went with that.  You know the football game was on and you could go in the press box and you know walk; get down on the field if you want to.  You know you got a little badge or something; you could go where you wanted to.  And I think I, I think I liked that, but also I liked the idea of writing about the--sports has a lot of drama in it.  So you, you develop your writing techniques a lot, I didn't know at the time but some of the best journalist started off in sports.  But that came in handy later because it improved my writing skills, you are writing continuously, you're doing your homework and on the other hand, you're doing something afterwards.  You're writing and then you're reading and I had while I still in high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], I was reading papers from all over.
Speaker 1: Now were there black journalists that you knew of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: That were inspirational to you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: Yes, the, there was a man named, named Calvin Jaycox [ph.] whose a sports writer for the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal Guide].  I carried a paper; I had a paper route of Norfolk Journal and Guide of about fifty customers in my immediate community.  It was a weekly, a black weekly and it was owned by a man named P.B. Young [Sr.], who was a legendary figure of, of black journalist.  These papers were really popular and strong at the time because of the lack of coverage in white newspapers.  So you had, you had the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] own, owned by Robert L. Vann.  Then there was a sportswriter there named Wendell Smith, who people knew now because he was very close to Jackie Robinson covered him when Robinson first came out.  I was reading these people, Sam Lacy at the African, [Baltimore] Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] and Baltimore [Maryland] and Washington [D.C.].  And the Murphy family owned that paper; I mean I knew all of this probably through high school.  That my teachers, we talked about it, and we had these newspapers in our high school.  But I also read probably three or four times a week the, the New York Daily News we, we get it right downtown at the newsstand by the ferry leading to Norfolk [Virginia], or the New York Daily Mirror.  Particularly when Jackie Robinson broke into baseball you know it was quite a feat to you reading outside, out of town newspapers and watching what his batting average is every day.  And I was reading Dick Young and all the sportswriters here, and as well as reading columns and stuff like that.   So this was all going on while I was in high school and sometimes I'd write papers about something, some incident that I read in out of town newspaper.  Time magazine we were reading on a regular basis and discussing it in classes.  So there was just part of my life it became an integral part of my life, something that I just did on a regular basis, just writing and writing and writing.
Story_ID: 325732
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape four, you are about to enter the Virginia State University [sic. Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] as a freshman. What year (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I entered the Norfolk Division of Virginia State it was on, it is what they called I mean a group of people who went to Norfolk Division of Virginia State College.  That they call Wood Streeters, because they Norfolk Division of Virginia State College was partly was in administration, administrative building of an old hospital that had closed and also part of a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  So it was sort of a makeshift kind of school, it was, there was took the facilities that were available.  The outstanding thing about it that the teachers were superb and we had debating teams.  And there was a two-year school and the football team played four-year schools, so did the basketball team and competed admirably.  In, in many cases one, they always had a winning record, so this was before I went there.  One, one of the things that made the school is that it comes into being after World War II [WWII].  And it benefits greatly from the returning veterans and the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], because at that time they able to go and get a stipend because they're in school and have their tuition and books paid for because they're veterans.  And so the school had a lot of my, my sister, my younger sister and my immediate older brother [James Harris] went there before I did.  By the time that I had graduated, my older sister, her son and her daughter went there at the same time and graduated.  It was a four-year school, with brand new facilities on the campus where it's located now, but a lot time had transpired.  When I went there it was a very dynamic school because there was a mixture of young bright people and the people who had the experience of being in the war.  Most of the teachers had been in the war, and I think that, that one had been a pilot and another one we think had been the person in charge of foreign languages.  We thought he had been an intelligence officer; he spoke German, French and probably Italian.  So it was a very tight-knit group, the classes were small there were many honor students from surrounding high schools that I, I met and competed with and became friends with.  Studied with, it was a very, very dynamic situation, without having the best of facilities to operate.
Story_ID: 325733
Speaker 1: I marvel at that because that's just like I marvel at my high school football team, I mean track team.  The, the track team did not have a track and only time they ran on a actual track was when they went to the track meet.  But when they trained, they ran up and down the landings in the school building, after school was out.  And then they could run on the little the field on the back of the school where the football team practiced.  But the football team never really played on a real football field until they went to play a game at the stadium.  The city wouldn't allow them to practice on the stadium where Woodrow Wilson [High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] played also; the stadium was very near Woodrow Wilson.  I left out a key part; I have to, I have to digress for a second, because the place where the gymnasium, the Woodrow Wilson gymnasium was and Woodrow Wilson High School was on that particular location right now is I.C. Norcom High School [Portsmouth, Virginia].  Which is one of the most modern high school facilities in the nation science and technology.  And that's a wonderful story, and the gymnasium at I.C. Norcom High School is called the Junius Kellogg Gymnasium.  And I had the honor of going there to speak when they wanted to commemorate the gymnasium and I made a speech in which I said if they they're debating about anybody who should be the gymnasium should be named after, there's no one but with a greater stature for integrity and honesty than Junius Kellogg.  And soon thereafter, they named the gymnasium after him.
Story_ID: 325734
Speaker 1: But getting back to Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], the, there was some people who came back to the school from World War II [WWII] who played on the football team.  My brother [James Harris] had played on the team before, he hadn't been in the war, he's only five years older than I.  But he had played on the team before I did, and so always be following somebody I had a orientation what college life was gonna be like.  By having my sister and my brother going to Norfolk [Virginia] every day and coming home at night.  And so I got a sense of what the college life was gonna be like up close at home, so when I got there, I knew the professors and I knew 'cause when you're a freshmen there certain basic courses you have to take.  I was fortunate in that Dr. [Lyman Beecher] Brooks who was the head of the school and got it into being a four-year institution.  Dr. Brooks taught European history which was required and I studied under Dr. Brooks for two years there.  And he was a, a wonderful teacher, a proud man, a wonderful storyteller, worldly figure and a wonderful leader. And he was a model for the school, and so I was very impressed with him, as well as many of the other teachers that I had.  Immediately I joined the newspaper when I went there, and I became--it was the paper when I got there was called The Trojan Echo and the reason it was called The Trojan Echo is that Virginia State College [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] their mascot name was the Virginia State Trojans.  So the Norfolk being a division, they used to call Norfolk Little State and called Virginia State in Petersburg [Virginia], Big State.
Story_ID: 325735
Speaker 1: Now Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia] is bigger than Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia], and partially that's due to the metropolitan area that Norfolk [Virginia] is in, whereas Petersburg [Virginia] is more in a rural setting.  It's in between Richmond [Virginia], it's, it's maybe fifteen miles south of Richmond [Virginia], so it doesn't have, it's not at a seaport like Norfolk is.  As where as the headquarters of the Atlantic Fleet and so that has a, it has a Ford Motor Company plant there.  And so after World War II [WWII], things began to open up a little bit more because the, the leaders in that part of Virginia wanted to bring industry in.  And so segregation was standing in the way.  So what they starting doing was just ignoring the laws and promoting people and, and getting people in apprenticeships in places they couldn't have gone before.  This helped Norfolk and Old Dominion [University, Norfolk, Virginia] and all the surrounding colleges and universities grow faster than would have ordinarily grown.  So this influenced Norfolk State too like G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] but also industry start coming in.  And so people were coming to Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] to study technical skills as well.  So, so you had an academic liberal arts part and then you had the technical part also.
Story_ID: 325736
Speaker 1: I had wonderful teachers there.  I began to write for the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal Guide] while I was there.  I wrote a column, a Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] column once a week and I also worked on the newspaper.  In my sophomore year, Norfolk State decided to change the name of the paper and didn't want, they were getting to be more independent.  They wanted to be more independent and they were moving towards it, so they changed the name from The Trojans Echo to The Spartan Echo.  So I became the first editor of The Spartan Echo.  And I ran the paper for a year, and I was writing again, and I had wonderful colleagues working with me on the paper.  So it was a great time you know all everything was done after class, but it was, it was just a wonderful opportunity to sharpen your writing skills.  And people were, I would say much more competitive at Norfolk State than they were in high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  And they were from much more diversified group because some of the people were from Hampton [Virginia] and Newport News [Virginia] and Norfolk [Virginia] and, and Williamsburg [Virginia].  And they were community every day, all these places are very close to Norfolk.  So that was a wonderful experience for me and I, I had wonderful teachers Mr. Perkins [ph.] was a, was an advisor to the newspaper.  And a man from Portsmouth [Virginia] who still alive named Harvey Johnson [Jr.] was a, was a advisor for the newspaper.  And he's got to be almost ninety years old now; he's still active in, in the community in Portsmouth.  But these were people who were very helpful to me giving me advice; they had been in the war [World War II, WWII].  And you know teach you how to calm down or how to see through an issue, how to be analytical, it's a level of difficulty a little higher level of difficulty.  And so I think all of those things influenced me.  Ironically when I finished Norfolk State and went to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I didn't work on the newspaper, and, and I think there was always a, a, at that time, there was always a distinction between the students who went two years at Norfolk and then went to Virginia State in Petersburg [Virginia].  Because the, the area I grew up in is called Tidewater, and so we all, that part of the, the state, we had what we would call the Tidewater club.  And I think that, looking back that some of the people who weren't from Tidewater sort of resented that because I think we were sort of cliquish without even thinking about it.  Because every, either around Thanksgiving or Christmas we gave a big dance and party and stuff like that the Tidewater Boys and all that kind of thing.  But so I didn't work, I started to work on the newspaper then I couldn't get the kind of assignments I wanted.  You know I couldn't, I couldn't crack the, the inner circle there, so I may have made an effort the first semester I was there, but then after that I didn't.
Story_ID: 325737
Speaker 1: Now did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: During that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  While I was in I.C. Norcom [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], they had what they used to call smokers, which we weren't old enough to smoke.  But the people who were already members of fraternities would take the, the young and they did it with the girls in the sororities too.  Would take the young men and invite them to some dinner and tell them about the wonders of being in this, the traditions of the, this fraternity.  And when they get to college, you should think about this and the positive things that come out of it, and they also gave scholarships, scholarships too.  And they sponsored other events, the debating's and all kinds of other things to bring people together in a positive way.  Well some of my high school teachers were in the group that invited me, they invite, you know the outstanding students they invited them to, to go to one of the smokers.  And I went to one and it was given by Alpha Phi Alpha [Fraternity], and a man came, attended that from Richmond [Virginia] who was the head of the, I think at the time he was the head of the state chapter of Alphas.   But he was also the executive secretary of the Virginia Teacher's Association.  The, at the time that I was in Virginia, there was segregated sections of the NEA [National Education Association, Washington, D.C.], so many African American teachers didn't belong to NEA, they belonged to the Virginia Teacher's Association which was part of the ATA, American Teachers Association which was based in Atlanta [Georgia].  Later on they merged and of course they were integrated and then the blacks lost the power that they had.  Because the Virginia Teacher's Association wielded a lot of power, they couldn't lobby but they could do other things.  Because they had dues paying and they had met annually and they had their own program, invited their own speakers and you know.  It was, and they had an eastern district of that which met somewhere in the Tidewater area, so it was a very powerful organ, organization, so it a way of people communicating with each other as well.  So I went to the Alpha meeting, and, and there was a man named J. Rupert Picott who was the, had been the principal of a high school in Newport News [Virginia] and he was the head of that association, he was an Alpha.  I met him and I met of course my teachers at Norcom, who were Alphas, and then I met people from Norfolk [Virginia] and Newport News they all came for that. And it was, they brought in some students from Norfolk and other places in the area too.  So it was a wonderful event, so they didn't have fraternities at Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], but when I got to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and I guess some of the people I started associating with, they'd ask me why don't you consider joining Alpha.  I think the Alphas were the first ones that asked me, and since I'd already had an association and since I admired J. Rupert, Rupert Picott so much, and I had seen more of him after I got to Virginia State.  He'd come on the campus sometimes and visit with the young people, and they would invite, the Alphas would invite you to come to some event that they were giving.  All of them did that, but Alphas did that more with me, and so I decided to pledge.  And you know they did, they do a wonderful job, wonderful sales pitch on you by telling you who else is already a member you know.  So and I'd like that so I joined, I joined--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: In 1954 I became an Alpha.
Story_ID: 325738
Speaker 1: So that was the same year Brown versus Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education, 1954]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did that have any impact on your life?
Speaker 2: Not immediately.  I was in the first group, I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] it was, it was required the first two years were required when I, because I went to a land-grant college.
Speaker 1: Explain that to me briefly.
Speaker 2: In 1862, there was passed what they called a Morrill Act, M-O-R-R-I-L-L, and what that did, it, it mandated that land be set aside on all state institutions to teach agriculture and I think some technology or engineering kinds of things.  But it was designed to improve the capabilities of farmers partly, but it also established that they must have ROTC there.  At any college that was a land-grant college, and Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] was a land-grant college.  So I was required to take two years but also the draft was on and so the only way you could avoid beating the draft the only permit you were able to get is by being in the ROTC.  And if you, if they were late sending your papers in, you would be the first to go, what they did was your draft card had your race on it at the time.  So that the draft board, it wasn't like a lottery, what it later became, the draft board would know so they would use the blacks in the South to fill their quotas first.  So you'd be, you classified 1-A, you have to go right away, if they were late sending in your deferment papers.  So but I decided also I had known a few people who had gone and, and the second two years because then they paid you.  And it was helpful to defray your expenses of being in college because you got a monthly check for maybe forty or fifty dollars a month.  And that was, that was nice to have walking around campus, and, and also the country was much, in much more of a militaristic kind of thing.  It was your duty to do [U.S.] military service and all that, because everybody had to do it.  So I was in the ROTC my junior and senior years, I was commissioned after when I graduated as a second lieutenant.
Story_ID: 325739
Speaker 1: Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] we had professors who were friendly with Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I mean with a, with a Thurgood Marshall, professors at Virginia State who were friendly with Thurgood Marshall.  Now, one of the reasons for this is the way the segregation laws were broken down, is that there were each, there were challenges in each state.  So that this interstate commerce segregation of buses by that time I got to Virginia State, the segregation on buses was gone. Because it was a violation of the interstate commerce regulations, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People [NAACP] and others had, had successfully fought these cases on a state by state basis.  But also, there was research on the, at the laws of segregation and on the practices of segregation done, these studies were done by many black professors at the state colleges.  And that information was fed to the NAACP.  So Thurgood Marshall came to Virginia State before May of 1954 and gave us a speech to our student body, and told us that the, the segregation was gonna be overturned when the, when the court next met.  And so Virginia State had a greater facilities than Norfolk State [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], so we constantly had speakers of national stature coming like [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin or you know.  We had, we had a lot of scholars coming in and talking with us, and we had commencement speakers who were really powerful people.  So and, and it had a bigger hall you know get, most of the students body in Virginia Hall.  So you had opera singers and all these people coming there, so when Thurgood Marshall made that, I mean we were astounded.  And then when it happened, when it was announced, I mean it was joy everywhere you know.
Story_ID: 325740
Speaker 1: So at that time, I think we went, we went to college almost to the end of May before school was out.  So in June in your junior year in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] you have to go to six weeks of summer camp, which is like basic training for the regular soldier.  And we had to go to Fort Lee [Virginia], because every ROTC unit has a, a section of the [U.S.] Army is associated with.  So at the time, most of the predominantly historically black colleges [HBCUs] when they had ROTC, they were in some kind of service function.  By that I mean we were Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] was quartermaster, so they teach you how to be an officer and a quartermaster corps.  Which is a service of the fighting units or transportation, but not infantry not artillery not ordinance, these are things for or--you have a signal corps that was serve- you get certain kind of skills in that.  And the pro- promotion once you become an officer is higher if you come from one of those kinds of technical units or from a combat unit, like armor you know.  So I'll show you how this plays out again later.  That summer of 1954, I went to summer camp and we were integrated with a white unit into a white unit.  The summer before that, there were all black units at the, at the base, at the fort.  But they were not mixed.  So they put us in of us, those of us from Virginia State, we were with the ROTC cadets from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  The ironic part is that although we slept in the same barracks and ate in the same dining halls and all of that, same baths and all of that, when we were in formation the whites walked in front and the blacks we walked in--like in a squad, we walked in the back.  But we, everything else we were integrated.  I didn't really notice this that much until I was looking at the picture many years after that, and, and saw it.  But other than that it was an integrated unit.  And everybody where's the fights may break out and stuff, because this is just Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] has just happened.  And it was, it was a great experience, the interacting like that that was the first experience that I had interacting with the whites on an equal basis like that.  I had no qualms about it, because where growing up, we our parents [Annie Lawson Harris and Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] taught us now you know we weren't inferior to anybody.  And you know we were black and proud long before the, the slogan so you know we just thought we could compete with anybody that was a family thing.  And then the teachers I had in high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and college we thought we could compete with anybody, and with the best.  And so I, that's why I said these teachers, I never had white teachers.  So when I when I met many of friends in New York [New York], and they talk about certain things that they experienced or the psychological impact, and what it can be done to tell you can't do something.  Or you got to go to this vocational school or something because you never gonna be successful.  That was never instilled in me, I never even heard it, I was always told that whatever you think you can do, you apply yourself, you, you can do it.
Story_ID: 325741
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate Virginia State University [sic. Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1955, and they asked us, the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] students, to the graduates after commit, before you were commissioned, they ask you what units did you want to be in?  So I put down signal corps because I knew some people who had gone in and they said when you come out you'll know something, something about technology and something like that.  I definitely didn't put down any combat units, and I didn't put down quartermaster either.  So I, I left and when I got, we left school, I guess it was May like mid-May or something like that.  And I knew I was supposed to leave and go into the [U.S.] Army probably that probably a month after that.  They told you know preceding group had already told me once you get out in about four weeks; you get your orders and tell you where to report.  Well in July, I got my orders and it said that I was assigned to the United States Infantry.  And I was to re- report to Fort Benning, Georgia, and I had, I had real dread there.  The reason I had dread is that, first of all I hadn't been trained to be an infantry officer.  If you were, were in a school where like West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], where they know they're gonna go into infantry, well then they give them training with weapons.  And so the only thing we ever fired was a rifle, was an M1 rifle, in, in the summer camp that's where the soldier, the regular soldier fires.  At the time, it was probably oh what is it something fifteen or something in there.  So then they changed my orders, I, I still was in the infantry, I was really shocked that day, I'd been out with some friends and something who were home from school.  You see you couldn't find a job at the time because people knew that you were, if you--they'd ask you what's your classification when you, you fill out an, an application for a job, you had to put down what is your job classification.  Well if you put down that 1A or I'm waiting for orders, they're not gonna hire you, so I couldn't work anywhere.  So I'm just hanging out with friends and so forth knowing that I was gonna leave in July, some July 19th or something like that.  Well about two weeks before that, they changed and said you're, you're not to report until October.  So there I just left out, it was okay while the people were home from school that I'd knew but then September came, they, everybody was gone.  So I'm the only person that walking around the streets, there was hardly anything to do, and so then they changed it again before October and said January.  So fortunately my high school teacher, the man who was the science teacher unfortunately (laughter) I should say, he had to have some sort of operation and wasn't able to teach.  And so he was also teaching a gym class, and he was, he taught and I had, they hired me as a substitute to teach the gym class and to pick up some other classes that he had.  And I worked at that probably about two months, and then somebody else called me, the school system to substitute.  So I picked up a little money here and there what with doing that, and, and then in January, I left and went to Fort Benning, Georgia.
Story_ID: 325742
Speaker 1: This is 19, January 1956.  I was so naive at the time, the, the Korean War was legally over but there was still fighting.  And some of my friends who had already graduated and went into the [U.S.] Army had been to Korea and already had been injured and were back before I left.  They just for some reason got their orders ahead of mine and-so and then when I got to Georgia there were people in my class who were already there who they were getting ready to ship out to go to Korea.  And so, but I was so naive I couldn't understand why my mother [Annie Lawson Harris] was crying when I was leaving home, you know?  Because they were worried about me going into the infantry you know, they didn't think, I didn't think I was gonna either.  But I'd like gotten over it, so we drove in this 19, I guess it was a 1949 or 1950 Studebaker that my friend had, classmate.  And we, we left early in the morning and we, we there were no Howard Johnsons and all that where you could stay.  And there were hardly any interstates, so we were on all these like three lane highways and going through places like, like all this south side of Virginia through Danville [Virginia] and then cutting down through North Carolina.  I think the first place we found a rooming house in Charlotte [North Carolina] by asking a guy on the streets you know.  We on our way in the Army and you know some place we can stay the night?  We stayed at some family's house, and they gave separate bedrooms, we, we asked them what did they want; I think we gave them a few dollars or something.  They didn't want anything you know, they said well leave something you know for the food that you ate or something like that.  So we may have left fifteen or twenty dollars apiece.  And then we drove, we stayed there all night and the next day we had to be we had to be there no later than one o'clock that next day.
Speaker 2: Before you go on.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Are we close to the end of this tape before I start, two minutes?  Well just in these last two minutes, and I just briefly want you to touch on at that time the United States there, I mean this country.  There are no black hotels.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So you literally had to find, if you wanted to stay someplace, a black family or something to take you in.
Speaker 1: A rooming house, yes.
Speaker 2: A rooming house.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So there was no hotel for you to stay in?
Speaker 1: No, now you might get lucky and stay on a college campus or something like that, but you, we had a deadline.  We left in enough time to get there, but we, you, you can't report late you know, there's no excuse for that.  So that's why we stopped in Charlotte, because we figured we might be all about half way there.  And the car hardly burned any gas but we had to stop repeatedly to get oil, it was always smoking and stuff like that (laughter). We might've stopped at some black place restaurant or something to get barbeque sandwich or something like that.
Speaker 2: So there must've been a real camaraderie in the black community at that time.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Because it was legally segregated and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: And they respected that you were going to the Army and they opened their homes to you and says okay stay with us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, somebody we, you know you pull up to a barbershop or something and say you know drugstore or something and say, hi, look we're passing through town, you know where somebody can stay for the night or something like that?  And as a--you stop, start up a conversation and so forth you know and they ask you where did you go to school you know or where you going?  And you tell them and stuff like that, and I guess they size you up before they let someone take you into their home (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During that conversation?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 325743
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape five, you arrive at Fort Benning, Georgia for active duty.
Speaker 2: We arrived in Fort Benning, Georgia for active duty and I think its January the 19th, 1956.  At the, at this time it's a lot of tension going on because the murder of Emmett Till takes place in 1955.  And getting back to why my mother [Annie Lawson Harris] was crying, it wasn't just the baby leaving home, I think it was where I was going.  I had had a cousin who had been stationed in Alabama and during World War II [WWII] and was killed in some for some mysterious reason, unsolved murder.  And I think that all of that must've come to her too, but I was so young and I was single and you know, and was full of life and all this sort of thing.  So after I got myself accustomed to the fact that I couldn't do anything about changing you know getting out of the infantry, I just went along with it.  I said well it may not be so bad, just go ahead and get it over with, well and so and I left home thinking that I was gonna be gone for two years too.  I mean not that I wouldn't come home on leave, but I was gonna have to do two years.  So we arrived in January and immediately you get your first clothes and so forth, then we didn't have many clothes.  The only civilian clothes we had with us was the, probably the ones we had on and maybe a sweater or two or something like that.  Because you had to realize now that we're not that far from World War II and with the Korea [Korean War], I mean it's just beginning to, they just begin to relax the rule that you can wear civilian clothes when you're off duty.  That happened maybe four or five years before I got in but at one time if you were in the [U.S. military] service, you had to wear that uniform whether you're on leave or not.  So that's the tone of the country, so we got issued clothes, but you know officers had to pay for their own clothes.  So they'd give us some allowance and all that kind of stuff, and then had to go all these shots and so forth that you had to take.  So and then they assigned us to companies, what you do, what you're doing is you going through what they called basic training for infantry officers.  You already an officer, so it's not like going to Officer Candidate School, you're already a commissioned officer.  And but what can happen is that if you fail the program, you then have to be discharged and then you have to go back as a private.  You still have this military obligation you have to do.  At the time that I went in, and the time I joined the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], you were obligated to do eight years of service, two years of active duty and six years in the [U.S. Army] Reserves.  That didn't mean that you had to go meetings or but, but you had to be ready and you could be called at any time.  Well I took the training but it was, it was pretty grueling; it was grueling because we're in with a group of people.  There were like twelve blacks in the company I was in of like 190 men.  And but all of them had had infantry training, it was only those of us who were black.  And we were from two people were from Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] somebody was from Prairie View [Agricultural & Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], someone was from Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] and I guess we were the only ones from Virginia, it was like two of us from Virginia.  So but we studied together and there were other people from Virginia but not in our, our company, so they had been like a month ahead of us.  And so they would be feeding us information about what to expect, you had to take, you had to be able to fire a machine gun.  You had to disassemble it and assemble it and fire it you know.  Well if you already done that in the classroom you can see that those guys were going to play golf and stuff and we were having to study.
Story_ID: 325744
Speaker 1: There were elements of discrimination present and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For example?
Speaker 1: Well there were, there been some of the things that stand out is that we, you have to pay officer's club dues.  But the City of Columbus [Georgia] did not have a country club, so on certain days of the week, the black officers (unclear) spoken that they were supposed to go to the officer's club.  Because the leading citizens of, of Columbus may be there socializing with their wives.  And, and swimming and going into the swimming pool and stuff like that.  So they would get somebody else to tell you, they wouldn't tell you themselves, they wouldn't be of rank, be somebody a captain somebody telling you couldn't do it.  So it was an unspoken thing that you, you were gonna get extra duty or you were gonna get you know punished in some sort of way for violating the unspoken code.
Speaker 2: So the unspoken was code you don't show up at the Officer's Club on this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On--
Speaker 2: --day?
Speaker 1: Yeah, on a certain of the week because that's the day they allowed the citizens of, of Columbus the politicians and civic leaders and stuff to use the facilities of the officer's club.  Of course I didn't pay any attention to that, I went, and so a couple of my friends did too.  So I mean in the beginning it was sort of strange or sometimes we had a, not the main officer's club it right in the area where we were in, they'd have a, a like mini officer's club.  Where you could go get a few beers just a little bar, a little game room and stuff like that.  So you'd have to go get in your car and drive to the main officer's club, 'cause Fort Benning [Georgia] is a huge place, I mean.  So sometimes you walk in there, the white officers would start singing 'Old Black Joe' or something like that you know.  You'd get, you get incidents like that or you're on a, you're, you're out in the field and somebody start telling race jokes.  And sometimes the commanding officer may tell a race joke.
Story_ID: 325745
Speaker 1: What were the positive aspects of, of it?
Speaker 2: The discipline of it, the, the, to being in an atmosphere in many cases, this, the segregation wasn't the overwhelming atmosphere but it did come up it popped up from time to time.  The, the good part was the discipline that you have and, and planning and executing and you know having to get something done.  Have to figure out how to get from one place to another you know, how to escape an evasion and all kinds of programs that you have to take.  And knowing that you're in very good physical condition is another thing, and that you know, you know when you graduate in this kind of confidence.  They have a ceremony and you walk across and you get that document said you completed this, is a wonderful feeling.  And that you know you know you know that you can compete.
Speaker 1: So once you completed your basic training what happened next?
Speaker 2: Then I was assigned to the 29th, 29th Infantry Regiment.
Speaker 1: In Fort Benning [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: In Fort Benning, that's in a part of what Fort Benning called Sand Hill.  I, that shows you how large Fort Benning is, you can fire artillery weapons that can go twenty miles and stuff like that.  I mean or they, they come in and give an air show, demonstrations of the officers of the jets coming in and how they would come in and low and straight and drop bombs and stuff like that.  You know you have to be able to throw hand grenades and you know, you have to be able to set-off explosives, explosions and stuff like that.  You know and you have to go through this training where somebody you crawling and somebody's firing machine guns over your head and it's live you know.  And I had, I used to have, I still do, I just have a mortal fear of snakes, and Fort Benning is just loaded with them, rattlesnakes, it's just loaded with them.  I was one time I was down, we had, we were, I on some field study and I, we had stopped they had break for lunch and I was tying my boots, and somebody said Charlie [HistoryMaker Charles F. Harris], don't move.  And it a rattlesnake came right beside me, I thought I was gonna die, but you know the thing is, you don't, if you don't move, you might not, you don't frighten it.  And so he, he wasn't after me, he was on his way to somewhere else.  But oh it was always something like that or if when you sleep in the sleeping bag, you warm so this dew and stuff and the, yet when you get up in the morning, you have to make sure that you don't move too fast because they may be a snake under the sleeping bag, because it's, it's warm under the sleeping bag.  So and it happened to some people, I mean I didn't get bit but a couple of people got bit when I was there.  And you have a snake bite kit that you carry with you when you're in the field you know, it was an interesting thing.  You have to you know some of the fighting is from training is on helicopters, you--they'd take you into some spot and you supposed to lead the squad to some particular direction.
Story_ID: 325746
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were you thinking about your journalism career at that time?
Speaker 2: Well everything is on hold when you have to do your [U.S.] military service, I mean you can't you know.  The fortunate thing that happened is that after I completed the training, right in the end when I was about to graduate from the infantry school, it came, they passed, we were notified that those who wanted to get out in six months could do so and complete their military obligation in the [U.S. Army] Reserves.  And I was one of the people who chose to do that, so I started writing to newspapers in New York [New York].  This is, I completed the training like in May.
Speaker 1: Of 1950--
Speaker 2: Six [1956].  Then I was assigned to the 29th Infantry [Regiment] and then it gave me like two weeks off, I bought a car in the meantime.  And I drove by myself from Fort Benning [Georgia] to Portsmouth [Virginia], for I stayed for like a week and then went back and completed my obligation and then drove back.  And but I had written letters to all the New York newspapers for interviews and my brother who, who is older than I am came back to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] from military service.  He didn't want to be in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and he joined the [U.S.] Air Force, and he definitely didn't want to be in the infantry, I mean in the [U.S.] Army.  So he joined the Air Force and he had to four years, so that made him come back and I finished a year ahead of him.  And so he had, when I was in the Army, he graduated; he had graduated and gone to New York.  And where he enrolled at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and he was married and so he had called me to tell me that, that he had a job for me.  This is when I, the day I arrived at home that I had an interview the next day, so I had to leave.   So I caught the Greyhound bus, I stayed one day, caught the Greyhound bus and arrived at, at night.  I must've stayed one night at home and the next night I left and arrived in New York that morning.  I got to his house in Brooklyn [New York, New York] and he was, he didn't have a job for me no interview for me, he was trying to get me out of Portsmouth.  He said if I didn't leave right then, I'd probably stay, I doubt that was the case, but then I stayed.
Story_ID: 325747
Speaker 1: I arrived here [New York, New York] and it must've been July 20th, 1956 and I had an interview at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York], I mean at the Urban League on August the 12th, 1956.  I went to the Urban League on the 12th it was 136th Street just off of 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. Boulevard] I think.  That's where the Urban League of Greater New York was located at the time, and there was a man then who was the head of it named Ray Rivera [ph.], who interviewed me.  And I told him how much I wanted to work on newspapers, he said well, and I told him I had gone to some interviews but nothing had happened.  So well we don't have anything on the newspaper, but we have something in a book publishing house.  And why don't you go down there for an interview and see whether or not you like it?  Well I was radically running out of money, so because of that's what New York [New York] is, if you don't have income and you spending, it goes fast.  So Ray Rivera sent me to Doubleday & Company which was located at the corner of Madison Avenue and 57th Street.  And it's 575 Madison Avenue, and I was interviewed by in personnel and then they sent me to a man named Leonard Shatzkin who was the director of operations research.  And they were looking for research assistants, which was, they were compiling all kinds of statistical data in order to analyze it for to, to be able to quantify printing quantities during time and motion studies.  And Leonard Shatzkin had worked on the Manhattan Project, and had been in engineering at Carnegie [Institute of Technology; Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], its Carnegie Mellon now, but the Carnegie, Carnegie Tech then.  He interviewed me and told me if I wanted a job I, I could have it, and asked me when did I want to come to work.  He said, I said how about the next day, he said fine, I went to work at Doubleday August the 13, 1956.
Speaker 2: And you were hired as a researcher?
Speaker 1: A research assistant.  And after they doing that for six about six months, they the manager of the research department is a man named George Blagovidova [ph.].  And he was a statistician a trained statistician, and he's from Poland but he spoke Russian, French, Italian, German.  And he was an outstanding statistician, and he actually operated the department.
Story_ID: 325748
Speaker 1: After working there [Doubleday & Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] for six months, he [research department manager, George Blagovidova (ph.)] suggested to me that I go to NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and study statistics and I did.  And I ended up, Doubleday paid for this, and I completed the course requirements for majoring in statistics at NYU.  But the way that helped me is that I was doing the work during the day that I was studying at night.  The first semester I went was the summer of 1957 and I took a year's course in about eight weeks, which I would never want to do again.  But also during the work during the day it was rapid, it was a rapid growth process, and having him there, I could ask him questions, and he wouldn't give an answer, but he like use a Socratic method, method and lead to it myself, make me discover it myself.  But the advantages of being in that department, we did studies on inventory control, we did sales analysis, we studied how to predict initial printing quantities for books.  The, the relationship, the correlation between cost and price, well what it did was give me a good grounding in the business of publishing.  And the director, Leonard Shatzkin reported only to the president of the company.  So and he convinced me after being at Doubleday asked wanted to go into the regular training program where you rotate from department to department about every two months another department.  He said you're gonna learn more here that you can learn in that regular training program, and he turned out to be right.  And because it gave, we had, he used the team approach to research so that maybe if some of the search problem that you get a chance to head the team and sometimes you just a member of the team, so it moved around.  And I was in a department with people who had graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England], Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], Columbia [University, New York, New York], and I think I was the only one who was from a state university.  And you asked me earlier about the infantry training, well the infantry training, that competition also helped me because I had to do a number of things, like calling for artillery fire.  You're at one, you're at one point and the weapon is at another point and you're having and you're wanting to fire and hit a target that's ten miles away.  I mean well there's a board that you can use to plot that, well it's those kinds of things, and you have to pass this.  Because if you can't pass that you can't be an officer out in the field the troops, and you gotta call for artillery fire and call it on yourself you know?   So you, that's one of those courses you have to pass, I don't care how good you are in anything else.  So, but this is the kind of thing that they, they gave me kind of self-confidence to tackle something that I hadn't experience before and to be successful with it.  Because I had just come from something where I had just done that.  So and the leadership skills that you develop in the in the officer's course also comes in handy.  So if you ever head this team here that you're commanding people you know, you, you know so I already had that experience.
Speaker 2: So you went from Doubleday did you, when you left Doubleday were you considered a researcher?
Speaker 1: No, if (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what did you move on to?
Speaker 1: Eventually I became the supervisor of sales analysis and research and that was about after being there for about four years.  But I always wanted to be an editor, I then decided that I was not gonna get on a newspaper, 'cause I kept writing to newspapers while I was here and trying to break through.  So then I said oh well maybe I'll be an editor, because I was watching the editors there and so but I said I wanted to be an editor, they asked Leonard Shatzkin and George Blagovidova, do you think he can do it?  And they said yes, and so I, they gave took me into the editorial department and this is about the beginning of '61 [1961] or late '60 [1960].  And after about six months I was given the title, I was as editor, and I proceeded to, to edit (laughter).  I, I had been watching people and I you know read some books about what editors do and, and I'd been around.  I'd been to sales conferences and watched them present books and all of that, and I think I can do that you know.  And I knew my writing skills were there and of course they gave me in the beginning, they gave me manuscripts for me to reevaluate to copy and write on books.  And, and I was equal to the task, so they made me an editor in a short, short period of time, well I also knew the company and I knew I had been there a long time and I had done some outstanding work where I was.
Story_ID: 325749
Speaker 1: --Once you became an editor, you worked with like [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, Rayford Logan (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I worked with John Hope Franklin, I worked with John Hope Franklin, now John Hope Franklin was the first book, his book, 'The Emancipation Proclamation' was the first original book that I signed a contract for.  And it was published on January the first 1963.  At the time I became an editor, John Hope Franklin became the, the head of the history department at Brooklyn College [New York, New York].  Which it was a front-page story in The New York Times, and my professor at Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] he had been friendly with some of them.  And he told me one of my professors, who incidentally taught Reginald Lewis, Reginald Lewis went to Virginia State also the multimillionaire, late multimillionaire of Beatrice [International] Holdings [Beatrice Foods Company].  This particular print, professor was friendly with John Hope Franklin and told me I should go see him, which I did.  And this same professor had written letters of recommendation for me to get into NYU [New York University, New York, New York] as well you know.  And I had several professors at Virginia State who wrote those letters of recommendation.
Speaker 1: What was that first meeting like with John Hope Franklin?
Speaker 2: Well he you know it, it was a very friendly, he was much more relaxed than I thought he would be, since his, his fame and renowned.  He was a very down to earth person, and he asked about some of the people that I knew and he told me some of the people he knew.  And I took him to lunch we went, I went to his office first, and then I took him to lunch to a restaurant near Brooklyn College campus.  And I think it was on Norstrand Avenue or Flatbush Avenue one when they come together somewhere near the college.  And the place was called Paul's [ph.], and I can distinctly remember him with, with having a couple of martinis and talking.  And that was sort of the icebreaker and I, he, he was great conteur.
Story_ID: 325750
Speaker 1: One of the things before I met [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin--this is very critical factor--when I first became an editor, I asked the editor-in-chief could I travel to many of the predominately black colleges [HBCUs].  Because I knew most publishers didn't send anybody there, and I knew that these, many of these pro people who taught there belong to the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life & History (ASALH)].  And the editor-in-chief gave me permission to do that, and I started out, this is before I actually had contracted for any books.  I may have contracted for some reprints, the first reprint I contracted for was a book by Lillian Smith called 'Killers of the Dream' and it was about lynching in the South.  You know she wrote the book 'Strange Fruit' so that book had been, nobody wanted to I guess touch it because of the nature of the subject.  And that was I's, I bought the rights for Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] and then put it in Anchor Books, and I had signed some other contracts.  But then I took off on this trip which took me, I came back on weekends, but I started out and went to Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] where I met Benjamin [A.] Quarles.  The art professor, James [E.] Lewis, Nick Aaron Ford, English professor, Waters [E.] Turpin the English professor.  And they were very wholesome kind of discussion you know just talking about literature books and all of that sort of thing.  You should also know at the time, Langston Hughes was alive, and I made a point of visiting Langston Hughes before I did this.  I met Langston Hughes because Langston Hughes was conducting the Harlem Writers Guild at the time.  So I would attend, when I first came an editor that's one of the first places I went was the Harlem Writers Guild to introduce myself.  It was a--when I was made an editor it was in all the newspapers too, the black newspapers and Ebony did a story and all that.  So that, that broke the ice you know.
Speaker 2: Were you one of the first black editors at a major publisher like Doubleday?
Speaker 1: As far as I know, yes, as far as I know.  That's usually what people think, I, I think so.  So to be a regular person on the staff with that title yes, so this, this the stories appear in 1961.  And it's in Publishers Weekly it was everywhere; because of the nature it was you know it was a Jackie Robinson kind of thing.  But that, that having been, that association allowed me to meet people I immediately met Jackie Robinson, he wasn't playing then.  He was a vice president at Chock full o'Nuts, I just called him on the phone told him who I was, and that I wanted to come meet him.  He was very open, I went to meet him, and he said I have to go Harlem [New York, New York] and get me a haircut, come on and go with me.  We got on the subway and went up and I sat in the barbershop with him talking while he got his haircut (laughter).  But it was, it was, people were very helpful to me, Jackie was, Langston Hughes I mean they people I met John Oliver Killens.  I met [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou at the Harlem Writers Guild, Lonne Elder [III].
Speaker 2: Can you talk to me about the Harlem Writers Guild?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  The Harlem Writers Guild I don't know how old it was, but it was a place where writers, it was like a workshop.  People would get up and read their works and the other, others would critique them.  And I, they would sharpen, they would sharpen their material and it was a place where they did networking.  You know somebody had a gotten a good contract or something or somebody was negotiating a contract.  I mean I think that they talked to each other about those things, and so it was, it was, it's the '60s [1960s] so it's the lot of camaraderie and unity.  And you know [Lewis H.] Michaux's book store [African National Memorial Bookstore, Harlem, New York, New York] is open then, so hotbed of discussion and because the, the nationalist and other radical speakers was speaking right here on the corner.  Not far from the bookshop 125th Street near 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. Boulevard], so I used to go up there all the time because Michaux had almost as many historical books and, and rare books as the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] did.
Story_ID: 325751
Speaker 1: Did Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] bring you on to specifically go out and be sort of an outreach and black community and to acquire black books, they had not been able to acquire before?
Speaker 2: No, Doubleday didn't do that.  I could do anything I wanted to do, I was not, I was not isolated to and I did other books.  But at the time, it was very difficult for, for black Americans to get published, because publishing operates on the premises of how close, how in proximity are you to the people who make the decision.  And segregation being what it was, even though Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] had passed, we really had segregation.  When I first started traveling, I don't mean to digress, but, when I first start traveling Double, and going to restaurants with an expense account, Doubleday would tell me which wonderful thing about them, would tell me if I experience any kind of slights or any kind of you know what I thought was discrimination, they wanted to know it.  And in one case, they stopped going to a restaurant because that restaurant, I think it was Richard Wright, the editor to Richard Wright, the executive editor.  Which was in those days you didn't have all the other people with all these titles, and titles meant more.  So you'd have one executive editor, you'd have one managing editor, one editor-in-chief you know.  So the executive editor was like the number two person and he took Richard Wright there and, and the restaurant evidently didn't want, wanted to sit him by the door or something like that.  Or not at a good table, so the editor left with Richard Wright and we were told never to go to that restaurant.  But we were never told the reason that we will not approve of the expenses to going to that restaurant, and eventually the restaurant went out of business.  So Doubleday was good like that, I mean so that, that even with hotels, I mean had some situations where I'd go to at one in particular very famous hotel in San Francisco [California], I won't call its name now.  But--
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: Well because they're not like that and that got corrected you know. I--
Speaker 1: Well if they, if they're corrected let's hear who they were.
Speaker 2: Well it was, it was The St. Francis Hotel [The Westin St. Francis, San Francisco, California].  And I showed up and they said they didn't have a reservation for me and it was made by the, the people who handle travel arrangements at Doubleday.  And I said there must be some mistake; they said we don't have it.  So I went right into the pay phone station around the corner from the desk and called Doubleday and told them that they said I didn't have a reservation.  They told me you go back in there to the desk and you gonna have a room, I went, you just sit there for a few minutes, and they'll call you, sit there in the lobby and they'll call you.  And make sure they can see where you are, and I sat there in the lobby and eventually somebody came over, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Charles F.] Harris we do have your room," and so that never happened again.  And I, I went back and stayed there many times after that, that is one of my favorite hotels.  So but you know I never had, you know sometimes you feel a little funny in some restaurants and somebody's trying to seat you somewhere that you don't want to go or.  Or that table is reserved or something and nobody's sitting there.  But those were, they were, they were small things, but even when I was traveling in, in '61 [1961] and '62 [1962] you could you know when I was traveling through the South and stuff like that; you could run into some problems here and there.
Story_ID: 325989
Speaker 1: We're rolling for the completion of [HistoryMaker] Charles [F.] Harris' interview; I am Shawn Wilson the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, Nick Burghelea [Neculai Burghelea] the videographer with The HistoryMakers.  Today is August 2nd [2005], and we are on tape number six, seven, seven, continuing on tape number seven [sic. tape six].
Story_ID: 325990
Speaker 1: So we left off talking about you were just about to make the trip to the historically black colleges [HBCUs] with, and you were working with Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York].  But we wanted to back up because you actually married in 1956, and we would, would like to talk about that.  And then move forward to Doubleday.
Speaker 2: I had attended the college with my wife who was not my wife at the time.  My wife is, is originally from New York [New York] and she got a scholarship when she finished, an academic scholarship.  And she had an aunt that lived about two blocks from my home where I grew up, who I knew very well and she had known me since I was a toddler.  She, that aunt was from New York and she had married a man who, whose family lived two blocks away.  They had tired of New York and, and moved back to Portsmouth, Virginia, and so when my wife to be got her scholarship, the aunt talked her into coming to Virginia.  Because she would get more mileage out of the, the money which was a fixed sum, because the colleges in Virginia were less expensive than they are in New York.  And she came to Virginia and she went to Norfolk Division of Virginia State College [Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia].  That was after I had left to go to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], but in my senior year she was a junior at Virginia State.  And that's about the time that we met, and we were just friends and we ended up dating while I was waiting to go into the [U.S.] Army.  It was hardly much for me to do and so what I would do is drive my brother Francis [Harris] car to Petersburg [Virginia] and spend time with old classmates and, and pals of mine.  And my wife to be, her name is Sammie Jackson, and I begin to date about that time, then suddenly I was gone and gone to the Army.  When I returned, she had finished Virginia State and had gone had gone to New York, come back to New York where she grew up.  And so when I came to New York initially, I already had contacted someone to help me get around the city.
Speaker 1: Plus you had your brother who lived in Brooklyn [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: And my brother and my wife lived in Long Island [New York] in Arverne, Long Island, which is near Rockaway [Queens, New York].  And so it help me become very acclimated to New York very fast, because we a number of places, places that she already knew and I always wanted to go to.  And so I was here for about six months and we decided to get married suddenly, less than six months.  And we got married in December of 1956.  My first child was born in September of 1957 and so at a very young age, I was twenty-two at the time, at a very young age, I became a father.  And I didn't realize how young I was at the time, but I soon found out.  But what--my son is named Francis [Harris] because my older brother Francis.
Story_ID: 325991
Speaker 1: My brother Francis [Harris] had quit school during the [Great] Depression, quit high school.  He was seventeen years old when I was born, and he is the second in the family, second child.  And he had stopped going to high school long before I was had, was born in order to help the rest of the family.  So he went to work on the waterfront and became a longshoreman stevedore and eventually he, he worked on the down at the Southern Railway where my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] had worked, was working.  And so this by him doing this, it allowed my sister to continue her music lessons and made it possible for my father to keep the house, which they had only been in for maybe four or five years.  So he was the only one in the family who had, had been attempting to have children and did not have any, and it appeared that they would not, he and his wife were not going to be able to have any.  So I named my first child after my brother, who at the time was very healthy, but three months in December of 1957, he died suddenly.  And so it was an amazing coincidence but he never got to see my son [Francis Harris] but he was, I'd send him pictures and he was very pleased about, very proud of it.  But he and I had been very close and whenever he, whenever he bought a new car, he always gave me a key,  And I could go even when I was a little older than sixteen,  I could go to his house and just let him know that I had taken the car.  And it was, and it was always at my disposal and all, all other kinds of favors that brothers do for each other, but he was always there.  And said that you know when my brother and I went to New York [New York] if we needed anything you know if he had it, we could have it.  And he was a very generous kindhearted person and, and his death was serious loss for us a major setback emotionally for my parents.  I, I doubt if my, my parents ever really got over it, he was, because he lived not too far from them, and he visited them, the family home almost every day, either before he went to work or after he returned.
Speaker 2: Was that the same brother who had said, for call this is, come to New York I have a job for you?
Speaker 1: No that brother his name is James [Harris].
Speaker 2: James okay so it was the three of you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, there's seven.
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: There were seven of us.
Speaker 2: We talked about your seven siblings.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah okay.
Speaker 1: I have, have--I had four brothers and two sisters, now there are three of us.  There's my older sister and my brother who's next to me.
Story_ID: 325992
Speaker 1: Moving forward you were married, you had a child, you're at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York], and you were, now, you were kind of feeling your way and you had kind of your legs at Doubleday.  And you decided to go on this historically black college [HBCU] tour.
Speaker 2: Yes I had, I had become the supervisor of analysis and research and I'd felt that, that I was ready to become an editor and I that's what I really was more interested in than being a statistician.  And so when I asked to go to the editorial department, they asked my immediate supervisor a man named George Blagovidova [ph.], I think I spoke of earlier.  And they asked him if I could do it, and he said yes.  And I transferred to the editorial department and I succeeded at it.  So one of the first things that I did when I was there, after signing with a few books, one was Lillian Smith 'Killers of the Dream.'  I reprinted the original edition of the 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass' [Frederick Douglass], the smaller version with a picture of him as a young man.  Which got considerable notice because people had, had sort of forgotten about Frederick Douglass a little bit.  And this, this was a very successful book for us, that's when I said I need to go to the historically black colleges and so Doubleday approved of it.  And one of the reasons I wanted to go, is that I was in an editorial department of where people were not cognizant of the contributions made by historically black colleges to the education of, of this constituency the impact these people had on shaping the country.  For example, Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], transferred the country, you know transformed the country.  And so there was, the, the South was changing rapidly and in, in New York [New York] people had this image of people from the South as just being backwards and slow.  And I knew that was not the case at all you know.  And so I felt that with the resources editorial and in consulting, that we needed to do some of the project I wanted to do would require using some of the people from those institutions to substantiate the, the positions I was taking.  I also knew that there were a number of, of already published people there in these schools.  And that they should be brought into contact with the, some of the decision makers at Doubleday.  So I took off and I went to Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], I think I mentioned some of the people I met there.  And what would, what would happen is as I would go to one particular institution, and tell them where the next place I was going, they would give me, make telephone calls or give me some recommendations see this person or see that person.  Or if you're looking for somebody in colonial history, see this person.
Story_ID: 325993
Speaker 1: When I got to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], that's my second stop after Morgan State [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], I then, I then, I met Rayford Logan who was a graduate of Amherst [sic. Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts] and a Ph.D. from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in history.  I met Rayford Logan, I met Sterling [A.] Brown, outstanding literary figure, Arthur P. Davis, Owen Dodson the, the drama professor.
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who taught--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry just you're about to do it, just give me a brief description of each of these people and their contributions to you as you name them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's start again.
Speaker 1: Rayford Logan I met Rayford Logan at Howard University and Rayford Logan was the author of a book called '[The Negro in American Life and Thought:] The Nadir [1877-1901]' and it was talking about after the, the Tilden-Hayes Compromise of 1876 [sic. 1877] and that became a very dark period for African Americans.  Because what the rights that they had won because of the civil rights, I mean (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reconstruction?
Speaker 1: Reconstruction but then being diminished decreased.  And so Logan was known for that particular book.  But Logan had also been in World War I [WWI] as a, was an officer, and one of the people who decided not to come back to the United States.  He stayed in Paris [France] for a long time, and became an organizer for W.E.B. Du Bois Second Pan-African Congress.  The very worldly man and taught a number of us standing figures, Logan also besides Logan there was E. Franklin Frazier the sociologist.  Who had written the 'Black Bourgeoisie' there was Sterling Brown as I mentioned who along with Ulysses Lee and, and Vada [E.] Butcher had done this collection called 'The Negro Caravan[: Writings by American Negroes].'  And then there was--
Speaker 2: What was 'The Negro Caravan'?
Speaker 1: 'The Negro Caravan' was an anthology that had tremendous impact on showing the different aspects of the African American culture.  Until the late '60s [1960s] and you get 'Black Fire[: An Anthology of Afro-American Writing]' by LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] at the time and Larry Neal, it was probably the most outstanding anthology you could get you know.  So on African American culture, so I met him and I, I met, and I spent time talking to each one of these people.  Arthur Davis was a, a well-known literary figure himself, he had written several books.  So it was a, it Howard at the time probably had the most distinguished faculty of any of the predominantly black schools.  They had more scholars in number in different disciplines, and because in the, at the time most of the historically black colleges [HBCUs] didn't have any graduate schools.  Howard did have it and so sometimes people in those other schools when they were sending people to get their master's degree, they would be sending them to Howard.  Howard had master's and Ph.D. programs, so it was, it was a great time.  I stayed there for about a week and so each day I spent considerable time with these individuals.  And I developed a, a very cordial relationship with many of them that would later come into play in other endeavors that, that I was engaged in.
Story_ID: 325994
Speaker 1: I went to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia], I went to Virginia State [College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], I went to Hampton [Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  At Hampton, I saw [J.] Saunders Redding who had written a number of books at the time.  'No Day of Triumph' and he was a well-known writer, he did a book called I'll have to get, fill that title in for you.  It's a, it's a book in a series that Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] did of popular histories, and he did one on, on black people.  He also wrote a, a book called 'They Came in Chains[: Americans from Africa]' about blacks and about how they came to this country and adjusted to a new environment, a new society.  But I followed this pattern all the way South, I, I went to North Carolina A&T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] where Samuel [DeWitt] Proctor who later became the, the head of Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York].  Samuel Proctor was the president of the A&T when I, when I went there.  And you know the significance of A&T they, that's where sit-ins took place, and I was there soon after those sit-ins took place.
Speaker 2: What year were you?
Speaker 1: This about 1961.
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And the sit-ins started in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 1: I think '60 [1960] or '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], okay.
Speaker 1: Around that time.  But there was firming in all these places like North Carolina College at Durham [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] which these names now would been changed, modified somewhat.  But probably because some kind, North Carolina University [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] or something like that.  But it was an exhilarating experience because I was talking to some of the leading thinkers in the African American community.  And many of these institutions had played a role in pursuing state governments and then eventually this swelled into the whole thing of Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  But I meant, I went to those schools because I was already aware that that had taken place.
Story_ID: 325995
Speaker 1: Well, when I came back to New York [New York], I kept a diary of all this, and I came back to New York I was able to talk to the editor-in chief and other members of their editorial department about some of the things that I had discovered.  So when I--
Speaker 2: What were some of the things you had discovered?
Speaker 1: Well I had discussed issues; I had gone to the meetings also the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life & History].  Where many of the historians that I had visited these historical, historically black colleges [HBCUs] were in attendance.  And I came back knowing that W.E.B. Du Bois had once done a children series called 'The Brown Books' [ph.] and, and I knew what Carter [G.] Woodson had done with the Association for the Studies of Negro Life and History.  With the Negro History Bulletins and The Journal of Negro History, I then came back with the idea to do a series of short books presenting the history of American minority groups.  And that became what is known as 'Zenith Books.'  And 'Zenith Books,' there's a picture of that, that I will show you of the press conference that launching the books in January of 1965.  This became national news because The New York Times wrote a very long article about it, and on in two places.  And both columns as well as on an education page, which doesn't exist now.  But there was an editor, a writer an editor at The New York Times who wrote on education consistently, and his name was Fred [M.] Hechinger and he wrote a very long piece about significance of these books.  The sa- the reason I was able to do these books as I came to the conclusion that most students and the public at large can read at least on a fifth grade level.  Because that's about the level of a newspaper, like the [New York] Daily News or any of those tabloids.  So what I did was use the historians some of whom I just mentioned, I brought them to New York to have counsel to the company.  I would arrange for them to come to New York and we would talk about the plans and I would bring other people from, from Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Company, New York, New York], and I was the only black person at Doubleday.  So that would lay the ground when I brought in J. Rukert--[J.] Rupert Picott the man I told you that had influenced me about becoming an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  Well he was the head of the Virginia Teacher's Association, so I knew that he could put me in contact with the kinds of people who were in the classroom.  So I brought many of the people like Rayford Logan, like William Leo Hansberry who I had met at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who great African historian.  Brought him in for consultation, I brought in E. Franklin Frazier to talk about the, the sociological impact of this.  And then I took off on another series of trips where I went to Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois], Cleveland [Ohio], St. Louis [Missouri] and, and all these sit, cities I sat in the classrooms.  First I would talk to the director of instruction, I'd have, this would be arranged before I got that the letters that I written.  So I wanted to go to a classroom and watch the people teach social studies or American history.  And I was trying to get a sense for myself me having to edit for somebody who was ultimately gonna use these books.  What is it like and what's going on in the classroom.  So the, between the scholars who could validate the accuracy of the historical data, and then my experiences talking to educators and I also went to San Francisco [California] and Los Angeles [California] also.  I, each week when I came back, I would have to make a report to the executive vice president on what I did, what I witnessed in these various cities.
Story_ID: 325996
Speaker 1: And so after about, I guess about 1963, we started the contracting of the first books [in the 'Zenith Books' series], and what I did was put a writer with a historian.  And that was proved to be very effective, so but we never disclosed to the students that these books that the teacher has a teacher's manual.  So it was presented as if the regular trade book that they use in the bookstore.  And the, none of the books are no more, more than 144 pages, and they're, most of them are illustrated by an African American artist.  So--
Speaker 2: Do you know who the African American artist was that illustrated the illustrator?
Speaker 1: Yeah sure.  One was Charles [Wilbert] White, Ernest Crichlow, a woman named I think her first name is Leona Barnett [sic. Moneta Barnett], so it was a whole series.  We went through, we, we in some cases, we used illustrators who were already working.  But most of the artist were African Americans, because what I was trying to do is to establish in the minds of the people at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York].  That there was other resources to tap into, and to bring these people in as well, and everything doesn't have to look like it's done by the same design or the same artist or.  So the books have a completely different look, but the books became extremely successful because it was selling in more than one market.  And then after a while it was, students go home with these books, then the parents, and they would be in the library and the parents would want to have the books for themselves.  And so they would go into the books and then wanted them into their personal libraries, but many, the parents may have known this information exist from an oral history standpoint, but it never had been validated with the--Doubleday at the time was the largest book publishing company in the country, and probably one of the largest in the world.  So to have the president and the, and the principal owner, John Sargent was, was greatly endorsed this, and so did Nelson Doubleday.  John Sargent and Nelson Doubleday, John Sargent was Nelson Doubleday's brother in-law.  Today, John Sargent's son is, is named John Sargent [Jr.] is the president of St. Martin's Press [New York, New York].  So but it was the support that Doubleday gave me that made this have so much impact.  Because it was a way to use the resources of one of the most sophisticated companies that exist at the time to penetrate the market in a, in a way, to crossover: get the books in the classroom, get them in the library and get them in the bookstores.
Story_ID: 325997
Speaker 1: So that propelled my career.  At the same time I was doing that, I was also signing people like Jim Brown who's playing with the Cleveland Browns.
Speaker 2: Let's talk about Jim Brown, when did you, what year did you meet him?
Speaker 1: I met Jim Brown; it must've been about 1963.
Speaker 2: Who was he playing for at the time?
Speaker 1: He was playing for the Cleveland Browns, but I had known, I had been watching him for years.  I had seen a, a game that, that he played in Syracuse [New York] playing Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] and he and Lenny Moore who became another hall of fame player for the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts], put on such an outstanding exhibition.  I was watch, watching on television, but when Jim Brown came into the National Football League [NFL], he broke all kinds of records immediately.  And so I knew that with the following that he had, people, he packed the stadiums, but I knew the book was gonna be successful.  At this particular time ba- black athletes were not being approached to write their own stories--
Speaker 2: Were any athletes being approached to write their own stories at that time?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  Many of the white athletes were you know there were books about them and they had endorsements.  At this time African American athletes didn't have any endorsements, I had, before I went to, to see Jim Brown or try to sign him up, I had gone to Boston [Massachusetts] to try to sign up Bill Russell that was playing for the  Boston Celtics.  But I was not successful, I gotten a writer for one of the papers in Boston, I think it was, he might've been writing for The [Boston] Globe his name was Brian Rowlands [ph.].  I had signed him to a contract for a novel, and he's an African American.  And so I knew that he covered Bill Russell in sports, as well, so he took me, Russell, Bill Russell at the time had a soul food restaurant called Slade's [Bar and Grill, Boston, Massachusetts].  And he took me to this restaurant and Russell and I laughed about this sev- several times since.  But he took me to this restaurant and Russell had his apron on and he came out of the kitchen and, he was very suspicious you know there weren't that many, there were hardly any black Americans being editors at major publishing houses.  But he did make the introduction, but he said he wasn't ready to do a book right then.  But I, we stayed there for a while and chatted with him, but bef- that was before I went after Jim Brown.
Story_ID: 325998
Speaker 1: But I was determined to get one of the star athletes, and this is just emerging African American athletes and great numbers in the professional leagues.  Aside from Jackie Robinson, the people who were playing baseball.  So and the other thing is that you know a person had to be standing for something and I knew Jim Brown was controversial.  I had seen him a certain kind of interviews, he never talked very much but I'd seen some interviews that showed that he was involved in the civic activities of Cleveland [Ohio].  And he was involved, involved in black economic development and he and some other players on the Cleveland Browns had formed this organization.  So and they was, he was known for his militancy you know, so I knew there was a vice president what they call Negro markets then of Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo]. His name was Harvey [C.] Russell [Jr.], he's deceased now, and so Pepsi-Co, Pepsi-Cola had an office at 59th Street and Park Avenue.  And I went around to, got Harvey Russell to set up a meeting with me and Jim Brown, so we, he did, but Jim Brown worked for Pepsi-Cola during the off season.  And so we chatted the first time he came and I just feeling him out about his story, and I'd done some homework and knew that he'd come from Manhasset [New York].  I knew that he had, held a scoring championship for basketball, I knew he, he could be, if he wanted to be, he could've been a, a decathlon star.  So I knew he was an all-around player and he was All-American on the lacrosse player as well.  So I think the second time I met him, this is all in off season, I went back and told Nelson Doubleday that I think I can sign Jim Brown.  And he said okay, I said if I had a contract in my pocket I, if I was talking to him, I bet you I could sign him up.  So he said why don't you do that, get a contract, go to the, the contracts department and get a contract.  And we agreed on a, on an advance be offered to him.  So I met him, this was a few weeks after I went to meet him again, and, and we were talking about it.  I said suppose I had a contract in my pocket right now and offered you a contact would you take it?  And he said yes, we had talked about the numbers we, I was gonna give him, and so as an advance.  And I think it might've been, it might've been fifty thousand dollars, which was a very good advance in 1963 you know.  So he said oh, yeah I'll do it, and so we called in Harvey Russell into the office and to have a witness 'cause those signatures have to be witnessed, he signed the contract and, and Harvey Russell signed.  And went back and showed it to Nelson Doubleday, was thrilled to no end.  Nelson Doubleday was also a great sportsman; he liked sports as you witness by the fact that he at one point owned the New York Mets baseball team.  So this is later, I had left Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] when that happened.  But I knew that Nelson liked sports, so what that did for me is it allowed me to travel back and forth to Cleveland and see football games.  Especially I'd go when they played the New York Giants, but I found a writer for, for him and that was through some contacts at Doubleday.  The writer's name is Myron Cope, the book was published was called 'Off My Chest' [Jimmy Brown and Myron Cope].  And Myron Cope is now the voice of the Pittsburgh Steelers, he doesn't work for newspapers anymore.  But he was very much like some of the writers on the [New York] Daily News they the, the same style of Mike Lupica that kind of thing, and he sort of controversial.  But he stopped being that now; he's just works Pittsburgh Steelers.  But the book became very successful, the, the irony in it is that before, this is, Muhammad Ali wins the championship around this time, as well, heavyweight championship.  Around the early '60s [1960s] about '63 [1963] or something like that.  Well when Jim Brown's book is finished and is about to come out, there's a rumor that Jim Brown is a famous African American athlete who's joined the Nation of Islam.  And the assumption is that it's Jim Brown because of his militancy and some other statements he has made.  So when the like Look magazine which was really an established magazine at the time, bought the first serial rights, that's the right to publish the book, was excerpts from the book before the book itself was published.  They paid us I think fifty thousand dollars, which meant that the advance was already earned back before any of the books were sold.  But the, it was a featured article taken from the book, and that rumor persisted that the person was Jim Brown.  So, soon thereafter, Muhammad Ali knocked out Sonny Liston and that's when the announcement came out.  And I think that might've been 1964, and I think Jim Brown's book came out in '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 325999
Speaker 1: We are rolling again; we are now on tape number eight [sic. tape seven], continuing.  Let's just set it up.  Cash, well Muhammad Ali was he Muhammad Ali at the time or Cassius Clay?
Speaker 2: He changed, that's when he announced he was changing his name, it was about 1964.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: Is what.
Speaker 1: Cassius Clay becomes Muhammad Ali.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He knocks out Sonny Liston.
Speaker 2: No he knocked out Sonny Liston then he announced that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That.
Speaker 2: That he had changed his name.
Speaker 1: And then he changed his name and he announces also that is, he's a member of the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And it was suspected that Jim Brown would make that announcement?
Speaker 2: No, they stead, instead it became Muhammad Ali and Jim Brown didn't join the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 1: So what happened with the book ['Off My Chest,' Jimmy Brown and Myron Cope]?
Speaker 2: The book became a tremendous success, and, and then Jim retired and--
Speaker 1: What year did he retire?
Speaker 2: He, it must've been the fall of, of 1965 [sic. 1966] I think, that's when he was making the move.  The book came out in '64 [1964] that's correct.  And then they won the championship of the National Football League [NFL], they didn't have the Super Bowl at that time.  And they beat the Baltimore Colts [Indianapolis Colts], and the Balt- Baltimore Colts were highly favored to win the game.  And Jim Brown was held in check for the first half, but in the second half, he broke away and, and changed the tone of the game completely, which he was always doing during in the heyday of his career.  And he retired at the top of his game, which, which is the most important thing I think for to watch an athlete do that, to walk away at the top.
Story_ID: 326000
Speaker 1: In January of 1965 'Zenith Books' were actually published, and I had mentioned that before and was published with great fanfare.  So that made me a very a highly visible person in the book publishing industry.
Speaker 2: A hot commodity.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And so and soon thereafter some people that I knew had created some educational materials for slow readers, and they were called 'Springboards.'  And they were like pamphlets they were just like the eight and half by eleven, four or eight pages, very much like the Negro History Bulletin.  But it taught science and math using all kinds of common facts of everyday life or situations of everyday life.  So that you could teach somebody once an owner of a base, Cleveland Indians named Bill Veeck and made a statement that he could throw a ball to one of the best hitters than he couldn't knock it out of the park.  And nobody believed him, but what he did was he throws the ball before, but, he dropped them in cold water then froze them, and then the person couldn't actually hit the ball.  Because something happens the dynamics that takes place, and so they taught, they could teach you something about physics by telling you that story through baseball.  Or Gertrude Ederle swimming the English Channel and why did she have on all this oil and what was the purpose of that?  So they were highly successful.  The company, John Wiley and Sons [Hoboken, New Jersey] which is, is in existence, wanted to get into elementary and secondary school publishing.  And so since the 'Zenith Books' had become such a success, the people who created this and sold it to John Wiley.  John Wiley didn't want the creators to running it; they asked me to come in run it, and I, the name of the company was Portal Press.  I became vice president and general manager of Portal Press.
Speaker 2: Around 1965?
Speaker 1: From, no, I started in 1966 I was there it's almost two years until I went there late '65 [1965] and stayed there until 1967.
Speaker 2: But before you talk about John Wiley and Sons why did you leave Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York], you were doing so well with them.
Speaker 1: Well salary, it looked like greater opportunity.  Doubleday didn't want me to leave, but I more than doubled my salary with all other kinds of things that went with it.  And the experience, but I didn't like the atmosphere.
Speaker 2: At Doubleday?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't like the atmosphere after I got the job at Wiley.
Speaker 2: Okay so you left Doubleday.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Amicably?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Go to John Wiley.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: To work on these 'Springboard' books?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But there were other promises that were made by what other things that I could do but after I got there they became difficult to do them.  It was a different kind of an atmosphere, that's because trade publishing is a different atmosphere from educational publishing.  Because at Doubleday I had the freedom to go and come when I pleased and I didn't have to worry about reports to the board or you know I only had to report to Nelson Doubleday or to the editor-in-chief or.  And, and I had already built up a certain kind of stature where I had authority that wasn't even written.  That I could get permission to do things, get approval for contracts and I could launch new projects and so forth.  In a way that I wasn't as, I was confined when I, had become general manager, hiring people, supervising all these people.  Where at Doubleday, I only had to worry about my secretary and my assistant, who I hired, was is Loretta Barrett who is now a literary agent of Lareer- Loretta Barrett Books [Inc., New York, New York], well-known.  One of her most recent successes was have representing the Pope [sic.] the one who's John Paul, John 23rd [sic. Pope John Paul  II].  That book ['Witness to Hope: The Biography of Pope John Paul II,' George Weigel] was on the bestseller's list is one of hers.
Story_ID: 326001
Speaker 1: So I had, when I was at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York], there were people who had been at Doubleday when I started had gone to Random House [Inc.; Penguin Random House, New York, New York].  One was Jason Epstein who was like the father of, of quality paperback publishing; he started that revolution when he was at Doubleday in the '50s [1950s].  And those books became extremely successful Anchor Books [New York, New York]; he had gone to Random House to start Vintage Books [New York, New York] which is very prestigious today.  He was responsible for the Library of America [New York, New York] as well.  Well Jason had gone and I had known him when he was at Doubleday and wh- in my early years at Doubleday he was there.  And he had left and gone become successful someplace else.
Speaker 2: At Random House?
Speaker 1: At Random House and he was a vice president, one of the main editors there.  I knew him and I knew financial person, the chief financial officer who had also been at Doubleday.  And so they, while I was at Doubleday, they had suggested you know did I want to work at Random House, and I was very happy where I was.  But after I got to [John] Wiley [and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey] and became unhappy, I let them know and so they hired me as a senior editor.  And so there was another big increase in salary, even though the titles appear to be less, I made more money.  And I was backed into a situation where I had the kind of freedom that I was looking for.  So one of the things that I did, I went to Random House in 1967, and the first couple of years I was there, they asked me to do a number of jobs that I had done.  Well one was to become the publisher of the newspaper called New York New York [ph.] which was designed to be used in New York City public schools.  And it was five different levels of it that would go from like grade three up to high school, and it was directly, the size of the publication; it was like a regular newspaper, like a regular tabloid.  And many of the stories were shot exactly for the, the specifically for the newspaper.  So we would hire well-known photographers who were looking for Life or Look and they'd go out with, we get passes for the students to be released from school and take them on some trip.  Let's say to the (unclear) or take them to the circus and we would just background of the circus, you shoot that with a well-known photographer.  And then we write the story to fit the pic- the pictures, and it became a tremendous hit of the schools.  But it was under a contract with New York City school system so we didn't have to go out and sell them as such like Junior Scholastic.  But it was this was the conception of Jason Epstein's.  And so I ran that for a while and then when the contract ran out, they asked me to be a managing editor of the children's division which I did that as well.  And but I still would have my longing to go back and signing of adult books, and so I just told them what I wanted to do.  And we made the switch you know for the editor, full-time for the editorial department, I was just doing that part-time to the adult editorial department.
Story_ID: 326002
Speaker 1: So one of the things I did was to sign Muhammad Ali to the contract for 'The Greatest[: My Own Story,' Muhammad Ali and Richard Durham].  That's a story in and of itself, in the late '60s [1960s], Muhammad Ali refused to step forward and, and participate in the draft.  He, he was drafted once before and he was declared unqualified some of the test he took, he intellectually wasn't capable of being a soldier.  The second time they called him up again, they reduced the standards and called him again and he wouldn't step forward and be in the [U.S.] Army.  So he said you know he, he's a conscientious objector because of his religion.  So there ensued a big case and they were going to try to send him to jail for like ten years as a draft dodge.  Meantime, one night I was sitting in the office [of Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House, New York, New York] and the editor-in-chief came in, his name is Jim Silverman and said do you, this must've been about 6:30, 7 o'clock at night.  Said, "Do you, have you heard that Muhammad Ali is writing an autobiography," and I said, "No, I did not."  He said, "Well I heard that rumor would you check it out?"  So that first place I thought of is Chicago [Illinois] so I had always been close to the people at Ebony I knew [HistoryMaker] John [H.] Johnson, they'd done stories on me, I knew [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, Hoyt [W.] Fuller who was the head of the editor of Negro Digest which became Black Digest [sic. Black World].  And I knew newspaper reporters there too from traveling with promoting 'Zenith Books' and doing stories on, on you know being the subject of stories myself.  And so it was Lerone Bennett says no I don't know but I, if anybody will know it'll probably be the editor of Muhammad Speaks.  That was the militant and aggressive and very informative paper of the Nation of Islam at the time.  And the man's name was Richard Durham so he gave me the number to call, I called Durham who immediately said, "Who, who gave you this number?"  And, and I told him who gave it to me, he said, "Yes, I'm, I'm, we are doing an autobiography and I, at this moment I'm trying to get a hotel room in New York [New York] and I, not had any success."  So I put him on hold and I called the Sheraton Americana [New York, New York] which is at the corner of 7th Avenue and about 50, 57th Street [sic. 52nd Street], and got him a mini suite.  And I said, well I, after I put him on hold, I, I told him that I had to go to talk to my boss about something, but I didn't.  My boss was calling me, but what I did was got, they got him a hotel room, and then I called him back after putting, I didn't call him back I had him on hold, I said you have a room at the Sheraton and we're paying for it.  But the deal is you have, when you arrive in New York you have to come to see us, talk to me and the editor-in-chief.  He said that's fine, I said okay well give me your flight number and I'll have, he was coming in the next day.  And we'll have a limousine pick you up at the airport.  So he came in, he said well what I want to do is I want to come in and go to the hotel first and relax a little bit.  And supposed I meet you all about six o'clock, we said fine, he came in it must've been like two in the afternoon.  He came to the office and we chatted and, and talked to him about what, what possibly what was gonna be in the book and so forth.  And he says we have a meeting tomorrow morning and the Champ [Muhammad Ali] is coming in tomorrow, and we're gonna meet with the people at Simon & Schuster [Inc., New York, New York] at eleven o'clock, 10:30.  So we said could you come by here before, bring the Champ by here before you go to Simon & Schuster, and he said yes.  So he called, I don't know who he called, and they confirmed that he's gonna bring him there.
Story_ID: 326003
Speaker 1: To make a long story short (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No before you go on, did, did everyone refer to him as the Champ [Muhammad Ali] at that time, like?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you gonna bring the Champ by, and they confirmed they gonna bring, that's incredible (laughter).  Okay so the Champ's coming.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so [Jim] Silverman and I are there, he arrives we didn't tell anybody, but the president knew and Bennett Cerf who was the principal owner of, of Random House [Inc.; Penguin Random House, New York, New York] at the time, it wasn't the conglomerate it is now.  He knew and he was on Bennett Cerf was a participant on a very popular quiz show called 'What's My Line?'  Which we already knew that, that [Muhammad] Ali had been on there, and Ali like Bennett Cerf both like to tell corny jokes.  So anyway he comes and we start talking and, and first thing Ali says is I didn't know you all had a black man working here you know, and so [Richard] Durham was surprised too.  When I, over the phone, he didn't pick up any kind of accent so he was shocked when the, when the reception area the night before to bring him in for our meeting.  But that, that did have an effect on the conversation, I'm sure.  So the next day when the Champ comes, and he makes this remark and then we start talking, he starts you know talking about what he's gonna say in his book and he's gonna tell everything, he talks about some things in his life that are in the book.  That people didn't know about you know, how he felt about he threw he, the Olympic belt that he won for winning the champ, light, I think heavyweight championship in the [1960 Summer] Olympics [Rome, Italy].  He threw it away because of some of racial dispute in Louisville [Kentucky].  So all of these things he was telling in the conversation and Durham had been a writer for soap operas before and he had been an old newspaper man.
Speaker 2: Now was Durham black or white?
Speaker 1: Durham was black, Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: Oh he's with the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He wasn't a Muslim, but he was their editor of their paper [Muhammad Speaks].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I'm following you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So what proceeded is we, we talked him out of going over to Simon & Schuster [Inc., New York, New York], and it was a long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You talked him out of the meeting in period?
Speaker 1: Yes, we, we kept we started the negotiations after he saw I was there, then Bennett Cerf came in, and he didn't, Ali hadn't realized that Bennett Cerf was the owner of Random House.  He only knew him from 'What's My Line?'  As soon as Cerf walks in the room, he says, "Oh, I know you," and they said, "Of course, how are you Champ and stuff?"  And they shake hands and they start trading jokes, so the atmosphere is very comfortable for everybody.  And so then Cerf leaves the room and tells the editor-in-chief, Jim Silverman and me I want that book.  So that's like a mandate, you know, so we had to figure out what we were gonna do.  So we then, but also in the room was a man named Chauncey Eskridge that's the, he's a very prominent, was a very prominent Chicago [Illinois] lawyer, he was also [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s lawyer.
Speaker 2: Can you, what's his name again?
Speaker 1: Chauncey Eskridge, E-S-K-R-I-D-G-E, he's probably a civil rights lawyer but he was also prominently made a lot of money otherwise too.  Representing high-profile people, this is before Johnnie Cochran.  So he was in the room and there, there was a figure who wasn't in the room that I think was always present and that might've been [Jabir] Herbert Muhammad.  That was the Honorable Elijah Muhammad one of his sons, who I think in a, was a, was a chief advisor, counselor to Muhammad Ali.  So from time to time someone would have to leave the room to go and make a telephone call.  And I was assuming they were getting permission.
Story_ID: 326004
Speaker 1: At any case, a couple of times they called over to Simon & Schuster [Inc., New York, New York] and said we gonna be an hour late.  And so we're now, we're engaged in discussions about the book and negotiating, and so I think we started at something like a hundred thousand dollars.  So we sort of stalled when it, it's about one o'clock, so [Jim] Silverman decide why don't we have a break and so everybody can have a bite.  And so that's what we do, we break for about an hour and then we come back and they still, they were already told Simon & Schuster that they still are gonna be late.  So and one of the party, one of the people in the Champ's [Muhammad Ali] party, after we've gotten to like 150, 175 thousand dollars one of them says and I think it's they're caucus, they asked us to leave the room, they asked  Silverman and me to leave the room.  They caucus and they come back and get us, it's Silverman's office, so we come, go back into the office and they said, finally said, Silverman says well what do you, what do you think of the [$]175,000, we think that's too low, that's what [Chauncey] Eskridge says.  So then we decided to make go it up to [$]200,000 and we still don't get it so then they leave the room and make another telephone call and come back and says if you make it $225,000, we, you have a contract.  And this is about 2:30 now, and so obviously my stomach is in knots all of this time.  Because what we don't want them to do is to go leave the room and go to Simon & Schuster, and so because then we'll, we're in a competing like at an auction so you never want the, the client to leave.  Once you started negotiations unless it becomes just outrageous, but we thought we had the inside track.  Just because of the amount of time that they spent with us and because you know the people, I could, I could engage in some side kind of conversations as well with the, with many of the members of the party.  And they also knew that I had done Jim Brown's book ['Off My Chest,' Jimmy Brown and Myron Cope], and so I had some other credentials going for me, I had helped the, the mosque in Harlem [New York, New York] had wanted to buy books and didn't have credit and I helped them get credit with publishers and stuff like that.  I had met some of them through you know thing places I've gone, events that I've gone so I knew some of the people.  Some of the writers I knew knew some of the people in the Nation of Islam so that's how I met some of them.  And so I had some kind of creditability there that they didn't know where they were going, what they were gonna get when they got to Simon & Schuster.  So they left the room came back and, and said if you give us $225,000, you, you have a deal so Silverman then leaves and he, his, he couldn't go higher than two hundred [$200,000].  He goes and he talks to the president, Bob Bernstein [Robert L. Bernstein] and Bennett Cerf and they said that they approve the 225 [$225,000].  So when Silverman comes back, who comes back with him, but Bob Bernstein and, and Bennett Cerf.  And said we, gentlemen, we have a deal.  And it was just hoorays all around the room and you know handshaking and stuff, and it was a great day.  So soon thereafter there was this big press conference that was covered worldwide you know, because it, it was just every, everybody in the news media was there because of the sig- the significance of the event.  That we had signed him while he was still threatened with this prison sentence, of which he obviously, the government eventually dropped the case.  But we think that this may have influenced the government to certain extent because, Ali at this, by this time had become sort of the darling of those who were opposed to the draft and opposed to the Vietnam War.  And they had the younger whites who didn't want to be in the draft also embraced him, so he had gone from being a hated figure by becoming a Muslim to being this other towering figure of anti-draft and anti-war.  And so I had, had an opportunity to bring this about, and I think you know, I, I was always, I've always been pleased about that.  Because anybody can, not anybody, but a large number of editors can find an agent and engage in an auction if you have enough money and win an auction.  It's another thing to persuade people that they should come be published by you because of what you gonna put on the table and what you gonna, how you gonna present them.  Give them the confidence that you are going to be fair with them, you gonna show them integrity and you're gonna present them in a way that they should be presented to the world, even though they are controversial.  And I think that went very far in establishing my career.
Story_ID: 326005
Speaker 1: Simultaneously, I came up with the idea to do two collections of works, one--and call them Amistad.  I had always known the name of Amistad from my days as, as a kid in Virginia and my family's always talked about that and the Amistad incident of 1839.  That's when Africans captives who are in bondage take over the ship and, and eventually win their freedom in the United States Supreme Court.  And where they are represented by [President] John Quincy Adams, they, the event takes place, the mutiny was not a mutiny because they were not sailors.  But the rebellion takes place on the Amistad ship which means friendship in Spanish, but it's a slave ship, another irony in 1839.  And there ensues a tremendous legal battle and many of the Africans learned how to speak English, they're held captive in New Haven [Connecticut] near Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And it becomes a big event for the anti-slavery movement.  So someone of the anti-slavery abolitionist convinced John Quincy Adams who had already been president and had become a congressman after that, to convince him to represent the Africans.  And the case goes to the Supreme Court and they win their freedom in 1841.  So I chose that name for that reason and I asked Romare Bearden, the famous African American artist, late famous African American artist, if he would do a cover specifically for this book.  I enlisted John A. Williams, the well-known writer, novelist, journalist who's now retired professor from Rutgers University [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], he were, we were very close friends at the time.  And I convinced him to be co-editor with me on this project.  So what ensued is a, a critically acclaimed collection of essays and fiction that was published in April of 1970 to great and controversial reviews.  It was designed to be used in black study courses, and so what you have is there are people like [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding who was the head of the Institute of the Black World at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time.  A well-known historian, C.L.R. James, the, the famous Trinidadian philosopher and writer and thinker who was a Pan-Africanist a great influence on Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and others of that period.  He's in that, Basil Davidson the famous English writer, we had fiction, we had two additions that came that came out.  The first one came out in April of 1970 and the next one came out the following year, I think that was spring.  There were people in there like [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti who was Don L. Lee, the poet; he's a publisher now in Chicago [Illinois] of Third World Press, as well as a writer.  So it was a great collection and it, and it was quite shocking at some of the concepts and some of the thoughts.  And so these are publications that, that set a tone for that period, it was, they were not harangues but sort of critiques of, of American society on various levels.  There's [HistoryMaker] Ishmael Reed is in there, the late Calvin Hernton [Calvin C. Hernton] is in there, we, we John A. Williams did a, a marvelous interview with Chester Himes which people are constantly referring to.  So these books today are collector's items and here again we we're using African American artists for the covers.
Story_ID: 326006
Speaker 1: Soon thereafter, Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I get, I got calls from people at Howard University ask me about coming to Washington [D.C.] to start a university press.  And it's at this time that I become very restless and want to start my own publishing company, and I tried, I didn't start exploring, this is about 19, late '70 [1970], '71 [1971].  I, I started exploring trying to raise money for a publishing company.  And a printer extends me some credit, I'm highly visible at the time for all these things that I've done.  So and, and other people, I see some other people starting small companies and so I wanted to do the same thing.
Speaker 2: Who were the other people you saw?
Speaker 1: Well I, they were so many small companies at the time, there were, there was Helen Wang [ph.] there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Were the any black ones?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, no black ones.
Speaker 1: No, there was Dodd Press [Dodd, Mead, and Company, New York, New York] which is independently, that was, if it wasn't for James Baldwin it probably would not have existed you know.  There was Dodd-Mead, Mead; there were numerous small houses that had been, been in existence for a long time.  So you didn't need as much capitol as you need today in order to do this, so what my hope was that it be, to be a joint venture.  But be sort of independent, editorially but then use other people's production and design department and that kind of thing, which some of the people did.  So they, they had an impressive name but they weren't that large.  Well then I was getting pressure, I went to Washington for the interview and then they told me that was like the spring of '71 [1971].  And so they told me if I wanted a job it was mine to be the director of Howard University Press [Washington, D.C.].  So I would come back to New York [New York] and I'm getting all this pressure from people well why don't you take the job? [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, the alumni that I know and Howard is a very impressive and powerful alumni association.  And they all over the world, so especially they're strong here in New York, and I had known some of these people from you know other jobs.  So eventually I felt that I was gonna get myself into some difficulty if I didn't, I was having difficulty raising the money.  And so I guess it was about September I chan- I called the people at Howard, Andrew Billingsley who was the vice president of the academic affairs and so the second person in charge of the university.  And [HistoryMaker] James Cheek was the president, he was new and young he was thirty-nine years old or forty at the time, so it was, it was a chance and then there was John [Oliver] Killens who was already there teaching, the writer John Killens, he was there teaching.  Don L. Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] was flying in to teach, they were changing, changing the situation.  Tony Brown had, was already there starting a, a television station, and then they just gotten a radio station from [The] Washington Post it was a gift, that became WHUR [WHUR-FM, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 325770
Speaker 1: Continuing on tape number nine [sic. tape eight], you just spoken about the television station that had been started W--
Speaker 2: The television station is WHMM-TV [Washington, D.C.]; the radio station was a gift from Katharine Graham and the Grahams who owned [The] Washington Post.  That became WHUR [WHUR-FM, Washington, D.C.], so all of these things that Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was moving towards creating media on different levels.  And the aim was to provide a, a in the case of the radio station or television station to provide a facility for the training of students to go into those areas of the media.  But also it was a force that broadcast news and information just like any other radio station or television station.  And so when I, Tony Brown was there also to start the School of Communications, which he did.  This had already preceded my going there, so I already knew some of the people who were there, as well as I knew faculty members who wanted me to come there as well, from my previous visits there.  And also many of the scholars that I visited when I went on the first trip at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York], that the rumor was out that I was being offered a job.  And people wanted me to do it because no instructor of black college [HBCU] had a university press.  That, they had presses in name, but that, they didn't have a facility or a staff or a budget or didn't publish on a consistent basis.  And so I guess it was about September soon after Labor Day, I called the people at Howard and I knew somebody had called me and said you have to make up your mind.  Not someone connected with Howard, but one of my friends who, some of my friends who thought that I was might've been being arrogant or, or selfish.  And so I called [Andrew] Billingsley and went back to Washington [D.C.] and I was represented incidentally legal, my legal representation came from Reginald Lewis.  Who became the, the richest, one of the wealthiest business, African American businessmen, one of the welth- wealthiest businessmen in the world until Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] eclipsed him by selling at BET, when he sells to Viacom.  But Reginald Lewis was practicing law at the time, and he represented me in my negations with a contract to go to Howard University.  So but he, he didn't actually go with me, he instructed me for what to ask for and I had a, a draft of what I wanted to negotiate with the agreement I wanted to make.  I, I didn't take all of his suggestions because at time, at the time I was concerned that I might be ber- treating them as if they were a commercial enterprise.  Much to my regret, I should have treated them as it were a completely commercial enterprise.  Because the work I was doing was, was not only academic but it was all, would be doing was only not only academic but it would have commercial impact.
Story_ID: 325771
Speaker 1: Any case, I was, I was generally pleased with what I got, and I was exceptionally pleased to have the opportunity to become identified with an institution with that kind of tradition and renown.  And to be in that kind of atmosphere, my parents [Annie Lawson Harris and Ambrose E. Harris] were deceased at the time, and I know they would have this lovely idea of my being at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. In fact my siblings told me that they thought that was the greatest thing that I could do by taking a job at Howard University.  So you can see what my family thought of education as a, they didn't think, they thought of other things I've done they were important.  But this being with Howard University topped everything.  So on November the 1st, 1971, I went to work at Howard University [Press, Washington, D.C.] and I was the first employee.  And so I had to go out and recruit people, the first thing I did was I asked that I could go to visit the most successful university presses to find out how they govern themselves and what was their relationship to the university.  What was the best model to create, and so I went to, wrote letters and I went to about five or six major universities.  I started off at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and I stayed there three or four days, and they showed me, each director of the university press where I went, showed me the, either papers of incorporation or their procedures for operating vis a vis the university.  What is the relationship to the university, what authority do they have, how much autonomy do they have, and what are the critique of where they are?  What is wrong with the structure they have?  They were questions I set up for myself to ask each one of them, I kept notes of that too.  And so I started with, these were all very distinguished publishers, many of, some of whom had been in commercial publishing just as I had.  And at this particular time universities were putting pressure on their university presses to become self-sustaining.  So that once they started them they wouldn't have to contribute to their operation.  So I went to Princeton first as I said, then I went to Columbia [University, New York, New York], where I knew the director of Columbia University Press [New York, New York] had been a vice president in charge of human resources at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] when I worked there.  Then I went to Teachers College Press [New York, New York], which is an educational published educational material mainly for teachers colleges.  Then I went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], each place I stayed maybe four or five days, and then I got copies of their procedure, their governors.  I went to Yale, I went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And each one of them has a different structure.  Chicago is like a separate corporation; that was the best one.
Story_ID: 325772
Speaker 1: So when I came back, university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] gave me outside legal counsel to work with me to draft what became the management for operations of the Howard University Press [Washington, D.C.].  And so what we did was get with that person is a lawyer named Timothy Jenkins who's in Washington [D.C.] now.  And he, at one point had been the alumni representative on the Board of Trustees of Howard University.  So he knew it from that side, but he was also had been a student at Howard and a Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] graduate.  So he knew it from Howard from many different angles, and so what happened is we came up with what some, the president [HistoryMaker James Cheeck] gave us a mandate to give him some bylaws that he could be sure that he could put before the Board of Trustees and it would be passed without any kind of long debates and, and conflict.  So we came up with something called the management of, The Commission on Management for Operations of the Howard University Press [sic. The Commission on Management and Operations of Howard University Press].  This passed the Board of Trustees; I think that must've been in like the spring of 1972, but in the meantime, I was hiring people.  I hired some people that I'd gotten into publishing who were working at Random House [Inc.; Penguin Random House, New York, New York]; the marketing director was a salesperson who worked at Random House.  I had hired someone, an editor at William Morrow [and Company, New York, New York], I'd gotten him a job first at Portal Press at [John] Wiley [and Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey] and that got him started at William Morrow.  So I hired him when William Morrow to come to Howard, and so we had a staff with maybe like eight people initially.  And I used some outside consultants, so in April, here's that April again, April of 1974, on April the eighth, the Howard University Press was officially launched through a press reception and luncheon at the National Press Club [Washington, D.C.].  So it was broadcast live throughout the world but most of America carried it, the president of Howard made a stirring speech.  It was a great day; people came from many different places, a lot of judges and alumni of Howard.  The large number of African American judges in this country, many of them came, there were doctors all alumni.  And the press obviously covered The Washington Post and all the major media covered it.  So it was a great day and it was a historic moment, and also April the eighth was the day that  Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] broke Babe Ruth's homerun record.  And so we were up there on the wire services right when that, that groundbreaking news.  There were actors, playwrights everybody thought this was a historic moment and it was.  It had a fever pitch, it was just a splendid occasion because this had not occurred before and it was a kind of warmth that and people knew history was being made. That evening, [HistoryMaker] Congressman Charles [B.] Rangel hosted a reception at the Rayburn [House Office] Building [Washington, D.C.] also in honor of the launching of the Howard University Press.
Story_ID: 325773
Speaker 1: So we were off and with our first books and there, they, its, they we got very outstanding critical acclaim for our first books.  And we proceeded to publish on a regular basis.  So one of the most notable achievements was that the prime minister of Jamaica, Michael Manley had published a book in Eng- England, with a publisher a well-known publisher named Andre Deutsch [Limited, London, England].  And he had published this book in England and it never been circulated any place else.  And he felt that he had dated himself in the English edition of it, British edition of I should say.  And so through one of his representatives they contacted me that it was a strong Jamaican Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] alumni association as well.  So I don't know how it happened but somebody contacted me and said that the prime minister had a, a representative coming to New York [New York] and they wanted to talk to me about bringing out a North American edition of 'The Politics of Change[: A Jamaican Testament,' Michael Manley].  And he wanted to, I got a copy of the work and I could see what they were talking about, it had been too narrow and focused and it been it and maybe eight or ten years had lapsed.  So at this time you had a, a formation of sort of non-aligned nations with Mrs. Indira Gandhi and the head of Indonesia government.  It was sort of a third world kind of constituency that doesn't exist now.  And so the, the it was the, the European the old world and then the new world, United States and then it's the third world.  And so Manley wanted to address that question in a much broader sense, and in a broader context.  So I met with his representative and put it before the executive committee of the commission that govern the press, and they thought it was a good idea.  So after I let the, the prime minister's representative know that, they let me know that the prime minister would like to meet me.  And wanted me to come down there so we could discuss how we were gonna work together.
Story_ID: 325774
Speaker 1: I flew to Kingston [Jamaica]; little did I know at the time, that I was going to meet--the significance of going to meet a head of state.  So and that you just can't--you're not just an ordinary citizen doing that.  So I, when I arrived in Kingston, I was going through customs and the people examined my bags very carefully.  And then a, the, the one of the people who was examining, they pulled me aside of everybody else going in the, in the line.  I was wondering what is this about, and so they were going through my bags they said [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Charles F.] Harris why are you in Jamaica?  And I said I'm going to see the prime minister [Michael Manley] and the man who gave--he's plainclothes and he had on just ordinary business clothes, cas- sort of casual but formal.  And he sort of smiled, he said well you have to come with us, and I walked out and then I get in this car and I can tell its security.  So you can't just go, I don't know what I was thinking about, they knew that I was coming because I had to go to Jamaica embassy and tell them that I was going and why I was going there.  They told me what procedures to follow in Washington [D.C.] (laughter) so I, I don't know what I was thinking that I was gonna catch a taxi and go to the prime minister's residence (laughter)?  So they took me to his residence and he greeted me, very, very warm gracious man, I'd never met a head of state before.  Very gentle, he was a man of the people sort of you know. And I had read many of his speeches and I read some of his works and I'd seen you know tapes of him speaking and so forth so I knew what they expect generally.  So we ended up buying the rights from Andre Deutsch [Limited, London, England] and then bring out our own edition.  And I was there maybe two or three days and it was, I was treated royally and I was, I was going places.  One day, one morning I came from the hotel and what, I went out for a walk, and some sort of way they didn't know where I was.  They phoned the hotel room and then I had to learn that I'm not supposed to do that, I mean they wanted to somebody has to escort me somewhere. Everyplace I went I was in some huge Mercedes Benz or something like this, that you know which I had not been accustomed to.  But I don't know what I was expecting, but also you know coming from a small town [Portsmouth, Virginia] and so forth it was right really impressive.  And you know to be taken to people's homes who you know have servants and tennis courts and you know what do you want, what would you like to have for dinner?  And like you don't know what to ask for it like we should've; anything, just name it (laughter).  And they have you know maids and butlers and stuff like that; it was a lot of that.  But it was work too, and so we came away agreeing on what with you know he would do and then from then on, we were just back and forth.  Sometimes he'd send the material to me through diplomat pouch and I'd send it back to him after I edit it.  And so this must've been about 19, late 1970, the book was published here.  And the good part about that is that the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] put up the funds to host the party there for him.  And all the city dignitaries, New York City [New York, New York] dignitaries were there, plus [HistoryMaker] Congressman [Charles B.] Rangel was there, when Percy Sutton who had been the borough president was there, just to name a few.  But it was all, the religious leaders and of course a large number of well-known Jamaicans were invited you know.  So here again, the Secret Service, the United States Secret Service was at the door.  So when I get to New York and check into the hotel, when I go to the Ford Foundation I get off on the floor where the reception is, one of the Secret Service men said good evening Mr. Harris how are you?   And I'm like (laughter) how does he know who I am, here again I saw that at lapsed that in this country the United States government has to be responsible for the head of state.  And so they, they, I didn't tell the Secret Service I, guess they must've found out some other way.  But they were there in numbers and so I had to wear some badge or something they put on me along my lapel.  But that was another great event and a greater appearance for the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and for the prime minister, he was very pleased and the book ['The Politics of Change: A Jamaican Testament,' Michael Manley] did very well.  It's done very well; in fact it probably should be updated now by somebody else, because it still would have relevancy in this day's world.  But that gave me an international exposure that that led me, it increased my, you know, world view.
Story_ID: 325775
Speaker 1: About this time I learned from some other publishing sources that there was gonna be a Nigerian book fair in Lagos [Nigeria].  And that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year was this?
Speaker 1: This is in the late '70s [1970s] and the United States, one of the reasons I think we were participating is that we had had an oil crisis in the '70s [1970s].  And at the time Nigeria had this huge surplus because we had nothing to sell to them to offset the surplus that we had created by buying all of this Nigerian oil.  And so Nigeria they had just you know come from under this military rule and this civil war [Biafran War] and so we offer and so the Nigerian book fair [Ile Book Fair] was, was being launched.  And I heard that some Americans were going under the auspices of the USIA, United States Information Agency.  So I called some friends that I knew at that agency that I'd met by being director of Howard University Press [Washington, D.C.] and they did confirm it.  But they said that all the slots are are filed, it was I guess it was twelve people who were going.  I said well how can, how can United States government send twelve people, some of them university presses, to represent United States government in Africa?  And don't send somebody from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] which is educated probably more than Nigerians and Africans than any university in the country.  And also we have a press too and we have books to exhibit that, that the Nigerians may want to see.  So there ensued some back behind the scenes manipulations by I guess people at the state department [U.S. Department of State] called some people.  I mean people at USIA called people at the state department.  So I was then added to the list but I went under the auspice of the United States state department.  With additional mandate to send me to Kenya, Ivory Coast, Senegal, and Senegal. They wanted me to go to Tanzania too but I couldn't go to Tanzania because there was a dispute between Kenya and Tanzania.  And you couldn't fly from Nairobi [Kenya] to Dar Es Salaam [Tanzania].  So the only way to, to get there I would have to fly to Somalia north of Kenya and then fly down south to Tanzania.  So the state department thought that was unsafe, I, it wasn't in the newspaper but there was some civil war was going on in Somalia and they weren't, didn't want me in that country.  So after we stayed in Nigeria for the fair, which I met people from every part of, of Africa and the Cold War sort of was still was on.  So the Russians [Soviets] were there, Chinese were there, the Chinese were doing a lot of construction as well.  Not the ones attending the fair, but I, you saw Chinese and Japanese doing the construction work and architects and you know.  And I went to several places in Nigeria as well, not only the fair was in Ife [Nigeria] so that's further inland from Lagos.  So we landed in Lagos and then we had to go from Lagos by minivan which was a harrow, harrowing experience.  Go from there to Ife which is a, took about maybe five hours.  There's a University of Nigeria [sic. University of Ife; Obafemi Awolowo University, Ife, Nigeria] in Ife and that's where the fair was held.  So that was a, a quite an experience because each day you were interacting with somebody else and you know after a few days then people see you and they know you an American.  And I was the only black American at the fair, but once I got to Ife, I found black Americans were on the faculty there and so after having to eat all of the regular food, the couple times they, many, more than a couple of times, they invited me to their homes and gave me you know home cooking (laughter) you know.  So that was wonderful and we had some time off to mingle and so they would invite me and a few other people from the American delegations to their homes.  And it would be music and one of the highlights of, of the entertainment aspect of it, is that we went to one person's home in Ife, an American, and there was a man there named Peter Chatman.  And so they asked me if I knew who he was, and I told them I didn't, it just astounded everybody.  Peter Chatman is a very famous blues singer called Memphis Slim, and he was touring under the auspices of the United States Information Agency.  Talking about you know African American music and stuff like that.  But his most famous song I guess the public would know is 'Every Day I Have the Blues', made famous by Count Basie and Joe Williams, but he sang it first.  So his name is Peter Chatman so I, so that thrilled everybody, but it was a wonderful occasion.  He sang a little bit and, and other people sang the blues, singers, I don't know who, who they were.  Some were Nigerians and so forth, to see the effect of American culture in Africa is an amazing thing.
Story_ID: 325776
Speaker 1: After about eleven days, I then flew the lum- we went back to like Lagos [Nigeria] and I, I flew to Nairobi [Kenya] where I was there for about a week.  And I visited with some of the printing people and publishing people there, and then I flew, that was a very nice experience, a lovely experience.  I met scholars and the United States state department [U.S. Department of State] had someone travelling with me, I had somebody, I had like you know a guide.  So one day at lunch, I was walking down the street and somebody was saying Charlie [HistoryMaker Charles F. Harris] somebody was yelling.  I thought I heard somebody saying Charlie, here's a sea of nothing but black people, they couldn't be calling me.  Well one of the things I didn't know is that a friend of mine was the head of the African bureau and he happened to be, for Time magazine.  And he happed to be in Nairobi at that time.  So it was a reporter from [The] New York Times was there too, a man named Randy Daniels, who now is a official in governor, Governor [George] Pataki's administration here in New York [New York].  But they were together going someplace to lunch and [HistoryMaker] Jack White was the, is the person for Time magazine bureau chief for Africa.  So I, I left what I was getting ready to do and went to lunch with them, which was sort of a spontaneous thing, but we had a wonderful time, we laugh about that quite often now.  But I, I after I had left I went to the Ivory Coast, so this must've been like the last year of the Carter administration.  Because [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] went to Senegal and, and all of the interpreters had to be made available for the president.  So they took Senegal off my itinerary, and when I went to Ivory Coast I stayed there I think a few more days.  At that time Ivory Coast considered the, the very famous resort area in Europe.  It was considered the Riviera of, of Africa: lovely hotels, wonderful food, and some Americans there hosted events for me in their homes.  But they were part of the United States government.
Story_ID: 325777
Speaker 1: I came back to the United States, and I wrote a report about all of this.
Speaker 2: What did you put in that report?
Speaker 1: Well I put in the fact what the United States could do, they can build a, printing presses in Nigeria.  They can build them in, in Kenya and what that will do is help the English speaking part of Africa, give them greater access to books published in this country.  As it is now, books that are published in this country in many cases is of, of when they get to Africa they have a higher price on them.  Because they, they're first bought by British publishing companies and goes back to the old days of colonialism.  And so the British don't want Americans pushing them out of that market and Americans accustomed to letting the British deal with Africa acquiescence.  So my point was if the United States built a modern printing press or assisted Nigeria in building a modern printing press, it can serve all of English speaking Africa.  And so the upside of that is that after I presented my report to the state department [U.S. Department of State] in writing, which I still, have a copy of.  A corporation, an American corporation called the Harris Corporation which is based in Melbourne, Florida and it's in Westerly, Rhode Island.  The Harris Corporation is part of the satellite program and then Cape Canaveral [Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida], and so they had put up a satellite system for Nigerian military.  Harris Corporation also is one of the largest manufacturers of printing presses in this country.  So they had also built a modern printing press for newspapers for a man who owned newspaper chain, his name is Chief [Moshood] Abiola he been assassinated when he was trying to run for president or prime minister of Nigeria a few years ago.  But he was a businessman, so the Harris Corporation found out about this, and I only mentioned this because I had the experience, they, they called me and then they took me to lunch.  They had an office in Washington [D.C.] in the Watergate Hotel, Watergate [Office] Building [Washington, D.C.] rather.  And so they took me to lunch and told me what they were doing that they had read the report, and how would I be, would I be interested in going back to Nigeria as a private citizen to, to identify the people in Nigeria.  Because they were tired, they had already spent close to a half million dollars doing a study of feasibility study on building a press that could print books.  And so they were didn't want to go any further but they were willing to send me as a consultant to them.  And so I did go and got with the approval of the university, but it was, it was tough duty and then I first went as a representative of the university, then when I, I mean as a, as a representative of Harris with the commission of the university.  And then I went maybe two or three other times.
Speaker 2: Was the press ever built?
Speaker 1: No it wasn't.
Speaker 2: Even today?
Speaker 1: Even today has not been built.  The, the after going, I was able to get R.R. Donnelley [& Sons Company; RR Donnelley, Chicago, Illinois] which is probably the largest printer in this country to say that they would operate the press if the Harris Corporation built it.  They would operate the press and trained the people that would take five years to do it, but they would stay there for five years.  And so when they walked away, it would be a solid staff that can make it run and all the other engineering aspects would be mastered.  The condition that they wanted me to go and live there and Donnelley was gonna take me to a plant and train me to be a printer myself before I went there.  And that would involve my leaving Howard University [Washington, D.C.] of course, but the possibility of the money was immense.  Because I would've had, I would've owned a percentage of every book that was printed there.  The, the breakdown came in that the government; I went back several times as a private citizen after the Donnelley situation.  And, but the government collapsed it was civilian government of [Shehu] Shagari collapsed and it collapsed about you know about four or five days after I had left there.  And so (laughter) that ended that concept, it could not be effectuated but it was a great experience.  Donnelley then, when I didn't want to live in Nigeria, and I knew my wife [Sammie Jackson Harris] didn't and my kids [Francis Harris and Charles Harris, Jr.] were small at the time, they said well we will pay for you and your family to live in Paris [France] and so you can go to Paris every two weeks to live, visit your family.  But my, my French isn't good, so I would've have to take French and then learn how to be a printer then and I didn't think my wife would be comfortable with it.
Story_ID: 326007
Speaker 1: We are rolling on tape ten [sic. tape nine].  We're gonna continue.  Your wife [Sammie Jackson Harris] didn't want to live in Paris [France]; you didn't want to live in Paris so that idea was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And also, well these, these the issue became settled when the government collapsed and the civilian government collapsed.  And so we were, they were back to military rule and everybody was concerned that maybe a civil war may break out again.  So all of that had to be forgotten, but it is an interesting building project that could have vast implications with regard to education.  Because that would allow a lot of American works to be available without it having it to go through the United Kingdom [UK].  And then have another surcharge put on top of the price that we already are paying, so that, that we, they already paying so it limits the number of American books in the English speaking Africa, while it maintains the same quantity of, of British publications.  The way to look at this hardly any British publishing company could exist without with sales that they get from former colonies, English speaking colonies.  And so we'd be cutting into their profits, but on the other hand it will offset our surplus that the Nigerians have here, and we were selling directly to them.  Or licensing books to them and let them print their own, it would save them a lot of money too.  Because what they're doing is spending money buying books in England from England, and they could use that money for other things.  For crops and agriculture development and so forth, so it has vast economic development issues, still today.  So it was one of the things that attracted me.  I understood that part of it at the time.
Story_ID: 326008
Speaker 1: Having gone and traveled under the state department [U.S. Department of State] auspices, I had another opportunity to do this a few years later, when the American commercial publishers had been going to Beijing, China to try and convince the Chinese to join the [Universal] Copyright Convention.  So about 1985, '84 [1984], the United States decided to send university presses and so I was one of the people chosen to go to China to get China to join the Copyright Convention.  So we went in 1985 and the delegation was headed by a man named James [H.] Clark who was the director of University of California Press, which is in Berkeley [California].  And in the delegation I can name a few of them were the director of Columbia University Press [New York, New York] a man named John [D.] Moore.  The director of Temple University Press [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] David Bartlett, University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was Tom Wotel [ph.] there were someone from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], not the director, a representative from the University of Tennessee Press [Knoxville, Tennessee] and, and Johns Hopkins University Press [Baltimore, Maryland].  Which is the oldest press in this country in continuous operation, and a representative from Harvard University Press [Cambridge, Massachusetts] it wasn't the director, it was like the deputy director.  And so it was, it was quite a thrilling experience; we were there for a month.  We first went to Beijing and official state dinners, and it was the food was impeccable and we went on tours when we weren't in sessions.  And there was an exhibit that was travelling in all of these places; we went to the University of Beijing [Beijing, China] first, where we were hosted by the provost.  And we had interpreters of course, and in the evenings it would be government dinners at very palatial halls.  And we went to obviously old city, Tiananmen Square [Beijing, China], the Great Wall of China, and then we, from Beijing we went to Shanghai [China].  That maybe, that may have been they may, yeah, Shanghai, we were in Shanghai for maybe about a week, then we went to Guilin [China].  In each place we were interacting with university people and we each, there was an exhibit of each university had their, some books that they had done in the exhibit.  And finally we went to Guangzhou [China] or was it Canton [China] I guess we could know that as, and that, that was about after three weeks we were there.  So it was just one city after another all different kinds of parts of China, and so the last part of the trip they gave us like five days of, or four days for leisure in Hong Kong, we didn't have to do anything.  So that was quite an experience but we all participated in the writing of the, the report, but it was really written by two or three people.  And it just ran it by us to see if, did they have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And what year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-five [1985].
Story_ID: 326009
Speaker 1: You leave Howard [University Press, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: In 1986.
Speaker 1: In '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: I, I the wanderlust was still in me and wanted to--I was still convinced that I could do become a commercial publisher as an independent.  And one of the things that happened about this time, is I got a call with somebody saying [HistoryMaker] Charles [F. Harris] this is Arthur Ashe.  I was at Howard University Press, and I say oh yeah, he said yes, Arthur Ashe, he says you know I have an idea for a book.  And I want to do a book on the history of, of black athlete; he said when is the next time you coming to New York [New York]?  I said just so happen I'm coming tomorrow, that was not the case I figured if Arthur wanted to, (laughter) wanted to talk to me about a book, I should move rapidly.  So I went the next day and I met him at his apartment which was on East 72nd Street then.  We chatted for a while and then we went to visit his agent, and his agent wanted to see my capabilities about publishing the book.  Well I, I talked to people at Howard before I went you know I was gonna meet Howard, Arthur.  So I didn't think I was gonna have a problem with my executive committee about offering him a contract.  Didn't realize that at the time that they would be a strict academicians who felt that the university press shouldn't publish sports books.  Or that sports are not on the level of or a serious subject.  But anyway after talking to Arthur and his agent and the agent was asking well what other people have you done?  I said well , I, I just listed some of the scholars I'd done, I said but on top of that, I published Jim Brown, I published Emlen Tunnell, who's a hall of fame player for the New York Giants.  I said I published Muhammad Ali and before I can, I was getting ready to say, Arthur said that's good enough for me.  So then I went back to Howard and we, Arthur submitted an outline and I got the approval, we offered him a contract.  Soon after we gave a press conference, we had a press conference at the Palm Hotel [ph.].  Got great national, international news because of his stature you know?  And he had been injured he had had an operation on his heels something like that, and he had won Wimbledon [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England] and that was a first of course.  And so but he was had health, something was wrong with his health.  And he had had, by that time he had a quadruple bypass operation, but something hadn't come out right.  But anyway it was a press conference was a success, Arthur then I think goes, is back in the hospital for another operation, so this must be, this is also 19, late '85 [1985] or maybe spring '86 [1986].  Anyway, I decide, no I'm sorry I got, I have, have the dates wrong, it was 1985.  So I'm still, I still start thinking about going to back to New York because I'm, one of the problems I had was that the press wasn't allowed to keep its money.  So every year we'd have to go to a budget hearing, even though we have successful books.  The revenue was taken by the university and we had to live within the budget that the university said.  And that was a policy that I could not change, the only time I could change it is the that the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] gave us a grant of several hundred thousand dollars to publish some books that we couldn't publish.  And the Ford Foundation, the grant came through Dr. Benjamin Payton who's now the president of Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama].  He was at the Ford Foundation then and was a program officer, and he, the money they gave us the university couldn't touch it.  But I, I one of the other things I'd like to mention about Howard because that, that at this point I'm emotionally about ready to go.  Psychologically I'm in a state where I think I can, I been there almost fifteen years.  Some new officers come in that, that I knew that from '71 [1971], this is '85 [1985] then some new officers come in and I, I didn't particularly get along with them.  And I knew Alsedem [sic.] was gonna be tough and so we came to a parting of the ways ami- amicably.  But I think that, I think it was time for me to go, and so the Arthur situation and when I came back from China I could tell it was, I was getting a lot of exposure and, and certain kinds of jealousies were taking place.  And I think the president's [HistoryMaker James Cheek] position wasn't as strong as it had been, you know, been some other things and budgets been getting tight.  And it was just a constant struggle, so I made up my mind I was gonna leave.
Story_ID: 326010
Speaker 1: I started going to New York [New York] and doing some explorations.  So by June--
Speaker 2: Of?
Speaker 1: Of 1986, I had incorporated Amistad Press Incorporated [New York, New York], and I chose the name because the books that I had done 'Amistad' volumes had sold like thirty-five thousand copies each.  And so I knew that name would be recognizable by a large number of people and what it stood for.  And so I incorporated before I went back to New York, and so in the summers, I officially left Howard [University Press, Washington, D.C.] June the 30th 1986.  That had been agreed to like about January of that year that I was leaving.  So about July I formed a joint venture with a company called Dodd, Mead [and Company, New York, New York], Dodd Mead was a very respectable company.  It was small but it had published, it published Agatha Christie in this country, V.S. Pritchett, it had published Paul Laurence Dunbar.  It published Langston Hughes. It had a large for, for I, I don't know what the reason was but they had a large number of African American writers relatively speaking to those times.  But they had some successful writers, white and black, and so, so I, I, a young couple had just bought that company and that, that young couple, the husband knew, he had worked at Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] after I left and knew who I was.  So when I wrote him a letter saying that I was starting a company, I was looking for a partner, they asked me to come to New York and, and we sat down and we made a joint venture agreement.  Which they would pay for the cost of, of the books and we would split the revenue, but I get a minor part of the revenue, but I wasn't putting up any money upfront so.  I figured that method would get me started, in the meantime when I left, Arthur [Ashe] wanted to know, Arthur Ashe wanted to know what was gonna happen to his book?  And I said well I think what you ought to do is address that to, I gave him a person at the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to address it to.  So he called him and, and asked what they planned to do and they told him nothing.  And they didn't want the book you see.  So they said, he said well how can I get it back, said just ask will we give it, give you the contract back.  So he got his contract back and that became the first contract that I signed in my joint venture with Dodd Mead.  But before we ev- actually published a book with Dodd Mead they got in some financial difficulty that they could've avoided.  And so I then said after I, I had to make, find another partner, and so one of my friends was friend of Steve [J.] Ross who was then the chairman of Warner Communications [Time Warner Inc., New York, New York].  He had bought Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., Burbank, California] and one of my friends is a friend of [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, my, my friend is, was [HistoryMaker] Clarence Avant who owned a record company and also knew Steve Ross.  I knew the president of Warner Books [Grand Central Publishing, New York, New York] named Larry Kirshbaum [Laurence J. Kirshbaum]; he had been a salesman at Random House [Inc.; Penguin Random House, New York, New York] when I worked there.  So I was operating on two fronts, I was dealing with somebody who worked for Steve Ross, the, the someone in the office of the president who is a very powerful man named Martin [D.] Payson.  And he worked directly for Steve Ross and he, I was talking to him and at the same time I was talking to Laurence Kirshbaum.  But I talked to Kirshbaum first, but I went to see Payson he, I told him what books I had under contract.  He called Kirshbaum, said let's make this deal.  So the first books I published with Warner was in 1988, and one of the first books was 'A Hard Road to Glory[: A History of the African American Athlete, 1919-1945]' which is now a classic by Arthur Ashe.  And Arthur became my, one of my first investor and he introduced to a number of people who in banks and couple times more than once he guaranteed loans early days getting me started, which I paid off.  The second people I group I sold stock to was Essence magazine, Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] whom I had known from before when I lived in New York before.  And, and Ed, Ed became a member of the board of directors of Amistad Press, so did Arthur Ashe.  So I, my first books were under a joint public, publication program, I also signed [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson for his autobiography under that program.  I signed a, a book called 'Skin Deep [The Story of Black Models in America and Abroad,' Barbara Summers]' the inside story of black fashion models, signed Spencer Haywood, the first hardship case in the National Basketball Association [NBA].
Story_ID: 326011
Speaker 1: And I signed Margaret Walker.  Margaret Walker did a biography, wrote a biography of Richard Wright, and it is the only biography of Richard Wright by someone who actually knew him.   They were friends from the days in Chicago [Illinois], when Wright was working for WPA [Works Progress Administration] [Federal] Writers' Project, and Margaret also was an outstanding novelist.  As you probably will remember, she was involved in the case of with Alex Haley and the material in 'Roots[: The Saga of an American Family].'  Margaret represented a, her work represented a powerful case [Wright v. Warner Books, Inc.] in that it, it had started with the estate, Richard Wright estate trying to keep her from using materials that were in the Beinecke Library [Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library] in Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  Because the papers had been sold to Yale but they were trying to restrict certain people from using them.  And it had something to do with the estate not wanting Margaret Walker to use them.  And so at this case started at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and when I went to Dodd Mead [and Company, New York, New York] it continued, and I paid the, the legal expenses when I was at Dodd Mead.  Because they wanted to be protected in that they were my partners and they didn't want to, somebody suing them and then have to pay for it.  So when I made the deal with, it was about the, the fair use, how much you can use, what rights do you have what right to have to use a, a documents that are in another library?   And so when I got the, the joint venture deal with Warner [Books; Grand Central Publishing, New York, New York], Warner took up the case and took up the legal battle, the cost of the legal battle.  And this battle started, it lasted almost ten years, and it came, it's a landmark case of fair use.  And the reason Warner wanted that, they didn't want the writers to be restricted and they didn't want publishers to be you know sued by other people who have materials in libraries.  Just because they don't want particular people to use it.  And so the case, the decision in the case is, I published it in the paperback edition of the biography of Richard Wright, which is called 'Richard Wright: Daemonic Genius,' [Margaret Walker] it is a, I think a classic work but it's also very important legal case.  And we were supported in this case by friends of the courts by the Association of American Publishers and I think it might, the Authors Guild [New York, New York].  So it was a very important case which is not talked about much now because we won it.  But if we had lost it, it would've been a very severe blow to what I was trying to do with Amistad [Press, New York, New York] and probably to my career.  Because they would be followed with a big lawsuit, if we'd lost that case.
Story_ID: 326012
Speaker 1: After about two years of publishing jointly with Warner [Books; Grand Central Publishing, New York, New York] it was then decided to finance Amistad [Press, New York, New York] by Warn- by Time Warner corporate [Time Warner Inc., New York, New York] the merger soon took place.  But the big setback was the death of Steve [J.] Ross and then because what happened is that all of the investments that Time Warner in minority enterprises, they changed that policy and didn't do it any more so.  Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] was at BET was fortunate, he was partly owned by HBO and he was able to raise the money to buy other HBO interest.  But I wasn't able to do the same thing and so I ended up having, I ran into I had some very successful books like [HistoryMaker] John [H.] Johnson's autobiography called 'Succeeding Against the Odds' [John H. Johnson and Lerone Bennett, Jr.] became a bestseller.  I published a biography of Dorothy Dandridge ['Dorothy Dandridge: A Biography'] by [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle that created the big attention for Halle Berry and all the other actresses who wanted to play Dorothy Dandridge (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whitney Houston being the first one, right?
Speaker 1: I did the first one yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah but Whitney Houston was the first actress to--
Speaker 1: We sold it; we sold it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sold it yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't sell to the agent sold the rights to Whitney Houston so an auction was supposed to have taken place between all of these actresses but it never took place.  So because the agent made a side deal with Whitney Houston's agent and so it, it angered all the other people like Janet Jackson and, and it's a lot of the agencies too.  Like CAA [Creative Artists Agency] and other big agencies, IMG [International Management Group] they were all represented stars who wanted to play that role.  We would've made more money if it been an open market and an auction.  But I learned a lesson from that also; I didn't have enough authority to keep it being done in the way it was done.  But that book was very successful for me and so you know I sold the paper rights, back rights for a hefty six figure sum.
Story_ID: 326013
Speaker 1: I published [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor's 'In the Spirit' which sold about, in hardcover, sold perhaps about 190,000 copies something there about.  But I did have a setback in that some my distributor made some mistakes in financial reporting.  And so that set me back for a while, but that was, as an independent I was always strapped for cash.  So that with the upsurge in the Internet, I then became an avid like everybody else was with it, and Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] whom I had known since I was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] 'cause he started BET while I was at Howard University Press [Washington, D.C.].  Bob Johnson was gonna invest in my company if I could find a distributor who would put a minimal investment in the company.  Perhaps five hundred thousand [dollars], as low as five hundred thousand, he was gonna put several million dollars in.  And so I couldn't get my, my present exhibitor, distributor to put any money in that was St. Martin's Press [New York, New York] who was my distributor at the time.  And so I went to HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC, New York, New York] and HarperCollins looked at my business plan and said I don't want, we don't want to be a distributor at; this is after about thirty days.  We don't want to be a distributor we don't to be investor, what we like to do is buy your company have you come work for us and then you introduce us to Bob Johnson.  Bob Johnson was gonna build a site on BET.com called The Amistad Bookstore.  And we wanna sell books and records and DVDs, CDs and DVDs everything on that site.  At the time Bob Johnson had two investors in BET.com and that was Bill Gates of Microsoft [Corporation Inc.] and John [C.] Malone of TCI [Tele-Communications Inc.].  And they were gonna leave his contract with them was gonna expire June the 30th, 1999.  I took the people at HarperCollins to meet him in Washington, D.C. in his office around April of that year.  And in that meeting, the president, the, the president of HarperCollins corporate development international relations, international sales said upon authority of the president of the company.  That BET could use up to 750 words of any HarperCollins book without having to pay for it.  This immediately solved Bob Johnson's content problems with John Malone and Microsoft, Bill Gates.  They decided to stay in the venture and then some of the people who turned him down like Barrett-Diller [ph.] changed their minds after they heard this.  And also, also the deal got to be too large for HarperCollins and so the investment had to be made by News Corporation [News Corp, New York, New York].  So in August 1999 Harper, I mean BET.com was capitalized for thirty my, thirty-five million dollars.  And News Corporation was the second one, became the second largest investor, and the other partners were Barrett-Diller, John Malone and Bill Gates.  So I was, I was excited about this because I had been the person to bring all of this together, and so we proceeded to start writing articles and publishing on BET.com and signing up books also.  But then in the year 2000 the bottom fell out of the Internet business and so the e-commerce capability on BET.com did not materialize.  Which was a tremendous setback for me because I was supposed to have gotten an income from that, significant income from it.  So I didn't like the corporate world, the giant corporation working at HarperCollins because it restricted many of my concepts and the, the things that I had been able to do when Amistad [Press, New York, New York] was independent.  And that is to have a control and coordination of publicity advertising and promotion, as well as the, the timing of the publications of the works.  This is much more difficult to do in a giant corporation.  So, after about three years there, I decided that wasn't for me; we mutually decided.
Story_ID: 326014
Speaker 1: And so I now have embarked on and started another company called Alpha Zenith Media Incorporated [New York, New York].  I am at present engaged in intense discussions and intense exploration of capital and, and people who have capital.
Speaker 2: No but we can't stand it that abruptly.  What is the aim for Alpha Z, Zenith Media?
Speaker 1: What is Alpha Zenith Media is attempting to do is a bit, I, I try to do it in, in more than one way.  Once I started once trying to acquire other companies, small companies and then build on top of that.
Speaker 2: Is when you say media, do you mean just books or (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 2: Or you going to explore radio and TV now your options are open?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: What does media mean?
Speaker 1: What media means is, is I have some properties that I would do as books that may end up as movies or documentaries.  That then would become DVDs that I would sell on the Internet, and that's my original concept when I thought, when I sold my Amistad [Press, New York, New York] to HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC, New York, New York].  That was the aim to have that coordination but I couldn't, I didn't have the, in a giant corporation in, in a conglomerate it's much more difficult to have that control over that many different aspects in one place.  But in order for this to work, it has to, the concept has to work is, you have to have control over the different units of it.  And if you don't have the control of the different units of it, you can't time when things are released.  So, for example, I'm in discussions with people who make television documentaries right now about some properties I intend to get control of.  Well they--
Speaker 2: Can you tell me what the properties are?
Speaker 1: Well I can't at this particular moment because the, they are legally tied to somebody else.  But they are things that, that I've would say would transform a significant way that African Americans perceive of themselves.
Story_ID: 326015
Speaker 1: I think that the state of the publishing world right now has too much of a concentration on publishing books for pure entertainment.  As if there's no need to educate, to inform in a serious way about historical events or world events or, or reinterpretations of, of what has gone on in the past.  I don't think that we have produced enough biographies for example, that we can see the world through other people's lives.  And if we do successful books, it will lead to successful movies, it'll suc- it'll succeed in television features, it'll succeed in being on Internet.  And I think these things have to be coordinated a lot better and particularly as it affects African Americans.  Af- African American history and culture has not been explored properly and by that I mean it's been done in sporadic ways.  All of, most of my career what I try to do is present books in a systematic way as I did with 'Zenith Books.'  As I done with I did the 'Amistad' volumes, I intend to bring those concepts back by using new material, using new graphics.  Using websites and then finding other means to penetrate as far as marketing is concerned.  There is no publisher today that has a systematic marketing approach to reaching African Americans.  It is one of the most amazing things that anybody, that I know of in the publishing or entertainment fields.  Because if we look at the marketing of records they have known for years how to reach African Americans, they have know how to inform the African Americans of an audience that an African American of, they know how to put an artist before an African American audience, and they've always known that since Scott Joplin.  But one of the reasons may be that many African Americans have had more control in music over what is presented to African Americans and to the general public.  The same can be said of movies, they now know how, how to penetrate African American market.  If they're allowed to, if the people who produce the movies and direct them are allowed to participate.  Like [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles with 'Sweetback' ['Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song'].  He knew how to get that before the public, but before Hollywood, they didn't even know what the (unclear) was.  But then the modern version of it, look at 'The Diary of a Mad Housewife' [sic. 'Diary of a Mad Black Woman'], that you can see the person understood, he [Tyler Perry] had pre-sold this by going around the country on a bus performing before audiences that, that Hollywood had no idea existed or wanted to know existed.  But now what does he have, five, five movie contracts or something like that, and he has control in the way he didn't before.  So this is my concept with Alpha Zenith Media Incorporated [New York, New York] to be working with television and motion picture people on books that I contract for and having some control over the sale and marketing, not only of the books, but the CDs and, and using the internet.
Story_ID: 325787
Speaker 1: We are rolling on our final and eleventh tape [sic. tenth tape], to wrap it all up.  But one thing I want to have you comment on that you've sort of done today is just the, the titles, we've, we've used to describe ourselves as, as people.  And, and you used them all today at various points except for colored, I think.  So can you just talk about the evolution, what it means, why it has been what it has been, where we are today?
Speaker 2: I don't ever remember people, black people in Virginia in the segregated South calling themselves colored.  I think that was a term that the white people used when they put the signs up, white and colored.  Because it sort of like white and other, and I think that that black people, the word Negro, white, black people fought so hard to get that word capitalized.  And why many older people prefer it as opposed to African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay but before you go on, Negro was not a capitalized word?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In some places when I was a kid, there were certain newspapers that refused to capitalize Negro, so a large number of people had to fight about this.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and, they wanted to capitalize all other races but they wouldn't capitalize Negro.  And so I can remember that being an issue but I can't tell you exact year.  But the only time I see signs saying colored but it might be on the bathroom in some restaurants or something like that, or it might've been in a department store.  But as, I think that after World War II [WWII], I didn't see it, the signs were taken down, probably during the war they was taken down too. But there were certain unwritten things that you would; the code of behavior was such that you might not go there.  Or that I didn't see it on water fountains either, just in certain places or certain parts of town.  And it might've been in poor sections of town where the, you know where only white people lived.  And so yeah, the thing about where I grew up is the Tidewater section of Virginia, there is no landed gentry that like 'Gone with the Wind.'  Which people in the North think that the white people in the South all live like 'Gone with the Wi--.'  Clark Gable in 'Gone with The Wind.'  Well it, the people that worked in the shipyard they worked right beside black people, if they were electricians, they worked all together.  Or on construction sites, stuff like that, the only thing you would see that they were, people were working on pavement or some of the streets like that, the supervisor would be white.  The, the for some reason or another black person couldn't do that or couldn't drive the truck that had to pick up the asphalt, you know.  And then eventually they, they could do those jobs, they could drive the truck.  But for going back to the term colored, I don't think black people called themselves colored.  Except in a derogatory or humorous way, say you know describe the man, well he was a colored fellow.  They really mean that as a, as a joke or some sort.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not a, and they wouldn't use it in front of white people where I was growing up.  But white people called black people colored; we call ourselves black at home, you know; always did.
Story_ID: 325788
Speaker 1: Did you refer to yourself as a Negro?  No--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were only black?
Speaker 2: We said black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we said black.  They may have been something where an official document where somebody wrote down Negro, but we didn't put that down ourselves.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because we called ourselves black.  And I don't know why but I think my, my parents [Annie Lawson Harris and Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] said that they their parents called themselves black.
Speaker 1: When did you, when do you remember calling yourself an African American?
Speaker 2: It probably, they, you hear parts of that in when I was in college [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], because the, the re- the discussion started about where did you come from?  Because everybody else was designating themselves as being you know Italian American, German American.   And so I started seeing people calling themselves African American but sometimes people use Afro American, because, I, I think that may have come from the newspaper.  But by the '60s [1960s] it was black began to dominate be, this not dominate, but I guess I don't know whether because of the, most of us, most of my siblings are my complexion, some a little lighter.  But, but we, our parents said that, well you should be proud that you're black, you know?  This is before 'I'm Black and I'm Proud,' so I mean it wasn't uncommon for people, we didn't call each other in our community black as a putdown you know?  So I, but I was a man before I really thought about that we didn't do that, we didn't do it in high school either.  And it's just like when I, when I went to Washington [D.C.] and I went to, came to New York [New York], there were black people who equated a knowledge and, and respect so forth with the color of your skin, within the African American community.  Well I didn't have that, the positions that I ha- I never experienced that, positions I held, that I, I was, my classmates were all colors.  The student body was all colors, and the, so the people that I palled around were all colors, so I didn't suffer from anything like that.  And I, but, but my older siblings did, they can tell me the stories they felt they slighted my sister, my older sister.  But that changed as, as she grew older and she was an accomplished musician, and so they changed it.  But we were, we were also told not to, we were taught not to be judging people by the color of their skin.  That was a trap, no matter white people judge you by the color of your skin, you should not do that because that's a trap.  And you will not be able to see the person who they are, and just because somebody's discriminated against you, the revert- you shouldn't do that yourself.  So I went home once and told my father, that one of my teachers is, was a, was a fair-skinned, very fair-skinned woman who could've passed for white.  And I didn't knew, I had my advisory grade and, I remember this, I was a freshman, and so I got like a D or something like that.  Which was a shocking thing to me, but when I was being questioned about it, I said I guess you did it to me because of, because the color of my skin.  And I, and so I wasn't, I wasn't using my intelligence to be quite frank, so my mother didn't say anything.  My father came home from work and I told him the same thing, and he, so he waited two or three days.  And then he asked me how did I know she was doing it because of the color of my skin?  I hadn't thought of how to explain that, do you know what grades everybody else got, I said no, well then how would you know that she singled you out for the color of your skin?  And my father was very demanding on an intellectual basis, you couldn't be saying stupid stuff you know you (laughter) he couldn't tolerate that.  So he would and he'd lose respect for you if you do things like that.  So what ultimately I had to admit that that wasn't true, that I had to do my homework.  And he told me as long as you live, I live, I don't ever want you to ever say anything or use that even if it's true, to use that for saying that you couldn't succeed at something.  But it turns out this woman had grown up very poor and destitute and my parents had been very helpful with, and gave her and her family food and fed them and so forth.  And the families had been close and I didn't even know it, and it was long before I was born, so she was older than my oldest brother.  So I didn't know any of that, so they told me after I had gotten myself straight and then you know they told me that.  But they were really mad at me and you know so, we, we, I grew up in a very good time.  Because the, when I was in high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and college, people didn't speak derogatory things about other black people, you know.
Story_ID: 325789
Speaker 1: What are your hopes now for the African American community?
Speaker 2: I ap- one of the things that perplexes me is that there such a divide between the middle and upper class blacks and the poor blacks.  And I think that there's a question of, of the media promulgating and rewarding negative stereotypes.  I'm not a great fan of the culture of hip hop; I'm not talking about the art that's involved. But the culture of hip hop that you gotta get shot or go to jail and in order to be authentic you know to have respect.  I think that's a tremendous mistake, but I think that the record companies thrive on this.  But now the record companies are in the hands of whites completely, and but I think that like, like all cultural movements they shift and fade and they decline.  And I think this is run its course it's gonna far as it can go eventually, or something else will rise up suddenly.  And I think the pendulum is going to swing back, because I think that the Internet offers so much of an opportunity to go into people's homes.  And you don't have to have as much, if you have the right connections or the right relationships.  Then you don't have to have as much money to spend on advertising and promotion that you would have to use on television or newspapers.  And in a fact if you strong enough you can attack, attract the advertising and promotion while still controlling the content.  Because you create the content and they come to you, and that's my aim is to, is to try to present material that's entertainment but at the same time informative.  Make people think and the only way you can do that is you gotta put the material out there and so that means you got to control the sources.  So I have a contract, for example, with a distributor that can give, give me national and international distribution, I can go worldwide.  And I know that a key to, to marketing these books is having the distribution capability, but you also have to have or with anything else CDs or DVDs.  Then you also have to have the fulfillment capability to be able to supply the order once you get it.  Well I have that, through the distributor, what I don't have is what, is, is the Internet asset, which I'm trying to pursue at the same time I'm trying to pursue and getting the capital.  It's a chicken and egg sort of thing, so the trick is to convince someone who has money that this is a multimillion dollar deal if you get the concept.  Because the mainstream publishers haven't gotten the concept yet, and that's why they're spending money on chick lit and stuff, that can't last.  'Cause its pure entertainment and if you read one of those things, all of them are the same.  It's the same story, you know, somebody said on television the other day, that's how Stella got her grove whacked (laughter).
Story_ID: 325790
Speaker 1: Why do you and these, and this will be the last question for you.  Why do you feel history's important?
Speaker 2: I think history is important, because it, it tells you where you where you have been, and it keeps you from making mistakes going forward.  It also--history is not complete, because the history is not complete, as a perception that people have of themselves, I'm talking about African Americans.  Which remains as faults you don't have to go out and talk about inventors, that's not what I'm talking about.  But if I see the difficulty I had in trying to sell people in, in Doubleday [& Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York] on the fact that only 360 something thousand black soldiers appear, appear for, fought, for the in the Union Army, World War II [WWII], I mean the Civil War.  They did not know that, to this day we don't know about the participation of black troops in World War I completely and World War II [WWII], we don't, that's record has left.  So if you see 'Saving Private Ryan', you don't see any black people in there at all, except they couldn't have fought without all those.  The transportation and quartermaster which was heavily black, it was a segregated army and then the combat troops as well.  You never see that story, so that's what I'm saying is we, we you'll hear a story about black troops liberating a concentration camp.  But you'll hear the story once, nobody makes a movie with that, but we know that that happened.
Speaker 1: Except that there's one documentary I've seen which if you never seen you should see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I ha--
Speaker 1: --the 'Liberators[: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II]'.
Speaker 2: I have seen it.
Speaker 1: Yeah and Dave, yeah I saw it and [HistoryMaker] David [N.] Dinkins at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] and it was a big to do, yeah.   But I didn't know that, that had happened or that existed until, I agree with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah well we haven't dwelled on that because we haven't presented it, you know?  They made a movie about the Red Ball Express, and all the people in it are white, we never thought that trucker drivers were all black.  So how do they change the history?  Or look at this 'Mississippi Burning' thing movie here.  Now somebody today would think that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] was diligently looking down, looking after for people who were lynching black people, when they were not.  They knew who the people were and said they couldn't arrest them because they didn't have the authority to.  So they just changed the whole thing around, and that's what I'm talking about, there's a different perception of yourself.  So you know and so when that happens, white people have a different perception of African Americans and themselves as well.  So it makes society better, it makes, each opportunity just have to be created.  African Americans don't have control over any aspect of the media, and if you just trust your story to be told by somebody else, then they gonna tell it the way they see it or what's to their advantage to tell.  So, so, let's take for example, I took an examination to go to the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland].  This is about 1950, and the reason for it you go to the Naval Academy or what they call the Naval N, NROTC [Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps].  Which paid more than the [U.S.] Army, it paid full scholarships for Ivy League schools or you can go to the Naval Academy.  So those of us who were top students, we filled out the forms and so forth, well when they gave the test, they gave the test in a place in Portsmouth [Virginia], Alexander Park.  Which was a stronghold of Ku Klux Klan [KKK], so we couldn't go in the cafeteria and eat lunch when we broke for lunch.  So that the test was English, history, algebra, geometry, chemistry and physics, that's was the topics, so we had to eat in nabs, you know what nabs are?  It's like a little yellow cooking thing with peanut butter--
Speaker 1: Cheese little thing, yeah, nabs okay.
Speaker 2: And drink Pepsi-Cola from a machine while they went in and ate and we knew that was Klan country, so why give the test, you see what I'm saying?  And at the same time, we couldn't use the public library, when I was in high school [Chestnut Street School; I.C. Norcom High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], we couldn't use, go in the public library.  When I was in college [Norfolk Branch, Virginia State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] we couldn't go in the public library, well how, where did you find that story, so where, you can look today and say why is it these students are not doing so well in reading for example?  Well look, check out the facilities that they have, it's, it's easy.  In many cases the white kids were give, given the test, they knew the test well before the (laughter).  So of course they score high why wouldn't they you know.  But when there's a level of playing field you can see the African American students just as well as anybody else.  And then the racial distinction is not made as, as much as lev, as the playing field is level.  So that's what I'm saying, this kind of thing has to change because then this would change the teachers, so we need to change the perspective of the teachers, then the students are gonna change as well, but you know.  This, the stories have to be told not just the heroic part, but you have to tell the climate in which we lived, and sometimes the only way to tell the climate in which we have lived is to tell the story of somebody's life, and you can see the climate of a certain period.  I hope that my life as--by examining my life, that people can see some of the changes that have taken place in American society as I lived my life.   I know that's what I've seen.
Story_ID: 325791
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Oh I don't know I, I think that my, I think I was put on this earth to publish books and to put out information.  That's why I stated it so much; no matter what the circumstances or the hurdles.  I think it's, I've always had this love of books and I, I always, I started a publishing institute at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I did that because I wanted to encourage more minorities to go into the publishing business.  And that was done with a grant from Time Incorporated [Time Inc., New York, New York], Time and Warner [Communications] hadn't merged then.   And I had a friend who was officer there, she arranged for me to get this grant to start the, start the, Howard University Press Publishing Institute.  What, what attracted me was, and what's always appealed when I talk to young people about books and why I'm in it.  Is I ask them have you ever, when you studying this, do you ever figure out how out of this book how it got in your hands?  And then I take them to the steps of how this happen, it had to start with somebody thinking this, I can write this book.  Then they have to write it, and then somebody else has to go over the manuscript and copyedit and proofread.  And then somebody else has to edit it you know and then somebody has to say okay let's offer this kind of budget for the advertising promotions.  And then all the number of people who are involved and then the shipping company and you know the warehouse and all of these things.   And then people become fascinated with the process you know, and then how, now, what does that do,  now that you know the process what does that do for your mind?  You know when I was a kid we would read books about other places; my father [Ambrose E. Harris, Sr.] says you should be pick up a book if it says China learn something about that.  You don't know one day you might want to go to China you know or you might go to China.  That seem far fetch in, in the South in 1940 something, but I ended up going to China you see (laughter) you know, but you know I wasn't overwhelmed by things you know.  Colonial history that used to be boring but then I had to go Williamsburg [Virginia] on a field trip or something.  But then when I started reading 'The Negro and Colonial America' [sic. 'The Negro in Colonial New England'] by a man named Lorenzo [Johnston] Greene it was just fascinating.  Now I had something else to put beside the, the white version of what had happened, you know?  So, so and it's, that fascinate me today and that always keeps me excited about things; books keep me excited about things.  And I'm always, you know, I'm looking for new ideas and new ways to do things, so.
Story_ID: 325792
Speaker 1: When I had the opportunity to look at other oral history projects, one, one of the things that has fascinated me most is for people to put some sort of climate or context into their oral history into which--what was, as--you know, in this moment, so fifty years from now, when someone's looking at his oral history, what cont- what climate are we living in as African Americas today?
Speaker 2: I think, we're, we're living in a climate of, of many different cities, it's not like [Charles] Dickens said, a tale of two cities.  I think that, I think that, that African Americans are more conservative than they think they are.  I think that uninformed, uneducated or people who are leaders in the religious community may not have as broader worldview as they should have.  Since, therefore, they're constantly reacting to something rather than saying this is the plan that I have and I'd like you all to join me in this plan.  I, I think that's a mistake and I think it plays too much of a prominent role in our lives, as opposed to mainstream white America.  They, you know when something happens to, in some incident they don't want, the ministers don't go running to it.  And it I think, sometimes we think that, that ministers can solve problems that are, that are economic problems.  That they're business problems.  I mean they can bring about pressure, I'm not arguing against that, but, but I think that the, the African Americans who have the wealth are not investing that wealth in other African Americans.  I'm not talking about making a donation to a college, I'm talking about, that's wonderful, I'm not opposed to that either, but I'm saying there has to be an entrepreneurial class among African Americans.  And that entrepreneurial class has to be, it has to have a great participation from African Americans who have money.  And to be delivered, I'm trying to create an African American class that, there other people who are religious who are holding a lot of business positions.  That didn't come about just because they prayed, I mean somebody had a plan you know, and I'm not, I'm not being critical of that.  I, this is something that I admire, so there's other ethnic and religious groups have done this, we are gonna do that too.  So I'm not so sure that building a megachurch that can hold thirty thousand people is gonna lead to kind to kind of economic development.  I'm not saying I'm opposed to people of desire to go to heaven, I'm not, I'm not saying that.  Or to rejoice in, in the gospel, I, I admire that and I like some of that myself, but what I'm saying it should not be an either or proposition.  I'm not sure that churches can lead and economic development in their communities you know, I'm not sure of that.  Maybe it has to be some other kind of structure; maybe they can lead to the development to some other kind of structure than can finance entrepreneurs.  Or can encourage the entrepreneurs or train them, but I'm not sure the churches themselves can do it.  So the religious initiative that some politicians want to use I, I'm concerned about that because it might take it in the wrong direction.  It may require a person who has a sound business plan to have to embrace a religion just in order to get the money.  And I, I, I'm concerned about that, because I don't think that's the way the country ought to be going, and so why should it be in the African American community?  I mean, the people who built Enron [Corporation] didn't have a church, I mean they and they're probably not going to hell either, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)(Laughter).
Story_ID: 325793
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Charles F. Harris, editor, Doubleday & Company [Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, New York, New York], approximately 1963, the photograph on the wall is of Jim Brown of the Cleveland Browns, and it was taken by a very famous photographer, Robert Rieger.
Speaker 2: Charles F. Harris, 1966, while I'm general manager and vice president of Portal Press a wholly-owned subsidiary of John Wiley and Sons [Hoboken, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph taken at a press conference to announce the publication of 'Zenith Books.'  A line of books originated by Charles F. Harris, and where [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin serves as the general editor.  The persons in the photograph are from left Charles F. Harris, next is John T. Sargent, president of Doubleday & Company.  Next is John Hope Franklin, professor of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], professor of history, the University of Chicago, general editor of the series and Nelson Doubleday the major owner of Doubleday & Company.  And brother in-law of John Sargent and executive vice president of Doubleday in January of 1965.
Speaker 2: This photograph is taken in January 1965 at a reception held at a Park Avenue [New York, New York] hotel, which no longer exists, which followed the press conference.  The people in the photograph are reporters of the first is from New York World-Telegram and Sun and the next the woman, is from a New York [New York] newspaper which is unknown at this particular time.  The person in the background is Louise Thomas who is director of publicity and public relations for Doubleday & Company Incorporated.  And next is Charles F. Harris, editor of the Doubleday 'Zenith Books' series.
