Story_ID: 558871
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Math- is (laughter) I'm sorry, Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Charles Holton, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Holton, H-O-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most people refer to me as Chuck, and they have for years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 3, 1930, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am currently retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your occupation (laughter)?
Speaker 2: After school I spent a number of years, six years playing professional basketball with the Harlem Globetrotters and following that I spent twenty-nine years in the social service field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were the director of the peace--peace--
Speaker 2: That was subsequent--
Speaker 1: Okay, subsequent, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Right, I worked for state service, Wisconsin Department of Health and Social Services those twenty-nine years and, and five years with the House of Peace [Milwaukee, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 29, 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558872
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as a warm up and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anything that's on the plate.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I guess, maybe barbecued ribs might be my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Love fall, fall is my time of year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Gray.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Door County, Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Be good to yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558873
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's [Frank Holton, Jr.] side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Alice C. Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N [Alice Wilson Holton].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 20, 1908.  And I think it was Hot Springs, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace your mother's ancestors?
Speaker 2: Her parents pretty much might be it.  Lulu Thompson [Lulu Webb] was her mother--and my mother was an only child.  And Woodrow Wilson is her father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there any tradition of the, of, of your grandparents coming from another state or were they all, you know, just kind of the buck kind of stops in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: As far as I know it was, that was it on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spent a number of years in Oklahoma growing up, my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story behind your, your grandfather's name, Woodrow Wilson?
Speaker 2: None that I know of.  We always called, or they called him Woody, we called him Grandpa Wilson, but they called him Woody.
Speaker 1: What's interesting and it didn't dawn on me when, and I know you showed me his picture when we came in--but it didn't dawn on me that, now that you give the date of your mother's birth, he actually was born, he would be a contemporary of Woodrow Wilson the president, just happened to have the same name perhaps?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not named after him because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --I don't think the President Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson] well, he was president during World War I [WWI], 1914 or so, that's after your, your, your grandfather was a father, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So I mean, it's conceivable that the names have nothing to do with each other, you know, I mean, as such, you know, what I mean, they just happened to be the same name.
Speaker 2: Could be, could be.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You never know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause I don't think President Woodrow Wilson was well known prior to becoming president, he was, outside of the state he lived in.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And it wasn't like it is today where you get so much media coverage--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and such.  In fact, I think, he was a college president and a history professor before he became a president of the United States--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so.  So well do, do, do you know anything about your grandfather, Woodrow Wilson, or your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother would spend--a number of times would come up and visit us.  She was very short, had hair down to, almost down to her knees.  Very little gray as she grew older.  And I know she was part Cherokee [Native American], but I don't have any names of any of those ancestors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories that are passed down through the family about life in Arkansas or, or Oklahoma in the early part of the century?
Speaker 2: None that I can recall.  I remember my little brother [T. Michael Holton] went down with my mother to visit her and Granny talks about the, the red clay that he was playing in and some of the little white kids playing in it and they, I can't remember the whole story but (laughter) she didn't, she didn't take too kindly to whatever happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558874
Speaker 1: Hot Springs [Arkansas] was an interesting place because it was a resort town.  Any stories about Hot Springs that you know of, or what life was like there for that--your family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  My mother [Alice Wilson Holton] came, came up at a fairly young age to live with her father in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]--that's how she got to Wisconsin.  So she didn't have a lot of years in Arkansas or Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About how old was she when she came to Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm thinking maybe in her--well, she would have been a preteen probably because she, she went to school here and finished the ninth grade I believe and living with her father so she probably was a preteen when she came to Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about why Woodrow Wilson moved to Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: None that any of us have ever heard.  It could have been for a job.  He worked at the, the old Heil Company [Heil Rail Joint Welding Company; Heil Trailer International] for a number of years.  They were a manufacturing company.  And there are some interesting stories about him.  He always shopped for his clothes east of the Milwaukee River, which was kind of a ritzy area for men's--men's clothing.  The first black person I knew who ever dealt with The Wall Street Journal.  He got The Wall Street Journal every day and apparently did a lot of investing.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea of, of where he learned about these things or what, who mentored him or--
Speaker 2: No, no idea, no idea.  It's unfortunate that we weren't into getting some of that background and history when, when they were around, but we missed a big opportunity I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was he the first person in his family to move to Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: As far as I know there were some of his family was in, in St. Paul [Minnesota].  He had a sister in St. Paul and she lived there for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558875
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Alice Wilson Holton] talk about growing up at all, about, you know, what things were like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not too much, not too much.  She didn't spend a lot of time with us talking about growing up.  I think, she probably felt she was too busy helping us to grow up (laughter).  But we didn't hear a lot from, from Mom in terms of her growing up.  Of course, as I came along it was during the Depression [Great Depression] and so, you know, the big thing was trying to find work and take care of your family, which she did along with my dad [Frank Holton, Jr.], for years did housework.  Which was, you know, pretty popular work for many black women in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you ever get the impression that she missed Hot Springs [Arkansas] and wanted to go back?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't think she ever (laughter) wanted to go back there.  She'd go back to visit my [maternal] grandmother [Lulu Webb] but that was about it, that was about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.  I just wanted ask it like that 'cause I was wondering, okay, so, I mean, I think people sometimes think it's self-evident that we wanna be out of the South in those days--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but there might have been some specific reason why she didn't wanna go back or you know, the, merely the fact that she's, you know, she wasn't just moving to be moving, she was moving because they--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, the family really didn't like it there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She--
Speaker 1: --as much.  That's--
Speaker 2: --never talked about--
Speaker 1: --that's important.
Speaker 2: --wanting to go back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did she get a chance to finish school in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Just grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what, what did your mother do, do for a living?
Speaker 2: She did housework.  During the war she worked in one of the defense factories as many, many women did during that time--that was World War II [WWII].
Story_ID: 558876
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Frank J. Holton, H-O-L-T-O-N [Frank Holton, Jr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and--
Speaker 2: He was born June 27, 1908.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Heathman, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Eatmon?
Speaker 2: Heathman.
Speaker 1: Eathman [sic.], okay.
Speaker 2: H-E-A-T-H-M-A-N.  It was near the Kosciusko area [Kosciusko, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he always said he was glad (laughter) he was from Mississippi.  He didn't ever want to go back to Mississippi.  I don't think he even went back to visit--'course most of the family did move up to East St. Louis [Illinois], St. Louis [Missouri], and then on to Wisconsin, that's the way they arrived here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he have a story about what life was like down, down there?  Did he talk about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he didn't like it.  It was not fun.  But he was, he was the youngest child in his family and so he was fairly young when they moved up here.  Even though he, he says he didn't wanna go back, I don't, I'm not sure how much he remembered from growing up in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they, did they pass down any stories through the family about specific things that happened to 'em there that would make a difference?
Speaker 2: One, there was some sheriff that was in, a part of the family, a white sheriff.
Speaker 1: He's a biological--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --relative?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was, and I can't remember if he was the father of my grandmother [Mary Holton] or one of her relatives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was his Holton too?
Speaker 2: No, it was, oh, Hulk, Hu- Hull, Hull, H-U-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, do you know very much about your, your father's ancestors in Mississippi, about how far back they go and what kind of work they did?
Speaker 2: No.  Very little.  He didn't, he didn't talk about Mississippi (laughter) very much at all.
Speaker 1: Did you get the impression that they were, when they were in Mississippi they were doing, did they work in the houses of, of the rich or did they work in the fields or--
Speaker 2: I think it was both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That would, that would be my, my best guess.  And then the women were all good cooks in the family so I imagine a number of them did cook for families in the South.  And there might have been some cotton pickers too.  And I don't know, you know, if, if it was just a matter of being ashamed of what they had to live through and not, not being open to talking about it and recalling it and sharing it with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558877
Speaker 1: When did your father [Frank Holton, Jr.] come to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Came from East St. Louis [Illinois], and it had to be in the '20s [1920s], I'd say the mid-'20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did the, what did he do--was he, did he come--his parents [Mary Holton and Frank Holton, Sr.] up here, or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And a number of brothers and brothers in law, brothers and sisters moved up and worked at the packing company, meatpacking company here, his brothers did.
Speaker 1: Is that Oscar Mayer or, or--
Speaker 2: I think it was Swift [Swift and Company] at that time and it was Cudahy meatpacking company [Cudahy Packing Company], I'm trying, Plankinton--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --meatpacking company [Plankinton Packing Company] was another one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a Plankinton Street here I assume that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Now, did your, your father talk about growing up any, about what it was like for him?
Speaker 2: No.  Our family was I think kind of closed mouthed (laughter) unfortunately, didn't talk a lot about growing up, unh-uh.  A little sometimes he would talk about, you know, some of the old baseball players that he had seen over the years but--
Speaker 1: Who had he seen that he would discuss?
Speaker 2: They were locals mainly.  But I'm trying to think of--when we were little he took us out here to see the, the Yankees [New York Yankees], the Yankees came to play an exhibition game and Joe DiMaggio was with 'em and so he said we could get out of school and he was gonna take us to see the baseball game.  I think he played a little baseball, sandlot ball, nothing spectacular.
Speaker 1: Now, was your father tall?
Speaker 2: I'd say about six feet, which was considered tall in those days, not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was your mother [Alice Wilson Holton] tall?
Speaker 2: No, she was about average, I'd say about 5'6", 5'7".
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fairly tall for a woman.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, especially in those days it would--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's fairly, that's taller than average.  But did, did, is there a, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They met at a dance, that's one thing I do remember.  And that was pretty much it, (laughter) they met and they got married soon after.
Speaker 1: Was it really, real soon afterwards or did they (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that, it was not a long courtship, well, it wasn't a long courtship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your father have a chance to finish school in the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, he finished--now my mother finished ninth grade and my dad finished the eighth grade.  Went to a school that is now called Golda Meir grade school [Golda Meir School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And at that time it was called the Fourth Street School, public school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause it, for those who don't know, who are watching this, Golda Meir is, actually, was actually raised in Milwaukee--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for part of her life, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And later became the prime minister of Israel.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, so did your father work in a meatpacking plant too or?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.  He worked in a number of factories, tanneries mainly, early jobs, Greenebaum tannery [J. Greenebaum Tanning Company] was a big tannery here.  Albert Trostel tannery, that's T-R-O-S-T-E-L [Albert Trostel and Sons Company], was another tannery here.  That was one of his earlier jobs and then he moved on to factory work during the war, worked in a number of factories.
Speaker 1: Did he, did he serve during the--
Speaker 2: No, he--
Speaker 1: Well, no, yeah, he would have been too, too old then, right?
Speaker 2: My mother said that if the war had lasted (laughter) another month he probably would have been drafted.  I think he had a deferment is what they call it, because of the size of his family.  But he never, never made the [U.S.] military.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he would have been old too for World War II [WWII].  I guess, he would have kind of fallen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, let's see he would have been--
Speaker 1: --between the two wars.
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944] would have been--or '45 [1945] he would have been thirty-seven, so he just missed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you, you think about your parents' personalities and talents and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mother.  I'm on the, I think, I am on the gentle side (laughter).  And I take a little after my father too but I think more after my mother.  I'm, I'm a little more sensitive than, than my dad was.
Story_ID: 558878
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I have a bunch of early childhood memories (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well there's the first one--is there a first one?
Speaker 2: First one, there could be a first that I, I can recall.  We used to get the newspaper [Milwaukee Journal; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel], the daily paper would be thrown up the stairs from the, the paper boy we called him in those days, and there was one part of the newspaper, it was called the Green Sheet and it had all the comics in it.  And we all, all the kids wanted to see the comics first, get the Green Sheet.  Well, I went to get it and my brother [Frank Holton, III] and sister [Dolores Holton Davis] knocked me down going to the get the Green Sheet and the newspaper.
Speaker 1: They knocked you all the way down the stairs?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --just get out of the way, you know, we're gonna get the paper.  And I cried (laughter) and my mother [Alice Wilson Holton] says, "You let Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Holton] get that paper."  And so they threw it down.  She says, "No, put it back on the steps and let him go get it."  So I marched down the stairs and got the paper.  Then I started reading the comics aloud (laughter) just to irritate them (laughter).  Oh, yeah.  Those were interesting, interesting days.
Story_ID: 558879
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: Seven all told.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two brothers and five sisters.
Speaker 1: And where are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two of the sisters have died.  I'm the third oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Right.  You can name 'em if you like 'cause it may be helpful for relatives and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's Dolores is--Davis now [Dolores Holton Davis], is the oldest.  Frank Holton, Jr.--or the III [Frank Holton, III] is the next, then I come.  Then interesting because we were all born on the third of a month.  There was December 3rd, June 3rd, September 3rd.  And then my younger sister came along on October 2nd, so we always teased her that she came too early.  And then there's Michael--Maureen [ph.], she's dead now, and Michael [T. Michael Holton] and Carol Ann [Carol Ann Holton Miller] and Mary Ellen [Mary Ellen Holton Ringhand], she's also dead.  So there are one, two, three, four, five of us now living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're spread out a little.
Speaker 1: Now, we--when I was coming in, we discovered that your, your uncle, I guess, your father's brother is Hugh Holton [sic. Hubert Holton, Sr.] the, the writer and police officer from Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Right [sic.].
Speaker 1: Detective and--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --novelist--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --mystery novelist.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know him growing up or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, from visits that they would make.  I have a cousin who was much closer to them than we were, but we kind of stayed in touch.  And then his son, Hubert [Hugh Holton], I was closer to him, closer to his age and used to see him a lot down in the Chicago area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558880
Speaker 1: Now what neighborhood did you grow up here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood was around 10th [Street] and Reservoir [Avenue], or 10th and Vine [Street], or 10th and Brown [Street] maybe is easier.  It was inhabited mostly by black families and Jewish families.  There were a lot of Jewish people living in Milwaukee.  And it was, you know, a nice little community neighborhood and schools were nearby and then grocery stores and everything.  Because in those days for the most part we had to walk or take a bus everywhere we went.  So the neighborhood was, it was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did it have a special name?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No name.  We--
Speaker 1: It's on the North Side of Milwaukee or--
Speaker 2: North Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  I'd say right now I'm trying to think of what freeways have cut through a lot of these communities over the years but it's, it's near Walnut Street.  And Walnut was the heart of the black community as I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question--now did you grow up in the same place or did you move, move around a lot, did you--
Speaker 2: Let's see, I was born in my [paternal] grandmother's [Mary Holton] and grandfather's [Frank Holton, Sr.] house actually.  And we lived there for a while, that was on 10th Street, 1906 North--wait 1850 North 10th Street.  And then we moved up a block, so we were about a block away.  And we were there for most of my childhood practically--yeah, we didn't move a lot.  After that we moved, of course, I was off to school then, we moved to 7th [Street] and Galena [Street] area and my dad [Frank Holton, Jr.] was a boil- boil man--fireman for the church, took care of the church furnace and, and--Blessed Martin Church [Blessed Martin De Porres Church, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And then while I was traveling they, they moved to 13th [Street] and Ring [Street] which was quite a ways north, it was like way out in the country (laughter) considered, but it was only, you know, a couple of miles away at the most.  And they lived there until they passed.  So it was pretty much in that, that 10th Street area that I spent practically all of my early years.
Story_ID: 558881
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Smells, there were a couple of smells (laughter).  The bakery, the Twinkie, Continental Baking Company and I passed it every day going to school.  Used to walk to school, walk back home for lunch, back for the afternoon session, and then back at the end of the day, and I'd pass that bakery every day.  And the other one was the hops coming from the brewery [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company] which was, I thought just a very pleasant aroma, not that I was into (laughter) beer in those days but I just enjoyed that.  Sounds, relatively quiet.  You know, if you, if you went far enough away, you would hear, get some sounds out of the factories, but that was pretty much it.  But I just really enjoyed that, that bakery trip and worked in there for a while there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was the factory that made Hostess CupCakes and Twinkies and stuff, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there was another bakery, the Jaeger Baking Company [Oswald Jaeger Baking Company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was not too far away so you got the bread aroma coming from there so it was baking time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I loved those Twinkies.
Speaker 1: So quiet in terms of sounds.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And sights, what, what did it look like?
Speaker 2: Green, a lot of parks, seemed like it was a long way to go to a park, yeah, but--because of where we lived, but and Milwaukee [Wisconsin] was always known for, you know, if they have a square block where there's no buildings on it, they'll make it a park (laughter).  Yes, but those pretty much were the sights.
Story_ID: 558882
Speaker 1: Did you have favorite things that you liked to do growing up [in Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: I liked, I liked to play ball a lot and listen to, I remember listening to the radio a lot, Joe Louis fights.  You know, there was no TV back in those days.  And it was just fascinating laying on the floor in front of the radio, the whole family, and waiting until Louis won.  Other than that, spent a lot of time on the playground.  You know, I'd get up in the morning, head for the playground, come home for lunch, head back to the playground, come home for dinner, head back to the playground (laughter).  Spent a lot of time on 9th Street (Unclear) Park playground, just doing everything, uh-huh.  We had benches with checkerboards painted on them, and we'd get bottle caps from soda and those were what we used for checkers.  Softball, we'd play a lot of softball there and then basketball and going to school took up most of our time.  And you tried to get a job during the summer but I think those, those were the things I enjoyed doing.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember, do you remember when Joe Louis lost on the radio?  I mean, lost the, that fight to Max Schmeling?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that one.
Speaker 1: You may have been a little young I guess then.
Speaker 2: I might have cried myself to sleep though (laughter).
Story_ID: 558883
Speaker 1: So in those days, now you had access to basketball I guess then, huh?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: When you--was there a court nearby and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Always onto the playground.  And in the fall we used to, go to the social center, which had a gym and we would watch the industrial teams play, like Allen-Bradley [Allen-Bradley Company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and Allis-Chalmers [Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Company, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and Greenebaum tannery [J. Greenebaum Tanning Company].  And that was before, you know, we got into organized ball and then, in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now was, were, were the movies a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Movies, yeah, yeah, they were.  My grandmother insisted on taking--what was the title of that movie?  Taking the family to see that movie about--'Pinky,' I think it was.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Insisted on talking us to see that.  We used to earn enough money to go to a Sunday movie, a dime (laughter) was what you paid to see a movie.  And you could sit there all day and watch it over and over and over, which we sometimes did.
Story_ID: 558884
Speaker 1: I remember Pearl Harbor, we were at the old Miller Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], it was downtown near 3rd [Street] and Wisconsin [Avenue] and the movie stopped and, of course, we started clapping and yelling, you know, "Bring back the movie."  And a fellow came out onto the stage and he said the Japanese have just bombed Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] and we were frightened and so we left and headed home, we ran all the way home.  And I looked up and saw an airplane and I said, (laughter) "They're coming already!"  Oh, some little Piper Cub [Piper J-3 Cub] flying over, you know.  But, yeah, we spent a lot of time in the movies, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And this is 1941 and you would have been maybe eleven, I guess, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: Eleven years old.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Story_ID: 558885
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?  Now, you, you were born right on the, at the beginning of the Great Depression?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Basically, so--
Speaker 2: Right in the heart of the Depression period.
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started at Ninth Street School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] which was about a block away.  And spent two years there.  And my sister was in some kind of a Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] program and the, the scout leader thought she was pretty intelligent and she was, and she suggested, "You should send your daughter to St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]."  And she went there and then the next year the rest of us went there.  And I, I was in the third grade when I left for St. Benedict, left Ninth Street School to go to St. Benedict.  And spent the rest of my grade school and high school years there.  It was, it was a, a fascinating setup because we had grades one to twelve, many of the students were boarding students and they called us day scholars, I don't know where they got that from, but we were the day scholars and they were the boarders.  They used to have to get up and go to church every morning, the boarding students.  And then they would march over and have breakfast.  And then back to clean up their rooms and then we would see them when, when school started.  Came from all over the country: California, New York, Louisiana, Illinois, Michigan, all over.  We had some interesting times just meeting kids from other areas and going, you know, going to school with 'em and growing up with 'em and that was fascinating, very fascinating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a group of Dominican nuns and Capuchin priests that ran the school and--
Speaker 1: What--was the school intended for black students?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it was a mission, a--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --mission school--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was--
Speaker 2: --originally.  And it was designed to bring black people into the Catholic faith.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, were you, was your family Catholic at the time?
Speaker 2: Not then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we subsequently became Catholic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was the tuition very expensive?
Speaker 2: It's funny you ask that because I can remember one year, I don't know if I was going into the eighth grade or ninth grade and I had a little summer job, and so my dad [Frank Holton, Jr.] said, "Well, you're gonna have to pay your own tuition."  Okay, four dollars (laughter) was my tuition and book rental, and I paid it and I was so proud (laughter).  But no, it was a very poor school.  Fred Miller [Frederick Miller] who was president of Miller Brewing Company [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], years and years ago, donated a lot of money to St. Benedict.  The building originally housed Marquette High School [Marquette University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --they subsequently built a gym which was above a laundry that they used for the hospital, there was St. Anthony Hospital [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was on the site too so there was a laundry that used, was used for the school, the church, and the, the hospital, right below the gym.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did you like St. Benedict's?
Speaker 2: I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loved it, yeah.  The teachers were just great, they were kind, they ruled, and the parents, you know, back in those days, corporal punishment was accepted.  And the parents would give them permission to (laughter) act in their stead.  And so if, if--I was a good kid, and I, I didn't cause any trouble, but, you know, the boarding students were away from home, and I'm sure it was tough on a number of them, but if they acted up, they, they felt the, the ruler pap, pap, pap.  We had a black brother, Brother Benedict [ph.] who was subsequently I think he went to Hawaii or went into the [U.S. military] service, but he, he was like a father, you know, or a brother to all of us kids and he, he didn't take any, any crap as they say (laughter).  And we, we understood and we minded.
Story_ID: 558886
Speaker 1: Did you have any understanding that St. Benedict was a black saint, an, an African saint in those days?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Did you have any understanding that St. Benedict actually was an African--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --historically?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then on, above the altar there was a sculpture of the martyrs of Uganda.  If you get a chance while you're here to stop in at St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor Parish, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], it's been remodeled, it's been declared a historical site.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know there's a school in Chicago [Illinois] named for one of the martyrs of Uganda.
Speaker 2: Oh, is there really (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. John--oh, I (unclear) name, I can't think of it now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But it's, yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --one of the schools--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --named for St. John, and it's right on the tip of my tongue.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was one of the martyrs from Ugan- from Uganda, yeah.
Speaker 2: First time we were exposed to black history and black literature, we had it in the classroom.  Charlie Madison [Charles Madison] came from St. Louis [Missouri] and he was a football coach and track coach and he introduced black literature and black history.
Speaker 1: Was he a black, black teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Charlie Madison?
Speaker 2: Charlie Madison.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Introduced those into the curriculum.  And we, we felt pretty good because it was the only school that we knew of that was teaching black history and black literature.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, it's St. Charles Lwanga.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: St. Charles Lwanga, and there's a school named for him [St. Charles Lwanga School] on the South Side of Chicago on 51st Street [sic.].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's one of the Ugandan martyrs, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well, let's see, well, okay.
Speaker 2: And St. Benedict was the Moor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, of course, that was another reminder that he lived in Africa.
Speaker 1: His--
Speaker 2: Or was of African descent.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It's interesting 'cause I remember in the '70s [1970s] there was a news article, AP [Associated Press] had out about the first black saint is, you know, named by the Catholic church and, you know, many black Catholics already knew there were black saints already--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And there was a--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know, and I remember a discussion I had with somebody in the office about that, I said, "No, he's not the first (unclear)--."
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: "Oh, there's never been a--."
Speaker 2: Was it Martin de Porres?
Speaker 1: Pro- I, I--I don't think it's even Martin de Porres.  It was someone--
Speaker 2: Because he was blessed.  He was blessed before and I think he was canonized subsequently because we named a church after him.
Speaker 1: Well, it was somebody who was canonized in the '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the AP put it out there over the--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --wire and it came, got to the Dayton Daily News that he was the first black, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 1: And a lot of Catholics in Dayton [Ohio] said they, you know, said, "Oh, you see this?  They--."  And, you know, so it was, he's not the first (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So that's interesting.  So, so, you had a, a, and Charlie Madison was a, a coach?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: He, he taught--
Speaker 2: Taught black literature--
Speaker 1: --phys ed [physical education].
Speaker 2: --and black history.
Speaker 1: Black literature and black history?
Speaker 2: And general science also.
Speaker 1: In, in high school, when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that is something for those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this would have been in the, in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Forties [1940s], right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that wasn't popular--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, it wasn't a popular thing in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: The names, Arna Bontemps and, oh, gosh, you know, the names would just roll off his tongue, and--interesting, interesting.
Speaker 1: That is interesting, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Interesting of all these interviews I hardly ever run across that, of anybody teaching like that in those days.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, so you got a--
Speaker 2: Well, we, interesting thing because when, when the black artists would come to play at the Riverside Theater [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], they had stage shows back in those days, and the Palace Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], Wisconsin Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and--mostly at the Riverside Theater.  They would invite the whole school down, Duke Ellington, Count Basie, they would, you know, I mean, you'd go there, you'd see the show, you'd see a movie, and the whole kit and caboodle, it wasn't just a, you know, a musical show but it was very interesting.  But they would invite the entire school down, and we would march downtown to the Riverside, go in see the show and--very enjoyable.  Lionel Hampton had been a student at St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] during his early years.
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Redd Foxx was another one.  And Harold Washington spent some time there.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, nowadays, say Harold Washington too, you say, he used to, he would run away from the school--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --from--periodically?
Speaker 2: He didn't like it there.  So I think his family finally decided, yeah, maybe that's not the program for him.
Story_ID: 558887
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you a question now, that seem to be in the news today about people reflecting back on Catholic schools, did you ever hear any stories of abuse in those days by the priest or the students?
Speaker 2: No, you know, that's, it has bothered me, and I think back, I said, gosh, with all those kids there that certainly was an environment where kids could have been subjected to abuse.  But, none that I've ever heard of, and I hope I never hear of any.  But we just, they, they, they rotated the priests a lot and I think the nuns were out of Racine [Wisconsin] so--their order, but the priests a lot of them came from the East Coast, from the New York area and, you know, we'd have 'em for a couple of years and just when we'd get used to 'em it seem like they would take 'em and assign 'em somewhere else.  And oh, boy, it was (laughter), it was tough to see some of 'em go some time but fortunately we never seemed to have any, any problems with child abuse in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, so did you, was there any particular course of study that you were, that you excelled in or, or were attracted to?
Speaker 2: English and writing.  I enjoyed writing a lot.  I was, I was, we- there were a bunch of us, well, maybe three or four of us who were real close, we were buddies.  And three of the guys were midyear students so they went into high school in January, and I was supposed to go in the following September.  And I remember Sister Wilma [ph.] says, "Oh, well, you may as well go on with the rest of 'em."  And so I went, went in in January to start high school.  And I had a tough time with algebra, ah, it was horrible for me.  And I didn't think, maybe I should have stayed in grade school another semester (laughter).  But writing I enjoyed.  English, history, I enjoyed all classes, enjoyed the languages.  The only problem was we didn't get a full two years of Latin and Spanish because one, there was a, it, it was a small school and some of the kids just couldn't keep up with the languages so two years of Spanish it's probably more like one year and same with Latin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, so you were there from, from certain point in grade school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], right, through--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, third grade.
Speaker 1: --third grade through, through high school [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Through the twelfth grade
Speaker 1: Through the twelfth grade.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What teachers would you consider to be special or to be mentors?
Speaker 2: Charlie Madison [Charles Madison] certainly.  Nick Kanavas was my basketball coach, he, he was very special.  Sister Wilma, oh, gosh, Sister Etta Marie [ph.], Sister Ida [ph.], all those nuns were just, just fabulous.  And I, I can't really point out any particular one, they were just all great, great educators.  And they were there, and I always say, well, maybe it was because they didn't have families and other concerns to worry about so they could focus in on teaching us and trying to make sure we were, you know, prepared for the world.  But it was, it was a wonderful experience, and I wouldn't have traded it for anything.
Speaker 1: Now, you were on the, the newspaper staff right?  In high school?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And were you, were you ever the editor or did you--
Speaker 2: No, did a lot of work in the print shop.  But later on in college [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin] I served as sports editor, and then editor my final year of the school newspaper [St. Norbert Times].  It was a lot of fun.  That was my first love.  If I would have been able to go into any field that I wanted to I think it would have been journalism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just enjoyed writing.  But that, that was a field that simply wasn't open to us like it is today.  So I missed, I missed my calling.
Story_ID: 558888
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in student activities?  Did you run for office or anything like that or involved in, in clubs and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In high school [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Hm, not a lot, not a lot.  I, I guess I was too busy either working or playing basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I wasn't (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now, did, did those two things create a conflict?  Because I know in those days that money was scarce and--
Speaker 2: Money was scarce.
Speaker 1: --to work and then play ball at the same time is pretty demanding.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was lucky enough to get a summer job that would, we were able to carry it over when school started.  So I would hustle (laughter) away from school down to the plant [Continental Baking Company], work about four hours and come home.  And then when basketball season started I, I wasn't able to work, but they said that, I, I marvel at the fact that, you know, there were jobs available for kids in school.  And, of course, there were jobs available for, you know, families too so it has changed so much unfortunately.
Story_ID: 558889
Speaker 1: Was basketball then the way it is today?  'Cause I've heard--some people told me that the basketball teams were divided into weight classes in those days or had you gone passed that by the time you came up (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, not, not here.  We had the old Cath- CYO, Catholic Youth Organization.  It's in, that was the grade schools that played in that league.  And, and your first year of high school sometimes they had a cadet class and it was based on age, cadet class and senior and junior, and then your, your high school programs.  So it was pretty much like it is now, except they're bigger (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Faster, taller, and everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what position did, did you play on the, on the--
Speaker 2: I played forward and--guard in high school [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], forward in college [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin].  I had to jump center and I was, I was, I always said I was 6'2" and a half, but I'm not, I'm about 6'1".  And--but I, I had good spring in my legs and so I jumped center, I did handle the center jump and there were some pretty big guys I had to jump against but forward was position I played most and then later on and, and with the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] I played guard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you were like the, the off guard, you weren't the one who brought the ball were you or were you?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let somebody else do that (laughter).  I was not the, the world's fanciest dribbler (laughter).
Speaker 1: So okay.  What was the strength in your game mostly, was it your jumping ability, or?
Speaker 2: Jumping, timing, defense, and, eh, team play I think more than anything.  I mean, I could shoot, but I, I considered myself more an all-around player and I enjoyed defense more than, more than offense.  Coach [Nick Kanavas] told us once, you work on defense, and you rest on offense.  And so I, I tried to remember that.
Speaker 1: That's, it's a--now that's a lesson that doesn't sink into a lot of people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --that play ball.  One of the faults I think of basketball players is that they don't play defense--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --those that'll lose crucial--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --games and such, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so what made you defensive minded, do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: No, it was just kind of challenging I think.  I remember a scrimmage once at school and this guy thought he was gonna (laughter) work me over, but I just, I played him so well that he couldn't, he couldn't get by me, he got real angry, he got upset.  Yeah, those things happened.  It's just more fun on defense, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I always used to say well, anybody can shoot which I think is true today but it takes, takes hard work to, to play defense.
Story_ID: 558890
Speaker 1: Who were some of the players you, you played with and played against in, in, on the high school level first of all, and then?
Speaker 2: Ah, boy, these, these, these names won't ring a bell probably to anybody but--
Speaker 1: Well, put 'em out here 'cause it's for history--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --some, if somebody looks up, is trying to look, look this subject at some point--
Speaker 2: Messmer High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was a big rival of ours and--
Speaker 1: Messmer?
Speaker 2: Messmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they Catholic too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and Norm Domach [Norman Domach] and the Shrampca [ph.] brothers were--Marquette [Marquette University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was a rivalry too.  Bill Lofy [ph.], he, Ted Zimmerwitz [ph.], he was from, oh, St. Stanislaus [St. Stanislaus High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?  Well, those were the high school guys I remember most of all worked our--Messmer and Marquette.  We beat Marquette twice one year and that was interesting because we had about forty-nine boys in our school [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and Marquette was an all-boys school, I don't know how many, if they had a thousand, and they used to kind of rule the conference along with Messmer but one year we beat 'em twice and that was unbelievable, that was, that was a rarity.
Speaker 1: So you basically had an all-black team right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Now, was there ever any dis- any dispute about playing you all from local teams or other teams in the area?  I know sometimes in the public schools they, they would--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --refuse to play black teams.
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any refusal to play.  I'm trying to remember, we always wondered about the referees (laughter) of course, you know, you, you wonder about the referees anyway.  But there were some places we played that, you know, weren't too hospitable, but, but some of 'em, a lot of 'em were especially if we--.  Like the state tournament was played up at St. Norbert [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin] and we were treated very nicely up there, very nicely.
Story_ID: 558891
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from your early basketball days at St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?  Did the team win a, win a, I mean, did it have a good season or a--
Speaker 2: We had a--
Speaker 1: Or seasons?
Speaker 2: --couple of pretty decent seasons.  We were outnumbered with, you know, forty-nine, fifty male students in high school it was kind of hard to compete with some of the other schools but (unclear)--
Speaker 1: They had so many other boys to choose from that it could make a bigger, taller team.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  But we, we had some good seasons, we had some good seasons.  We went to the state tournament.  Back in those days they had a separate tournament for Catholic schools.  And a couple of years we did go to the state tournament up at St. Norbert [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin] and we kind of held our own.  And then out of that came an invite from some schools to come to their--La Crosse [La Crosse Central High School, La Crosse, Wisconsin] and Menasha [Menasha High School, Menasha, Wisconsin] invited us to come up and play the following season, so that, that was kind of neat.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who, who, who was your high school coach?
Speaker 2: Nick Kanavas, K-A-N-A-V-A-S.
Speaker 1: His last name is spelled, I'm sorry, C--
Speaker 2: K-A-N--
Speaker 1: K-A-N--
Speaker 2: --A-V-A-S.
Story_ID: 558892
Speaker 1: When you were a senior now, did you, did anything special happen when you were on the verge of graduation [from St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], or did you get a scholarship anywhere or anything like that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's funny.  I, I did not know I was going to be able to go to school until Labor Day.  And no, no scholarships--well, they did--my pastor had some connections and he kind of hooked me up me with St. Norbert [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin], and they offered me some help and then an opportunity to do some work on the campus so that I could put in hours to cover my tuition and, and books.  But I often wonder why I didn't hear from Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] because every year that I can recall the, the leading scorer in the high school Catholic conference got a scholarship to Marquette University, and never did hear--never, in fact, never did hear from any school so when I see these kids having press conferences (laughter) to announce where they're going to school, I get such a charge out of that.  But--
Speaker 1: So you were the leading scorer in the conference?
Speaker 2: Yep, my final year.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your average?
Speaker 2: Probably about fifteen points maybe a game.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the games weren't real high scoring games?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  I remember, you know, in the thirties and twenties, a lot of the games were--
Speaker 1: Thirties and twenties?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Defense (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what you're really talking about too is scoring half the points of the team?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: So this is the, the equivalent of a guy now scoring thirty-five, forty points, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at least.  I can remember one game and it was kind of a fluke because, you know, I was, I just happened to be hot and nobody else was and I think the final score was--we had thirty-eight points and I had twenty-seven of 'em and that was a rarity to get into the twenties in those days.  But I often wonder why, why Marquette, well, I know why Marquette didn't offer me a scholarship.
Speaker 1: Well, were there other factors that made the game less high scoring then?  I mean, were, were the rules more strict or the style of play slower or what was it?
Speaker 2: The style of play was slower and you didn't have a time clock.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's no clock for a college to shoot?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You could spread the floor and just pass the ball around?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  So you would get some even lower scoring games than twenties and thirties.  They talk about back in those--earlier, being before those days, when, you know, a high school championship was like eighteen to twelve, or something like that.  And, of course, before then, that was before my time, after each basket they would go to a center jump and start all over again.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something that doesn't happen now.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So that would take a, you know--
Speaker 2: But it was a lot.  And then, you know, you could hold the ball as long you wanted to and so you, you could control the game that way.
Story_ID: 558893
Speaker 1: When did they change the rules so you could take the ball out after a basket--the other team would get the ball out?
Speaker 2: My guess, and I have to guess because I always played with the, you know, taking the ball out after the basket and, and going down the court, but I'd say probably in the early '30s [1930s] would be my best guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's an interesting question I'd--be nice to check out.  But I, I did play at a time when women's basketball, girls basketball were six players on each team on the court, three on one side and three on the other.  And the three on the one side could only shoot and play offense, the three on the other side, your three teammates on the other side would only play defense.  So when the ball was on that court the other six players were on the other, other side of the floor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they call that captain basketball or something?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: They call it?
Speaker 2: Iowa I think was the last state to finally move to having, you know, full court basketball for girls and women.  So it did, yeah, the game has evolved so much over the years.  It's strange.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever see anyone in those days do a crossover dribble?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also in those days you didn't go flying through the air (laughter) because you would have been on your behind.
Speaker 1: Well, well--
Speaker 2: And you can probably remember not too many years ago they had what they called--what did, what was the name of the, they were--enforcers.
Speaker 1: Right, oh, yeah, like the--
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: --famous Jungle Jim Loscutoff of the Boston Celtics.
Speaker 2: That's the one, you're right, yeah.  He, he would go in to soften up the other team.  And he did a heck of a job of it, yeah.  It was--but my mates on the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] would say it's why--shoot the two handed shot, your, your feet are on the floor and you're not gonna get knocked on your keister (laughter) as they say.  Yeah, that's a, it was a little safer.  And even the jump shot as that evolved, you know, you were kind of in a stationary position rather than moving but--
Speaker 1: And it was a surprise too, I guess, to the people that you were gonna shoot at at that point--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that you--were not something they could attack you.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Now, now, what, what did you, well, what were the shots in your repertoire in those days?
Speaker 2: Just a one handed shot pretty much.  I played around with a hook shot not too much though 'cause I didn't play in the pivot.  But I, I shot two hands for many years, and then my brother [Frank Holton, III] was the first one at our school [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and I think in this area to shoot a one hand push shot, and then I started shooting and some of the other players started shooting the one hand shot, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Was it easier to shoot a one hand shot than a two hand set shot?
Speaker 2: Not initially, not initially.  And I think it felt like you had more control when you had both hands on the ball.  The one handed, I guess, you didn't feel like you had the same amount of control of the ball as the two handed.  But, you know, they've got these jump hooks now and so many different shots, finger roll, and feathering the ball up there, but a different game.
Speaker 1: Now, now, I remember watching television when I was maybe nine or ten years old, this had to be '59 [1959] or '60 [1960], and seeing some of the pros, Clyde Lovellette maybe and some others go to the pros and Wilt Chamberlain shoot an underhanded free throw.
Speaker 2: That's what I did (laughter).  And a lot of people don't realize that I mean Wilt, when he--Chamberlain, when he got his hundred points he must have had fifty of 'em by free throws.  So a lot of people tell Shaq [Shaquille O'Neal], he ought to try that.
Speaker 1: He'd probably--it wouldn't hurt him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, yeah, that was the preferred method of shooting free throws in those days.  And then they started, you know, shooting one hand because I guess that was how they shot the ball and so you don't go around--.  Well, in the old days too, a two handed, underhand shot was, was, a, a field goal shot too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as well as a free throw.  I remember some of those real old timers you see them and they would shoot the ball underhand.
Story_ID: 558894
Speaker 1: When you got your scholarship, you got, well, you were able to go, you--did you get a scholarship to college?
Speaker 2: Partial scholarship, right.
Speaker 1: Partial, okay.
Speaker 2: Which they don't give, they don't now give athletic scholarships and I don't think they really gave athletic scholarships in those days, it was some financial assistance more.  But as I said I had a job that I worked [at the Continental Baking Company] and I would earn enough hours to pay my tuition and, and books.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what year did you graduate from high school [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, in 1948.  And, and so you started playing college ball in, yeah, in, in '48 [1948], I guess, fall of '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, could, could you play as a freshman or did you have to wait a year?
Speaker 2: Yes, we could then.  I, I didn't have a, a markedly outstanding year that first year.  So I played, we had a lot of, we had some freshman games that we were able to play.  In fact, one of the games we played at was at the correctional institution, Green Bay Reformatory [Wisconsin State Reformatory; Green Bay Correctional Institution, Brown County, Wisconsin] it was called then in those days, a lot of young men.  And we had a, had a, invited over there to play a game and it was so weird because they could not applaud or clap or anything, they had to be silent.  So playing a game in silence is rare.  But the interesting thing was, "Hey, Chuck [HistoryMaker Charles Holton], how you doing man?"  (Laughter) I'd see a lot of my old buddies in prison.  And, "What are you doing up here?"  "I'm going to school."  But it was fascinating.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your college again it's--
Speaker 2: St. Norbert [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin].
Speaker 1: St. Norbert, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: St. Norbert.  Okay.  So did you have like, did you play in a Catholic conference or was it independent Catholic conference?
Speaker 2: We had a conference called the Midlands Conference, Saint Joe's [Saint Joseph's College] out of Rensselaer, Indiana, Loras College out of Dubuque, Iowa, St. Ambro- [St. Ambrose University, Davenport, Iowa]--they were all Catholic schools around the Midwest, there were about six schools I think in that conference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 558895
Speaker 1: Now in those days, I--correct me if I'm wrong, but I think the Catholic schools had sort of an edge on other schools in terms of basketball.  I don't know it just seems like, like CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] and, and all that had developed basketball to a, maybe a, you know, had refined it some way or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not so sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't know, you think, you, you don't think so?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When you start to think about the, the college teams in those days that, you know, won the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] or in 19--CCNY, which is City College of New York [New York, New York]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --won both the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] and the NCAA when they had--you could go to both tournaments.  Hank Luisetti, he was from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] I think, so, I don't think, yeah, I don't think Catholic schools had any advantage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were smaller, we were much smaller.  You had DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois], which was, you know, an outstanding program particularly when they had Mike [George Mikan] in there.  And Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] lately has had pretty decent, but back in those days they weren't that--in fact, we beat Marquette.  I think that was my sophomore year, sophomore or junior year [at St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin].  They gave us a game and down here and we beat them.  And Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] never would give us a game, they let us play their junior varsity but they wouldn't play us.  I, I guess in those days, even today, you know, some of the big schools are afraid to play smaller schools 'cause they figure they got nothing to gain, if they lose, they don't, they'll feel embarrassed or humiliated or something, but it's happening so much nowadays, you know, what's the big deal?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just seems when I think back to those days, to a lot of the schools like, like Canisius [Canisius College, Buffalo, New York], or St. Bonaventure [St. Bonaventure University, Bonaventure, New York] and St. Joseph [St. Joseph's University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and St. John's [St. John's University, New York, New York], and, you know.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: They have a lot of, lot of basketball.
Speaker 2: The eastern schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah, eastern basketball--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --schools, or Catholic schools.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: S- come out of the urban--
Speaker 2: St. John's.
Speaker 1: --you know, environment.
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, that's a good point.
Speaker 1: I don't know, it just seemed like, seemed like it had some--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --kind of correlation here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But maybe not so much as I think but it, you know, seemed like there's an over representation of Catholic, good Catholic basketball schools--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --maybe if you look at the proportion of, of them that--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --than the public ones.  So there are more public schools but the Catholics seem to be better prepared for basketball for some reason.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Not so much football.
Speaker 2: Of course, in a lot of 'em they probably didn't have football teams.  Marquette lost its football team many, many years ago.  And then, you know, it was strictly a basketball school.  I suspect the same thing for like St. John's out of the eastern and a number of those.  I think Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] is, Georgetown is a Catholic school, I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have a football team.
Speaker 1: And Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] is a, you know, I don't know, it just seems like--Xavier [Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --you know, University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio], they all seem to be--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you know, college basketball teams that win like nineteen, twenty games a year.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They, you know.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: So I don't know.
Story_ID: 558896
Speaker 1: So you were at St. Norbert [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin] for four years?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: And now did you, did you win any honors there for basketball?
Speaker 2: Was voted on the all-conference team and won the scoring title my last year.  We, we, we were a small school.  We had about two thousand male students, it was all male.  And a lot of the students were veterans from the Korean conflict [Korean War] and World War II [WWII]--no, that would have been World War II.
Speaker 1: So that kind of makes it even more remarkable on some level that you were winning a scoring title with older guys.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of the guys were older than you?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Of course, they were probably more serious students than--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --us athletes.  But it was, it was, it was good time up there.
Speaker 1: Now, what, well, what was your major?
Speaker 2: Economics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I putted around, got a minor in journalism.  And, and I don't know why I decided to go into economics as a major 'cause I thought I might end up having to teach school but I didn't take any teaching credits and so--
Speaker 1: So did you earn a bachelor's of science in economics--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is that what it is?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: And that would be in 1952?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had no idea what I was gonna do when I got out of school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The people said, "Don't worry, we don't either," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what, were, were there any stories about school--now how, how were you treated at St. Norbert were you--
Speaker 2: I was treated well for the most part.  I'd hear the, the N word occasionally, not directed at me, but just hear it in conversations.
Story_ID: 558897
Speaker 1: I had a funny story, I was, used to listen to Jackie Robinson's radio show on Sunday night and my roommate said, "Who are you listening to?"  I said, "Oh, that's Jackie Robinson."  He said, "Oh, that doesn't sound like Jackie Robinson."  I said, "Did you ever hear him?"  He said, "No," (laughter).
Speaker 2: He mean that it didn't sound like a black person?  That's what he was trying to say?
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right, right, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I didn't even know Jackie Robinson had a radio show?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And he, he had a radio show, was it a, a talk show sort of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --format?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Sunday evening.
Speaker 2: What did he talk about?
Speaker 1: I can't even remember.
Speaker 2: Was it mostly sports or--
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Almost had to be.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I know at one point that, there was a controversy of some, there were some statements he made about Paul Robeson that were controversial about, you know, condemning Paul Robeson for being in Russia I think or something, you, you know, created a debate in the African American community--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --as to whether he should have said those things or not.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well this would have been, no, right after he started because I was there [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin] from '48 [1948] to '52 [1952].  Jackie came in in '47 [1947] so he was in his early years when he had this show.
Speaker 2: Did he ever talk about the, the--some of the, what we now know happened to him, you know, as a player, with threats and--
Speaker 1: You know, I, I can't recall.
Speaker 2: I imagine he didn't but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he probably was a little, a little leery about shaking up too much (laughter) of the upper echelon but yeah, I wonder, be nice to have some of those broadcasts to see what he did talk about.
Story_ID: 558898
Speaker 1: Were you covered in the black press yourself?  Did they, did you, did they write about you in the, in the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] or the Defender [Chicago Defender] or the local black papers or--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, that was, you know, of course, the Courier was out of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] I think.  There was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they tried some kind of a national kind of focus on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  We used to, I used to sell those papers (laughter).  But no, nothing out of there.  I, you know, I found it very interesting that in all the years I was at St. Norbert [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin] I was never referred to by race until I graduated--you know, in the newspaper.
Speaker 1: And then what context was it in?
Speaker 2: First Negro to graduate from St. Norbert College.
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a distinction.  That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, we had--subsequently we had some students from Africa after I started there.  We had one of the kids from St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] went there for about a year, Milton Clark [ph.], he was out of Chicago [Illinois] I think, but I was the first one to graduate from St. Norbert.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So well, 1952 and, and like the question is what, what are you gone do with a B.S. in economics out of St. Norbert?
Speaker 2: Right.  I started, (laughter) ended up going around trying to find out, you know, Daddy [Frank Holton, Jr.] would--my dad would say, "Now, you go to--," hm, "go over to Schlitz brewery [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company] because your grandmother ironed Mr. Uihlein's clothes and see if you can get a job over there."  (Unclear).  But then I got the offer to come for the trials, so I said, well, you know, I'll find some work this summer and see what happens out of this.  And I was, I was very fortunate because the year I started, the year I tried out, they decided to have a third unit.
Speaker 1: Now this is the Harlem Globetrotters?
Speaker 2: Harlem Globetrotters.
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about the day that you found out that you were gonna get a tryout, I mean, what, how did they notify you by mail or phone?
Speaker 2: A letter.
Speaker 1: Letter?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know if they were scouting you at all?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  And the story I heard later was that some fellow from, who lived in Menasha [Wisconsin] had seen me play and was a friend of Abe Saperstein's and told him about me.  And, and he'd, he'd always fancied himself as being able to find talent that nobody else could find because, you know, he had the, the black schools [HBCUs] in his hand because you, they couldn't go to the NBA [National Basketball Association] in, in those years.  So he could go to the black schools around the country and try to, you know, and get the choice players.  And I'm not saying, you know, I was a choice player, but I think he liked the idea of, you know, somebody that nobody had ever heard of, somebody from a little school that he's gonna make, you know, on a--put on his team.
Story_ID: 558899
Speaker 1: Yeah, went down and was a little nervous.
Speaker 2: Where were the tryouts held?
Speaker 1: At St.--St. Anselm's [St. Anselm's School] on the South Side.
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: In Chicago.
Speaker 2: St. Anselm's is right at 61st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] pretty--yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Across the street from St. Edmund's [St. Edmund School, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We used to stay at the Evans Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] and there was another hotel, Wedgewood [Wedgewood Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], further south and east.  And I never told anybody this, but I was a little, a little frightened (laughter) you know, I'm going to the big city (laughter).  And what's, what's, what's in the future for me.  So I got in the hotel and went right to my room (laughter) and, you know, they had it all set up and then the next morning, I stayed in my room until the next morning.  Then we met in the lobby to go over and start our workouts.  So as I say fortunately they decided to have a third unit, they had an eastern unit and a western unit.  The eastern unit had the, the primary players like Goose [Reece "Goose" Tatum] and Marques [Marques Haynes].  And the western unit played a lot in the western part of the, the country.  But there was such a demand around the country for the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] that Abe [Abe Saperstein] decided, you know, you know, "I'll have a third unit."  He called us the southern unit, and we had some veterans and some newcomers and they taught us the routines and how to do it.  And we played all local teams.  So we had no idea what to expect when we came into a town.
Speaker 2: Did people suspect when you came into--well, before we get there, now, how, was there any suspense about you making the team at all?  Did you think that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, with me there was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And once I got comfortable I said, well, you know, maybe I'll get lucky.  And particularly since they're gonna have a third unit, you know, maybe I'll have a chance, and I made it.  And, you know, it--things weren't done like they, they are today where, you know, you don't--you, you wouldn't tell a guy, you know, "You, you made the team," you just, "Come on, we're going to play down in such and such," (laughter) so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So they didn't, they didn't bring you up before a mic where--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and put a, give you the team hat--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: --like they do now and a big contract or anything?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it--
Story_ID: 558900
Speaker 1: You said you learned the routines.  Now what--so all the teams had to, all the Globetrotters' squads had to do certain things then?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were, they were showman part, they were part of the showmanship?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the team, just help us to understand, like what was the, what were the Harlem Globetrotters at that time?  We know they were founded by Abe Saperstein in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They started off--tell us the, the history sort of, what the Globetrotters--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it started out in 1927 as the Big, Big Savoy Five [Savoy Big Five] I think, was the name of the team then.  And played a lot in that area--would do a little barnstorming.  Played against teams like the New York Rens [New York Renaissance], in fact, Pop Gates [William "Pop" Gates] who was one of my coaches was one of the New York Rens before they turned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And by barnstorming for any kids watching this that means that you played whoever--
Speaker 2: Right, you go from town to town and, you know, play against a, a team and try to win.
Speaker 1: So it could be a, a team of town All-Stars or--
Speaker 2: It could be, it could be.
Speaker 1: --the guys that used to play in high school in that town or guys that, you know, were--best players in the town they could--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --assemble and they play you.
Speaker 2: Or it could be a bunch of guys that would just wanna get out there and play and be a part of the (laughter) the program.  And, you know, you, you had to kind of carry a game then and it wasn't always easy.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Because, you know, you, you wouldn't wanna have a, such a lopsided score that people would get bored.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So but we came across some pretty decent teams over the years and in some cases we lost.
Story_ID: 558901
Speaker 1: So we were explaining the Harlem Globetrotters.  And so they, they actually got started twenty years before you, yeah, almost, yeah, twenty-seven years before you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, about twenty-five years--
Speaker 1: --before you got--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --involved.  So it was quite an institution even then.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I had seen them and, you know, straight basketball and not a lot of show, but as the years went by most of the fans wanted to see show rather than basketball.  And I think originally, as the story goes, since they only had five or six players they needed some time to rest, and so somebody would come up with a little routine, the dribbling routine, the other four would rest and other kinds of routines.  And then they, they could survive and, and still win the game.  But as people more and more wanted to see show, they got away from the competitive game of basketball, and eventually they started tour, having a team tour with them, Washington Generals, the Philadelphia Sphas I think it was, Toledo, Toledo Mercurys, was it Toledo Mercurys--no, that was kind of an independent team and they played some, they were not a bunch of big guys, about all the same height, 6'3", 6'4", and played outstanding basketball.  And, and then I know at least one occasion they beat the Trotters.  And it was always kind of embarrassing when the Trotters would lose because of their record, but they have lost a number of games (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now on, as, on the fan side of it, as you're watching the Globetrotters back in the, I guess--and I didn't see 'em in the early, early days but in the '60s [1960s] when I was a kid, you, they'd play the Washington Generals usually.  And, you, you know, 'cause by that time the NBA [National Basketball Association] was in full swing and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --there were leagues, people say professional basketball as a league sport--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --rather than a group of individual professional teams that did barnstorming around--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but you had the impression that the Washington Generals were supposed to lose because it's in their contract or something, you know, they, they weren't supposed, whatever they do out there, they're not, they weren't supposed to beat the Trotters--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because it was part of the show.  Was that, was that the way it was done or could the Generals win actually?
Speaker 2: Well, very rarely could the Generals win.  They were never strong enough, a strong enough or good enough team to beat the Trotters but the Trotters could have an off night.  And--
Speaker 1: So they actually could, you know, theoretically win--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a game?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But the routines that we went through, there was a baseball routine and a football routine and, you know, this and that, mostly ball handling, they're expected to go along with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the referees were, are referees that know the routine too and they--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then so there's--part of the game is strictly competitive and then part is, you know, like, okay, we're gonna give the fans something to, to enjoy.
Story_ID: 558902
Speaker 1: But he, he was an interesting man and--
Speaker 2: Abe Saperstein?
Speaker 1: Abe Saperstein, founder and owner [of the Harlem Globetrotters] for many years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, he had been a player himself at one time right, years ago, I think, from what I've read at least?
Speaker 1: Well, say that loosely (laughter).  Yeah, he, actually he played, he was the, the substitute because they only had six players, so if somebody got hurt or tired he'd have to go in.  But he was, he was a little man.  He--
Speaker 2: I think 5'3", I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, if that.  And he was not a basketball player.  I, I laugh because there was one time when he really wanted to demonstrate to one of the players how to shoot a hook shot and he said, "Now, come here, you shoot it like this."  And he asked one of the 6'10" guys to guard him.  "Now see, he can't block this shot can he?" And he was gonna shoot the hook shot and somebody back there, said (gesture) (laughter), "Don't block it, don't block it, you're going outta here," (laughter).  So, so it became--.  And my dad [Frank Holton, Jr.] made an interesting point he says, if you'll notice, when they advertise those games it always says exhibition, and so I guess that made it, at, at least to me, made, allowed me to understand that, oh, okay, this is what it is, it's a show.  The first time I saw halftime acts, which now you'll see in the NBA [National Basketball Association], I mean, years ago you went to an NBA game and, and the half ended, you went out and got your refreshments, came back in, sat down, waited for the players to come back out, now they've got something going on at all times.  So that was, we used to have ping pong matches and jugglers and whatever, something to keep the fans (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I saw Chinese ping pong players play.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: One, on one occasion, I think I saw 'em about three times when I was a kid, I--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --on one occasion Cab Calloway performed after the game.
Speaker 1: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: This is in Ohio in Troy.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ohio, Cab Calloway performed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So it was a, you know, and to me I didn't know what he, who Cab Calloway was--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --but to my father's generation that was like James Brown, so--or bigger.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  "Hi-de hi-de hi-de-ho."
Speaker 2: Big deal.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 558903
Speaker 1: So you were part of the third group?
Speaker 2: Unit [southern unit], right.
Speaker 1: Unit.  And well, did, did you all ever play any of the NBA teams [National Basketball Association] in any of the exhibitions in--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --those days?  'Cause I know the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] had previously played like--teams like the Celtics [Boston Celtics] and the Lakers--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --before.
Speaker 2: Actually we, while I was there we did play the Lakers.  I wasn't on the unit that played against the Minneapolis Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] but I remember hearing that we'd lost that game.  I think there was a series of about six games and the Trotters won two.  And before that, the years before that there used to be a tournament, I think it was held in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --where professional teams could come and participate.  And one year the Trotters did win the world's championship, I can't remember the team (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think they held it about ten years and one year the Trotters did win.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And I think--
Speaker 1: I think the New York Renaissance--
Speaker 2: --one year they might have beat the Renaissance for the title.  But never played in a NBA or a structured league.  I guess that would have cramped their style because he did kind of have a soft spot, Abe [Abe Saperstein] had a soft spot for small towns, giving them a chance.  And a lot of times the gate wouldn't be much so he was losing money but he figured he owed that to them because in the, in them hard lean, the early years those were the teams, cities that kind of supported him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did he have relationships with the people in those towns?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Promoters, "Bring 'em here, Abe, bring 'em here."  I remember the promoter here, he just loved to see Abe come because we would play a double header.  We would play Washington Generals whoever, Boston Whirlwinds, and then they would be an NBA game.  Well, after a while they noticed that, you know, we would play the opener, and when our game was over, the people started leaving the arenas.  And so (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You all were the better show.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Most of the people wanted to see--yeah, you could always see a basketball game but can you see something that's a little different than just a basketball game.  So then they asked us to play the nightcap and they would open up the, play the first game.
Story_ID: 558904
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That raises an interesting question here, I think.  Let's see if it, see how you feel about this.  There's a book about black basketball called 'Elevating the Game' ['Elevating the Game: Black Men and Basketball'] by Nelson George, I don't know if you've seen it, but he writes a lot about hip hop and that sort of thing, he writes for the Village Voice and some of the New York [New York] papers but he's a good black man, he's a good writer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But he, he, in the book, 'Elevating the Game,' he talks about how black players have elevated the game of basketball to a higher art and more exciting sport than it was conceived to be.  And I think what you're, what you describe is people actually voting with their feet--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, to (laughter)--even though an NBA game [National Basketball Association] may, you know, may have been more scientific or whatever--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, in terms of how the game was initially plotted out.  After they saw the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] play--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they, they went home--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause they didn't wanna see the other one.  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's very true.  And, and we feel, I think to this day, that we in a sense saved the NBA.  And so, you know, we kind of think they owe us something, (laughter) they should.  Because the league never would have survived if there had--this had, would, would not have occurred because they, you know, just wouldn't have been able to carry out their business.  That's what, that's what we feel.  And it's, it's, kind of akin to the NFL [National Football League] and trying to make sure that their retired players get a fair shake because, you know, they're the ones that really got that league going.  And now that they're in dire straits or medically or whatever, the league ought to step up and pay 'em back.
Speaker 1: Now, in your opinion, now it seems as though, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, it seems as though baseball has done more to take care of the Negro League players that never got a chance to play in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] than football has done to even take care of the older football players, when they actually did play on their league.  And I don't know what the truth is but the NBA if it--does the NBA offer any pensions to the, the Harlem Globetrotters or any of the teams that--
Speaker 2: No, no, they, I don't know what kind of pen- and I know they talked about it some years ago and some of the players were saying, you know, these old timers need to get a better shake but the players union, they didn't wanna go along with it, I think, that's what I heard that, you know, somebody called 'em greedy, you know, because they're making millions, all those players are making millions so donating a little for some of those guys that, and as I say in the George Mikan case that dying penniless and--
Speaker 1: You know, George Mikan was 6'10", he was the pioneer big man in the NBA--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --played at DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] and with the Lakers [Minneapolis Lakers; Los Angeles Lakers]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and he played during the days that you were starting off with the--
Speaker 2: Exa- yep, that's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Globetrotters.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: And for years, they were, you know, the world champions out of Minneapolis [Minnesota].  And then, of course, they subsequently, they moved to Los Angeles [California], but it's, it's hard to see those things happen when there's, it seems like it would be so easy to help those fellows.
Speaker 1: But there's no pension fund in the NBA that you know of?
Speaker 2: There is one.
Speaker 1: There is one okay.
Speaker 2: But I have no idea what it's like.
Speaker 1: But it couldn't, they couldn't do anything for George Mikan?
Speaker 2: But some of the old time players--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't, didn't benefit from it.  You know all this collective bargaining didn't start until, I'm not sure when it started.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm trying to think too.
Speaker 2: --the contracts and whatnot.
Speaker 1: I know it's been around since the mid-'70s [1970s] at least.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I know, I think, yeah.  'Cause now, I know now even the, the lowest salary on an NBA team is a million dollars, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where it used to be a couple hundred thousand if not (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I was shocked when I read that, is it Herb Adderley is getting like two hundred dollars a month pension, or something like that.  And Willie Wood, you know, he's in a nursing home now and--
Speaker 1: And these are former Green Bay Packer [Green Bay Packers]--
Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --defense players but, but black player is the point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then it's a, it's a tough game.
Story_ID: 558905
Speaker 1: Well, all those games are tough, you know, that pounding and we played every night and sometimes twice a day with the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] and that pounding eventually takes its toll on the body.  Played in some interesting places, we played in some wonderful places.  There was a, Vancouver, British Columbia [Canada], you hit that floor and it was like bouncing off a mattress, it was so springy, a new gym that they had built.  We hit a lot of new gyms, even high school gyms that were very nice and held quite a few people.  I--and there, you know, it wasn't all fun and games, you hit that bus and you had to go to the next town and try to be ready.  We didn't have, you know, laundry service, we had to wash out our own uniforms.
Speaker 2: So where would you do that?  I mean, if you're on road?
Speaker 1: In the hotel.
Speaker 2: In the hotel--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --just in the sink?
Speaker 1: If you were in a town long enough--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the team would send 'em to the laundry.  But most of the times you were in a town, gone the next day, so.
Speaker 2: And did you ever play the next day in a dirty uniform, I mean, in the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, all the time (laughter).  You know I had a roommate, Jesse Coffey, who, who would wash out that uniform every night.  And it would get a little crusty (laughter) after a while.  But, you know, we didn't have a trainer.  If you, if you got an injury, you know, you found a doctor in the town you were in and then got treated that way.  But it was--I mean these guys--.  We didn't get, we didn't get meal money when we played in the states.  And now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it just came out of your salary?
Speaker 1: --you read about these guys getting what, fifty dollars a day meal money, and then they're making millions, when we went overseas we got five dollars a day.  Now, in all honesty you could take that five dollars, eat heartily and still have a couple of dollars for souvenirs (laughter).  But, you know, to hear these players getting whatever it is for meal money is unbelievable when you think about the salaries they make, what do they need meal money for?  You could take that money and donate it to the old timers, you know.  So many things it's, things change.
Story_ID: 558906
Speaker 1: I had some interesting times with the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters].  I, I recall, we played, I think, in West Virginia, this was on the All-Star tour, we used to play every year at the end of the season we would play a series against the college All-Stars, the top college All-Stars from around the country, a series of about twenty, twenty-five games.  And we would lose, you know, a number of those games to the All-Stars, they were good ball players, you know.  These were seniors and they were going into the NBA [National Basketball Association] the next year.  But we left West Virginia, going to, I think, it was Houston, it was Texas, and we went through rain and lightning and thunder and I was sure this plane was gonna disintegrate, but we finally landed in Houston about three in the morning.  And I got, we got out of the plane, and we're waiting for our luggage and I was so thirsty I walked over and went to the fountain and just drank as much water as I could get in my body, and just as soon as I finished, I looked up and what do you think it said?
Speaker 2: White?
Speaker 1: White only.  (Laughter) Well, at three o'clock in the morning there's not too many people around so I said, hm (laughter) that water really tastes good, I'm gonna have some more.  I don't know I was probably (laughter) so tired and exhausted, I wasn't thinking, but I often wonder what would have happened if somebody had, you know, come up and said, "Hey, boy," and haul me off to jail or something.  Trying to find a place to eat sometimes was very difficult in the South where you might have to go to a grocery store, we called it Dutching, we're going Dutch tonight because there's no restaurant that's gonna serve us here.  So we'd go to the grocery store and get cold cuts, cheese, whatever, and that would be our dinner.  Usually that was when we were gonna be traveling to another town after the game.  And my, my first shock was going into Indiana and I forgot where we were coming from that we drove up to the hotel and our business manager went in to get rooms for us and he came back, he says, "We can't stay here."  (Laughter) And I looked up and saw this neon sign on the top of the building, Abraham Lincoln Hotel [ph.].  I said, now, isn't that ironic (laughter)? Abraham Lincoln Hotel and we can't stay there (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, this is Indiana though--
Speaker 1: Indiana.
Speaker 2: Did that really shock you that Indiana would be like that?
Speaker 1: It did because, you know, I hadn't really--I figured Indiana being next to Illinois was somewhere in the North but (laughter) you know, not to say that you can stay any place you, you wanted to in the North, but that was a shock.
Speaker 2: No, the--I know Indiana has a reputation, you know, as being like the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I learned later.
Speaker 2: --Mississippi of the North.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, I learned later.  Of course, when I was in school [St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin], I remember this little town, Rensselaer, Indiana, and Saint Joe's [Saint Joseph's College] was there, we played there.  And after the game I was walking up these wide stairs like some hotel, you would see in one of those old time movies, you know, no elevators, walking up the stairs and I heard these little fellows sitting there, and they said, "Hey, I see those N Globetrotters are coming to town next week," (laughter).  And I stopped and I said to myself, I always said, (laughter) what would Jackie Robinson do in a case like this?  And I said, should I go educate 'em or should I just ignore 'em (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Now where was I?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You were going up the stairs--
Speaker 2: In Rensselaer, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Rensselaer, Indiana.
Speaker 1: In Rensselaer, Indiana.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had just finished our game and probably had something to eat and I was walking up the stairs and these two old fellows, old farmers probably, were sitting there and they said, "Oh, I see, those N Globetrotters are coming to town next week.  Yeah."  And I didn't know whether (laughter) I should go and (laughter) and educate 'em or ignore 'em or what and I always said, you know, when I got into a pinch I'd say, what would Jackie do in a case like this 'cause he was my hero.  And I said, oh, well, I don't know if, if this, this is the right time to try to educate these old guys.  So I went on up to bed.  But it was, and I said, I had no idea that at some point I would be a member of the Globetrotters (laughter).  But to hear something like that was unbelievable.
Story_ID: 558907
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever play any white teams in the South when you went to the South?
Speaker 2: (Makes sounds) Hawaiian, we played against a Hawaiian team, Hawaiian, what was their last name?  I forget, it wasn't the Surf Riders, Hawaiian something.  And, and I think we might have played against them in a couple of towns in the South.  But in Mississippi I remember going into Mississippi and we played against the Kansas City Stars, which was kind of like a farm team for the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters], another road team, and we played against them.  Now that, that was, that was scary playing--
Speaker 1: Were there white players on the Stars?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all black.
Speaker 1: All black?
Speaker 2: It was scary going into Mississippi because, you know, you hear, you heard so much, and then you experienced going to get food, at probably the original drive thru (laughter).  But, you know, leaving town after the game.  And, you know, we would stay in a town that would be convenient to where we were gonna be playing like when we left Mississippi, I think it was Tupelo, Mississippi, we went to Memphis [Tennessee], where we could find a hotel and places to eat and whatnot.  But, you know, you were out in the, the middle of nowhere sometime.  And it was kind of heartwarming one, one day when, some town in Texas, and the business manager went in and says, "Can, can we stay here?"  Or something like that.  He said, "Of course, you can stay here."  Well, we were shocked.  And so we stayed overnight, probably the first black people that had ever stayed overnight in that town is my guess.  So, you know, there were some breakthroughs.  And, and the more and more I think of it, I s- I like to think that we were kind of like the, the advance guard for Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], 'cause there were some things that we kind of softened up as we went along places that wouldn't previously have served us, would start to serve us.
Story_ID: 558908
Speaker 1: This kind of raises another kind of a question in some ways.  I, I know the, the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] have been called the ambassadors of basketball--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but they're really ambassadors of black people 'cause, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it's a introduction to African Americans for a lot of people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in other countries around the world--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and for small town America who, you know, a lot of people do not have any interaction with African American people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, asi- beyond, "Give me this and do that," for, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some menial job.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So the, you know, I, I guess, and I'm just asking you to reflect on, I guess, the Globetrotters as ambassadors especially during the early days of the Civil Rights Movement.  Now, you were with the southern unit, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Playing in the South, and a lot of the places where, you know, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, and others were organizing--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and Dr. King and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a lot of black people were, you know, Amzie Moore in Mississippi and other people were--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --down there laying the groundwork for voter registration--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and, and desegregation of public accommodations in schools and so forth.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you, well, what do you, how do you, do you see Globetrotters as, as a force for softening up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do because of, you know, the very nature of what we were doing, we were, we were entertainers.  And I, I think it gave people a chance to see well, you know, they're human, maybe not, "They're just like us," but they're human.  And I heard a guy use the N word down there as we came up to the bus and he said, "Well, I didn't mean you guys, you know, I meant those other people."  Oh, Lord, Lord, Lord.  You know, where do you go with that?  But there were places, I, you know, would--.  We went into one town, this was in southern Illinois, it's another interesting pla- (laughter) location, and somebody said, "Well, you can only eat at the Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] here."  I'm a be bad, you know, Woolworths?  I don't wanna go to Woolworths, that's a dime store, I go to buy stuff like that, but I don't go to eat at Woolworths, I'm going to a restaurant.  And so I walked across the square, you know, how these squares are (laughter) in town.  And went into the restaurant and sat down and ordered from a menu and my buddies, you know, they had been rejected so much they didn't wanna be embarrassed, they're out in the street waiting for me to (laughter) walk out of the restaurant unserved.  And, and they served me, no questions asked.  And then, here my buddies come (laughter).  But it, I think it, it showed me that sometimes you just have to make an effort and challenge 'em, otherwise, you know, maybe you'll be resisted for, for the rest of your life.  So I, I think there were a number of times.  I, I, I laugh because in New Mexico one time, a lady friend of our business manager was visiting with him and she went to this restaurant and she was very fair, very fair, she looked like a white lady.  And she sat down and she ordered, I guess, I went there later and went into the restaurant and the waitress brought me the, the menu and I'm looking at it, and then I look up and I see this man talking to the waitress in rather harsh tones, and I knew right away what he was saying, "You can't, you're not supposed to serve him."  And she had already brought me my coffee.  So I drank my coffee and paid the bill and walked out (laughter).  But, and they had no idea that she's a black woman who they're serving in there, so it was, it, it was fascinating, you know, just an education in itself to travel and experience those things.
Story_ID: 558909
Speaker 1: How far did you range when you traveled?  Did you make some overseas trips as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  In '54 [1954] I was invited to join the team to go to Europe for a tour over there, and I think the most interesting thing is I don't remember that first week at all (laughter).  We were in London for--or England, yeah, London, and played every night, it was dismal, all I can remember is rain and dreary weather in London.  Wembley Stadium [London, England], played there and we had a full house every night which was, you know, just mindboggling to me.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Tell us about some of the places that you toured.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 1954 I was invited to, to join the team to go over to Europe to tour for the summer.  And that was a, a new practice, relatively new practice for the team is to tour Europe during the summer months.  And the first week was, I, I don't remember a thing because all I can think about is London, fog, dreary weather, and that was it.  (Laughter) Like dark ni- probably didn't see the sun for a whole week.  But it was, it was funny when we left England and went to France.  The first town we went to was Valenciennes, France.  And no one in that town spoke English.  And my buddy, Clarence Wilson, who had been with the team [Harlem Globetrotters] for some time said, "Well, just look at the menu and you can probably tell what everything is on the menu because so many food menus are French, are French derived."  And that was true, so you could tell pretty well what you were ordering by just thinking back, yeah.  So that was, that was a, a new experience for me.  Spent about a week in Paris [France] which was again, that was exciting, Paris was different from London.  But we'd play every night and you're pretty tired, you know, you wanted to do some sightseeing so you'd get up the next day and there would be something planned usually for, for those of us who were making our first tour over there.  So we had a chance to shop and get perfume for our mothers and wives and so forth.  And I got to see a show with June Richmond, a black singer from those days who was outstanding, and that was, that's probably the first sup- dinner show I had ever been too but it was very entertaining and, and I enjoyed it very much.  Keep in mind that this was at a time when Americans were not readily appreciated in foreign countries.  And this was soon after the war, World War II [WWII].  So when you talk about ambassadors of goodwill, I think that was--probably came out of the fact that many Europeans saw us as kind of a different breed, they're not like most Americans, they don't think they own the world and can order us to do anything they want to.  And so I think that helped in terms of diplomacy between countries, U.S. and countries, that helped some at least, that's what some of the diplomats were saying that we were, we were not the ugly Americans.  And so traveling over, over, overseas was an eye opening experience, too.
Story_ID: 558910
Speaker 1: Yeah, was it refreshing to be over there and be treated differently than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, and, you know, they would look up to us [Harlem Globetrotters] like we were nine feet tall and (laughter) you know--we were compared to them, I guess, we were considered tall.  But they enjoyed the basketball and that was the interesting thing.  You go to those foreign countries and they enjoyed the basketball maybe more than the showmanship, and maybe they didn't understand some of the showmanship, but they did understand good basketball.  Interesting thing was there were no teams in Europe.  You know, you would have a few here and there, but basketball was not the sport, the worldwide sport that it is today.  Later on when we went to South America we were amazed at how well some of the South American players played, had it all over the Europeans, and now it's, it's probably just the opposite.  Rome [Italy] was an interesting place and being Catholic it was, it was interesting to have a chance to see the pope who had just come off an illness, I think it was Pius XI or XII [Pope Pius XII], so I went to St. Peter's Square [Vatican City] and--some of us went there.  And we've had, subsequently we've had, and before that we've had private audiences with the popes who were in office at the time but I was never at one of those opportunities.  Played in bull rings, swimming pools.
Speaker 1: Played in swimming pools?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You just take the water, take it--with the water out (laughter).  And, you know, they set up the court, we had to carry, we traveled on buses over there, and we had to carry a portable floor.  Played in--
Speaker 1: Was, was it made out of some kind of a hard rubber or something or what was it?
Speaker 2: No, it was wooden.
Speaker 1: Wooden?
Speaker 2: Plywood I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, you know, dribbling wasn't always fantastic.  But it was interesting to get a windy day or a night and have to--well, sometimes the wind was so strong you had to shoot the ball here (gesture) for it to go there and that was, that wasn't easy.  But most of the games were on, you know, on like a, an open field and they'd lay the court down and it's and we'd perform and then they'd take it up.  'Cause it wasn't real popular sport in Europe in those days.
Story_ID: 558911
Speaker 1: And then subsequently I had a chance to travel to South America and the weather was always nice in South America.  And as I said the, the ball players, you were more likely to run into some good teams down there, and we played some local teams.  But one year I had played with the, I had played with the opponent, a Trotter [Harlem Globetrotters] opponent, and I never did find out what, what, what the story was.  They, we traveled against the Texas Cowboys and they made me a Texas Cowboy (laughter).  And I didn't know if Abe [Abe Saperstein] was trying to tell people that there are black cowboys (laughter) in this country or what.  But other than those darn cowboy boots (laughter) which I had difficulty with, it was kind of a fun experience.
Speaker 2: You didn't have to play in 'em did you (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You didn't have to play in the cowboy boots?
Speaker 1: No, no, no (laughter).  But in Medellin, Colombia, we were--.  After a routine like they would roll the ball between his legs and go on the other side and the player defending would be looking around, and he'd play over, lay it in, they would always let the other team have a free basket.  Well, they didn't wanna let us do that for some reason and we decided to play 'em heads up, even steven, and we just kept, the, the store stayed tied, they would score, we would score, they would score, we would score.  And the business manager didn't know what was going on and they kept extending the time on the clock so that they could get their routine in and we just kept at it back and forth and they were getting angry.  And finally we said, okay, we've taught 'em a lesson, let 'em have their show, so they, they added a minute to the time and they went through their routines and.  (Laughter) We thought Abe was gonna send us all home (laughter) after that one but that was when--
Speaker 2: What, what compelled you to do that?  Did you just, was it just--
Speaker 1: Well, you know--
Speaker 2: --you all just got tired of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were, they were acting--
Speaker 2: Were they talking mess and stuff to you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were gonna, you know, not play like we were used to playing and try to show us up, really bad, so we said okay, let's show 'em.  But we had some pretty good ball players on the team, guys that had played in college, Joe Graboski, he was out of Chicago [Illinois], I think he seems--
Speaker 2: Graboski sounds like a Chicago name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, came out--I'm trying to remember if he came out of high school or never played college and played with the Chicago team whoever it was at the time.  Bennie Purcell was out of, is it Tennessee or Kentucky, his son [Mel Purcell] subsequently was, I followed him and it was a, quite a, you know, a, a high tennis player, high rated tennis player.  Charlie--Charlie Burns [Charles Burns], I can't remember what school he--.  Ernie Beck out of Villanova [sic. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so there were some good ball players we had.  And it was just fun.  We said we're gonna, we're gonna kick 'em tonight (laughter).
Story_ID: 558912
Speaker 1: Who were some of the guys that toured with you on the southern, in the southern unit?
Speaker 2: Sam Wheeler [Sam "Boom Boom" Wheeler], lost several of his fingers in an accident but he could handle the ball so well.  Boid Buie had lost an arm and was a one arm ball player.
Speaker 1: Now he's from Hot Springs, Arkansas, or, or--
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff I think it is.  And let's see, Trees Taylor [Harry "Trees" Taylor, Jr.], Oris Hill [Oris Hill, Sr.], Oris Hill was out of Illinois, Cairo, maybe, Cairo, Illinois, or Centralia.  Pop Gates [William "Pop" Gates], Duke Cumberland [Roscoe "Duke" Cumberland].  Duke was quite a character, even in his later years he could shoot that ball, oh, gee.  He would talk about in the old days where they'd shoot the ball so high that it would, that you would lose it because people were allowed to smoke and smoke rose and the ball would disappear and come out (makes sound) right through.  Willie Gardner ["Wee" Willie Gardner] came out of Indianapolis [Indiana], Crispus Attucks High School, played with us.
Speaker 1: Did he play with Oscar [HistoryMaker Oscar Robertson] when he was there?  Or--
Speaker 2: I don't think he played with Oscar.  I'm trying to remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Attucks is the school that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Oscar came out of I think.
Speaker 2: But he, I think he played with Oscar's brother, Bailey [Bailey Robertson].  Willie was, is a great--he went to the [U.S. military] service too but he, when he got out of the service he joined us.  He was, he was some kind of ball player, outstanding.  Went to play with the Knicks [New York Knicks] but couldn't pass the physical, a heart problem, I guess, he's, subsequently he passed on, but a great guy.  Clarence Wilson out of Horse Cave, Kentucky, Josh Grider, this guy went to Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], and most of the ball players went to predominantly black schools [HBCUs].  Bill Garrett came out of Indiana, he played with the Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] for a while.  I don't know if he ever played in the NBA [National Basketball Association].  Marques Haynes, of course, he's the world's greatest dribbler and he, he always will be, as far as I'm concerned, the world's greatest dribbler.  Goose Tatum [Reece "Goose" Tatum], Goose--we always had to carry an extra showman when we went to Europe because Goose might disappear and (laughter) not be found for days.  There is a story that says Goose went into the kasbah and nobody bothered him, he didn't have to worry, which is, you know, where all the criminal element would go.  And they used to call him (pronunciation) Tatum, Tatum.  But, you know, he'd go there and he was safe.  The year I went, Abe [Abe Saperstein] made sure Goose's wife came along, figured that would help keep him, but he always had an extra showman just in case Goose--
Speaker 1: Now, now, you were, you were in the Trotters during the era when I think Meadowlark [Meadowlark Lemon] was emerging as more of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Meadowlark--
Speaker 1: --and, and Goose Tatum was, was nearing his retirement I guess or--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  Goose left the team and Marques left the team and formed their own team.
Speaker 1: About when was that?  What year was that?
Speaker 2: That had to be in the--oh, I think that was after I left, so that would have been in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s].  But--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you played about what ten year--about ten years or--
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: Six years, oh, for six, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '52 [1952] to '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Meadow was in the service when, that year we toured Europe and played with us then when he got out, he joined us and he was on the southern unit for a number of years before he moved in to replace Goose.  Bob Hall [Robert "Showboat" Hall] out of Detroit [Michigan] was another outstanding showman.  There was a kid out of--kid--grown man, out of Chicago [Illinois], I don't know if you've ever heard the name Leon Hillard.  He was, he was probably a smoother dribbler than Marques but he could not control as well as Marques, he was an outstanding showman though.  Leon Hillard, I can't remember if he came out of DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], or one of those Chicago high schools [McKinley High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: And there's a fellow from Dayton [Ohio] you were talking about named Lee--
Speaker 2: Norman "Junior" Lee--
Speaker 1: Junior Lee.
Speaker 2: --out of Dayton, Ohio.  Quite a shooter, quite a shooter, long, lanky guy.  Chico Burrell [Stanley "Chico" Burrell] he was a showman, he's, he was out of Long Island [New York].  Frank Washington out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Babe Pressley [Louis "Babe" Pressley], he was my coach for a while.  Babe was, always had a cigar in his mouth.  He was, he was one of the original, early Trotters, quite a ball player.
Story_ID: 558913
Speaker 1: So you played eight, eight years.  I mean, six--
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: --six years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952] to '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, why did you stop playing, now--did--
Speaker 2: The body, (laughter) it was starting to give out.  It was getting to be a, a challenge just to get dressed because my, I--knees would ache and ankles were sore.  And it was, it was kind of a mutual, you know, I guess I was, I was declared a free agent (laughter) but nobody picked me up.  But I figured it was time.  I had married in 1957 and we had, we were expecting a child that winter and I figured this is probably a good time to decide what I'm gonna do with my life, the rest of my life.  And so I, I worked in the breweries for a while and then my brother [Frank Holton, III] was working for the Milwaukee County Department of Public Welfare and he had some friends working there and he said, "Oh, you'll get a job down at the county," social worker.  Huh?  I never did any social work.  "Oh, come on."  So I went and applied, and this was during a recession, they had a number of recessions while I worked at the county so they were hiring a lot of people to help the, the unemployed and people in poverty.  And stayed there for about six years and went off to graduate school at Ann Arbor [Michigan] and got a master's in social work and came back and started working with the state, excuse me, for twenty-nine years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you get your master's [degree] from?
Speaker 2: University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in 1967.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967], okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  It's one of those accelerated programs where you could go straight through and so I figured that was the best program for me.  And, then as I came out, took a job with the State of Wisconsin and worked for twenty-nine years and, and then retired.
Story_ID: 558914
Speaker 1: And then after a year of watching the grandchild, babysitter, I decided to go do some volunteer work and ended up serving at the House of Peace [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which is a community center, serving the poor.  Started by Booker Ashe, who is a cousin of Arthur Ashe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he started this as sort of a settlement house or a--
Speaker 1: Kind of, in that order.  It rose out of the, the, the riots in the, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  And there was an effort to bridge the west side with the east side, and so Brother Booker started this community center, and it had a food bank and a, a clothing pantry and some programs for children, trying to get scholarships for kids to go on to private schools.  And that was a, a grand experience for me.  It, and I've always been, I figured I owed the Capuchins because they did so much for us down at St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and Brother Booker was a Capuchin and Father Matthew [Matthew Gottschalk] who helped found it was also a Capuchin so, I figured it was payback time.  And spent about, let's see, three, four years there and they kept saying, you know, "Just, just stay here until we find somebody."  (Laughter) And I think they stopped looking and I said, "Ah, I think it's time for you to find somebody."  But it was time to move on there too, I think, 'cause we were raising a grandchild and--
Speaker 2: Now, you were director there for, basically for--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --quite a few years?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: For about, was it about four or five years?
Speaker 1: About four, right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four years, okay.
Speaker 1: It seemed like ten.
Speaker 2: So then you actually did retire then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  That was it.
Story_ID: 558915
Speaker 1: How do you feel these days?  You look like you're in, you're in pretty good, you know, physical condition, I mean, you walk around, you know, as well as or better than a lot of people your age but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I've had a knee replacement.  And this one is probably due for a replacement but--and I've had heart surgery, bypass surgery in '79 [1979], and it's still working so fortunately, I, I know of people who have had to go back in and have more treatment, but I've been fortunate that I haven't had to as yet.  So, you know, I, I feel good.  I try to get over to the workout center every day and keep my limbs loose and that helps.  But I feel it, you know, climbing stairs is not as easy as it used to be.  I used to bound up the stairs.  (Laughter) Now you just take your time.  And I think I learned after, I didn't have a heart attack, I just had, the angina pain.  I learned then that if you pace yourself and try not to get excited, which is hard to do some time, that things will work out pretty well.
Speaker 1: So that, now you're like, you're seventy-seven now?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So that's, that's--
Speaker 2: Getting up there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Getting up there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you seem to be in, doing pretty good (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess that's--
Story_ID: 558916
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point is there anything you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are probably lots of things that I'd do differently.  I think I'd be a little more patient with my children (laughter).  In terms of work, no, I, it's been wonderful, it's, you know, each of those work experiences have been something special for me.  And I feel like I've had an opportunity to serve people and help people and that's, I'm glad of that, I'm glad of that.
Story_ID: 558917
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and especially somebody who's had a career in social work could probably give us a more reflective answer on it, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Find a way to get rid of the guns, work together instead of individually, value education more than ever today, and don't always look for the short cuts.  We have so much to offer and we just have to take advantage of every opportunity we get.  I see so many kids that have talents of one kind or another and they have opportunities to develop them further and they for some reason don't take advantage of it or goof up and lose out on that opportunity.  I, I look--I mean, just, just take the, the sports field and how many of these young people get into trouble, and how many--I think so much of it is because we treat them like they're special too young.  Let 'em work, let 'em get an education, let them see how tough it can be and rather than, you know, I mean, give 'em a scholarship.  I, I mean they've started following these kids in the eighth grade now that's, that's not good.  And then they, they, they get into trouble, but before they're out of school the first--out of college the first year of college, and I think that that contributes to it.  So and, and we should look at trying to make sure that our kids get interested in as many fields as possible.  There are just so many opportunities out there now.  I mean, if you watch how people, people leave careers today, I mean, I'd been scared to death to, to leave, you know, a job that I, you know, got a little security in here but no, they've got opportunities I mean they can be working and whatever and decide, oh, I think I'll go over here and work in this area or this field.  So there are a lot more opportunities today.
Story_ID: 558918
Speaker 1: Now, when you look at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) My legacy?  Well, I guess, service to people.  Doing something that pleases people and can make them feel good about themselves.  I guess I was, maybe I was born to be a helping, in the helping profession.
Story_ID: 558919
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family now.  I mean, you got married in '57 [1957], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you have some children?
Speaker 2: I had two children by that marriage.  And--Kevin [ph.] and Sharon [ph.], Sharon's the young lady who's, we went to her wedding in Germany this, this summer.  Kevin is, left in--Kevin, Kevin died and they have no idea what caused his death.  The coroner, medical examiner apologized because they said he couldn't find anything.  He just didn't wake up one morning.  But he had just finished University of Michigan Law School [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and was preparing to go into a career in St. Louis [Missouri] where his, his mother's parents, her family lived.  And he just didn't wake up one, that next morning before he even, you know, started work at the law firm.  And those were the two from the first marriage.  Then I subsequently met my current wife in graduate school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And we married in '69 [1969], adopted two children, Lori [Lori Holton Nash] and Lisa [ph.].
Story_ID: 558920
Speaker 1: We got into a discussion off camera here that we probably need to put on camera, but we were reflecting on the, the, the--some of the stunts that the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] can do and, and reflect, also reflecting on the difference between the Globetrotters of yesteryear and Globetrotters today.  So you were talking about some of the routines you used to do that (laughter) you tried to, while we were, I was, I think I was telling you about I saw the current Globetrotters trying, trying to make a half court shot behind the back and missed it a few times.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And but, and how fans don't like that but you, I'm sure they have people that can do it but you talked about a time you did a football return and kicked it through the--
Speaker 2: Right, it went right through the hoop and, yeah, they said don't get excited, just act like you've done it every night and, you know, (laughter) and so we would move on and not look too excited.  I was pretty excited inside, but Jumpin' Johnny Wilson was very adept at that.  He kind of routinely could kick the ball in the basket.  Now, there was a baseball routine also that we went through and then we'd end up the game with one of the players going on the shoulders of a player and dropping the ball in.  But those were, were routines that, you know, people came to expect and hopefully enjoy.  And they've, they've changed a little.  Some of the things that we would do spontaneously, I can recall too closely guarding a man out of bounds and the referee said, "Give him three feet." And I looked down, I said, "I only have two, ref."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, they picked that up and would, you know, try to fit it in.  But some of the things would be just spontaneous, you know, rather than rehearsed.  And Goose was very good at that.
Speaker 1: So, so would you say that, to be a Globetrotter in those days, you had to be like a, some of the guys were pretty good comedians, just pretty witty people just normally, they weren't necessarily witty because of the routine?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd say so.  Some were just naturally good at it and others had to practice and become good because you can almost tell if it's artificial.  And as I say, Goose was just so good at that, you just never knew what he was going to do.  I'm not sure he ever always knew what he was going to do.  But something would present itself and, you know, he would capitalize on it, and--
Speaker 1: So in, in your opinion was Goose the all time, you know, king of the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Globetrotters?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Goose was, was, I guess, the original and of those I've played with I think he was tops.  Meadowlark [Meadowlark Lemon] was, you know, right behind him but Goose had the long arms which made it even more outstanding because he just looked the part.  And, and as I say he was spontaneous, he would do things that nobody would ever think up, it just came to him and he would do them but Goose was tops.
Speaker 1: Reece "Goose" Tatum, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 558921
Speaker 1: In those days the Harlem Globetrotters, at least when you started playing, there were no blacks in NBA [National Basketball Association], right?  Fifty-two [1952] or had they just started?
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], I think they had just started, it was around--right around that time that several were signed up and or drafted.  'Cause one of our ball players, Sweetwater Clifton [Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton], Abe [Abe Saperstein] (air quotes) sold him to the Knicks [New York Knicks], I think.
Speaker 1: Right, it was the Knicks.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Now, there's a story that Nelson George tells of Nate "Sweetwater" Clifton at a Knicks practice, passing the ball, doing a no look pass behind his back, and making the other, I mean, the other, the player he was playing against so angry that they almost, there was almost a fight.
Speaker 2: Huh.  Didn't like that huh (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I think he uses it--
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: --as an example of, you know, a clash of cultures in basketball.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  Yeah, well, Sweetwater held his own in the NBA.  He was big, huge hands.  And was smooth and he was a, he was a very mild mannered person, just he was funny, he was funny.  But he was like a little baby, he'd talk so soft (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, where, where did the name Sweetwater come from?
Speaker 2: As the story goes, something to do with soda water and I don't know, he said, "Abe, I just want some sweet water."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, you know, those stories get changed over the years so I think it was something to do with soda, soda pop as they called it in those days.
Story_ID: 558922
Speaker 1: In those days, the, I guess, the days where you played, for many years, I guess, at least for twenty years before you even started playing with the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters], the Globetrotters represented the black presence in basketball I guess--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  It was like Joe Louis, the Trotters and the, the Rens [New York Renaissance] and--they were special.  And kind of something to hope for and something to be proud of for, for us because we had somebody, you know, it was like they spoke for us or they did something for us.  Jackie Robinson, you know, another icon that we can look up to and say, we needed that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It came at the right time.
Speaker 1: And now, now, the, the, [HistoryMaker] Mannie Jackson has a, has a current version of Globetrotters touring and trying to keep the tradition alive.  Have you seen them play?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mannie incidentally was a ball player with the Trotters for a number of years.  Went to University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], had an outstanding career there.  Then I know one of the jobs he had later was with Honeywell [Honeywell International Inc.].  And--bright young man, bright young man.  I was so proud to see somebody, you know, do so well.  Mannie saved the team.  I'm glad that happened because it was starting to go down, down.  There's a book written called 'Spinning the--,' 'Spinning the Globe' ['Spinning the Globe: The Rise, Fall, and Return to Greatness of the Harlem Globetrotters,' Ben Green], about the rise and fall of the Trotters.  And I think a lot of it was salesmanship that he brought in to the Trotter organization and built it back up again and he really did a, an outstanding job.  We even had a--someone who was hired to contact the alumni and touch base with them and make sure that they felt, continued to feel a part of the organization.  I was shocked one day when I read that there--and this was a couple of years ago, there were like five hundred people, ball players who were Trotters and I just could not believe that that was that small a number.  That, I said, boy, I'm really lucky, I'm really fortunate to be a part of, you know, its history, its--.  But he did, he did a good job.  I got this, I get to see them play periodically.  It's different when you're watching and you were a part of it because you're thinking, would I do that, would I do that, why don't we do that?  Because we played an awful lot of straight basketball.  And after a while it got, for me, it got to be too much show and not enough competitive basketball, but they're starting to, he brought some of that back and played some college games, I mean, he had Magic Johnson playing, you know, some of these, in some of these games and some of the NBA players [National Basketball Association].  But they probably do a better, better, better job overseas I think because, and kids still like it, kids enjoy it.  But, you know, what can you do to make it continue to be relevant--
Speaker 1: You, you know--
Speaker 2: --and entertaining.
Story_ID: 558923
Speaker 1: There is a, and I hadn't thought of mentioning this before, but there's a brand of street basketball now that's becoming popular on television, there's even a, with guys off the different playgrounds on the East Coast and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --around the country, you know, doing fantastic stunts.  I mean, it may not work in a competitive game some of it, but they are certainly--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --worth, I mean, seeing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: They do some fantastic things with a basketball.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Have you seen some of the street basketball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've seen it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There's even a version on, on--
Speaker 2: I, I can't handle the announcer though (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He's, he's a nut (laughter).  Oh, yeah, they--
Speaker 1: And there's even the version I saw when they were actually on a, on, on a bouncing surface where these guys bounce way in the air and dunk the ball and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean, it's--the whole surface--
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: --is some kind of a trampoline or something--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: We played, and I forgot to mention it to you, we, one of the, the outstanding series we had was out in a little town, Pittsfield, Massachusetts.  And a little town, we were, had a couple of games scheduled there two nights in a row.  And the, when the, when we got to town, the promoter said, "Where's Goose [Reece "Goose" Tatum], where's Marques [Marques Haynes]?"  And we said, "Oh, they're with one of the other units."  "Well, we, we gotta have 'em here, you can't--do you know who you're playing?"  Well, there was a team we had to play, a local team, considered a local team, Sherman White went to LIU--do you remember that name?  Got into some shaving of games difficulty, I guess.  So this would have been probably fifty- fifty- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He went to L, LIU?
Speaker 2: LIU, Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: Long Island University, okay.
Speaker 2: This probably would have been '53 [1953] or so.  Gerry Calabrese [Gerald Calabrese], I think, he went to NYU [sic. St. John's University, New York, New York].  Billy Harrell later played baseball with the Cleveland Indians, he had gone to either Siena [Siena College, Loudonville, New York] or St. Francis, who else was on that team?  Anyway, they were loaded.  But they had played the Boston Celtics in an exhibition game and took 'em to overtime.  And here we are with our little (laughter) rag tag team, Ducky Moore [Donald "Ducky" Moore], Duke Cumberland, Sam Wheeler [Sam "Boom Boom" Wheeler], none of the big names, you know, that people were used to.  And he said, "They're gonna kill you, they're gonna kill you." (Laughter) "You're going--."  Well, we, we played 'em the first night and it was just straight basketball, all the way through.  And I think Ducky Moore shot one at the end of the game, it went through and we beat 'em by two points or whatever.  And then the next night, I think we must have deflated 'em because the next night it was a little easier, and we were able to put on some of the routines at the end of the game, and--but that was, that was an exciting (makes sound) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you kind of, you all kind of gauged the game in terms of whether you do any clowning or not, huh?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the game was hard I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no show that first night, strictly basketball.  And it was a game.  So they were shocked because, you know, they, they didn't expect these guys that they'd never--probably never heard of would be able to beat them.  You know, the eastern teams were--a little snobbery.  I think, in those years that they thought they only played basketball (laughter) up to the Ohio River or something, you know, everything was out east.  But I think they learned that there is basketball played the rest of the country as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 558924
Speaker 1: Now we were talking about your family before we--the last reel ran out and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you had said you had two adopted daughters--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --by a second marriage in 1969.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're still married to the same person?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Carol [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And your two daughters are Lori (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lori, Miss--Miss Lori Kathryn Holton Nash [Lori Holton Nash] (laughter).  She (unclear), she's been in theater for years and is now Miss Lori on kids PBS [PBS Kids].
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's Miss Lori now on public television?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Known by kids all over the world.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And the other daughter--
Speaker 2: She runs into them in the store.  "Miss Lori, I saw you on television!"  She gets so excited.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she does very well.  She's a very talented lady.
Speaker 1: And you have another daughter named Lisa [ph.], right?
Speaker 2: Lisa.  Lisa--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is, Lisa is bipolar.  And has had a struggle with her mental health over the years.  Gave birth to Kara [ph.] whom we're raising, Kara is now fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's, she's a dear.  She's, she gives us a tough time now that we're old, she tells us we're old, "You're too old, you don't understand it."  But thank the Lord there's somebody there who understands a little about television--or computers (laughter) and cell phones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's a doll, she's a, she did that self-portrait over there.  She's a, she's, she's an artist, I think that might be her field.
Story_ID: 558925
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we need to ask about that I have not mentioned that before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so, I don't believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess, I'd like to be remembered as somebody who took advantage of opportunities that were given and always found a way to, to serve in some capacity, whether it's on a board or in an organization, that's the way, I guess, I'd like to be remembered.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you for sharing your time with us.
Speaker 2: My pleasure, appreciate it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 558926
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture taken I'd say about 1931, this is my ma- paternal grandmother, Mary Holton.  This is my oldest cousin, Ferdie Crawford [ph.].  This is my older brother, Frank [Frank Holton, III].  And there I am as a baby, probably about six months old.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Great.  Okay.  This one.
Speaker 1: My brother and I on (Unclear) Park playground, my older brother, Frank, and myself.  Probably out in our, in our Sunday best in the winter, you'll notice the overcoats.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Got it.
Speaker 1: Picture taken in Flint, Michigan, Willie Wilson [ph.], a ball player out of Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Year?
Speaker 1: Probably about 1953.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good.  Next.
Speaker 1: Same year, 1953, this is a picture of myself in Flint, Michigan.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this was taken last summer in Germany where my daughter was being married, myself, my wife, Carol [ph.], and our granddaughter, Kara [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  One second.  Okay.  Good.  All right.  What about this?
Speaker 1: My final year at St. Norbert College [De Pere, Wisconsin], 1951 to '52 [1952].  I served as the editor of the school newspaper, the St. Norbert Times.  Fun times.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a cover of a sports night program held at St. Benedict the Moor church [St. Benedict the Moor Parish, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] by the Holy Name Society, and this was in 1955.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And myself and Orville Pitts, a local boxer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In 1944, I graduated from grade school at St. Benedict [St. Benedict the Moor School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  I'm this person here, notice I'm always between women.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And our pastor, Father Philip [Philip Steffes].
Speaker 2: Smart man.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: One of my early photos as a member of the Harlem Globetrotters.  You will notice that we are wearing not only long stockings and the original uniform of the Trotters but we're wearing Converse sneakers.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, Nikes in those days.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of members of the St. Norbert College basketball team in 1951.  Our coach Al Scott [ph.] and myself at the bottom, high scorer Art Kosner--Roman Kosner and Art Beasenthal [ph.] out of Chicago [Illinois].  We had quite a few students that came to St. Norbert from Chicago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture out of one of our Harlem Globetrotter programs and this shows a group of the team heading off on a tour of--summer tour of Europe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a Harlem Globetrotter program.  The thirty-third season, official souvenir program.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And these programs sold for fifty cents in those days (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I bet it's pretty valuable now, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.  If I was unscrupulous I'd put it under my shirt and take it to Chicago sports center or something.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: And get rich.  Let's see, here's another one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was another program.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: A souvenir program, thirty-first season.  And this was probably around 1954.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: One of our programs that shows pictures from a tour of [U.S.] military bases that we went on with Drew Pearson, this was I think in 1956.  There I am here, and here's the commander of one of the bases, Junior Lee [Norman "Junior" Lee] out of Ohio, Chico Burrell [Stanley "Chico" Burrell] was our showman, Hallie Bryant out of University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], Catfish Rollins [Oliver "Catfish" Rollins] out of Illinois, and there's Ducky Moore [Donald "Ducky" Moore], there's me again.  And there I am in Morocco.  And another picture (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not Morocco, Illinois, but Morocco (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Africa (laughter).
Speaker 1: Africa.
Speaker 2: Right.  A picture of the ball players and Abe [Abe Saperstein] giving a ball to Drew Pearson.  Drew Pearson was a well known columnist and a journalist.  And he got very upset when we got to, I think, it was a base in Bermuda and the commander hadn't taken care of business so he got on the phone and (laughter) raised hell with the White House.
Speaker 1: Who did Drew Pearson write for?
Speaker 2: Washington Post [The Washington Post] maybe, one of the eastern papers.  He had a radio show ['Drew Pearson Comments'] too.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Thirty-second season official program.  Some of them are caricatures and some of the programs ha- were actually taken from pictures of some of the ball players.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Picture in one of our programs.  There I am here with some of the other ball players, Inman Jackson [Inman "Big Jack" Jackson] and--as one of the original.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Program from our tour in Europe, showing Abe Saperstein and Leon Hillard, all in French.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Another program, official program from our European tour and I think it might have been in Germany.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, another French program from our European tour.  There I am here.  There's Reece "Goose" Tatum (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother just raved about Goose Tatum, seeing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Goose Tatum in person, you know, when he was, and that was when I was too young to go (laughter).
Speaker 1: This was my first season, official program 1952, '53 [1953] which was the twenty-sixth season for the organization.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a family picture taken in Madison [Wisconsin].   There I am and my wife, Carol, daughter, Lisa, daughter, Sharon [ph.] who's in Germany now, Kevin [ph.], our son, who died in '87 [1987], and Miss Lori [Lori Holton Nash] on the end.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Somewhere over here in between some women.  I always have trouble with this.  You can just, just see a part of my head.  Ah, here we are (laughter) 1944, the entire St. Benedict School.
