Story_ID: 218149
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer, and Ashley Palmer is observing today.  And today's date is Tuesday, August 10th, 2004 and this interview is taking place on 16th Street NW in Washington, D.C.  And if you would please, for the record, please tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dr. Janette Hoston Harris, J-A-N-E-T-T-E, H-O-S-T-O-N, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Harris, if you would, please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born 1939 in Monroe, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what month and what date?
Speaker 2: September the 7th.  I will soon be getting the big number (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the next couple of questions--oh and your occupation please?
Speaker 2: Well I have two occupations.  I am a city historian for Washington, D.C.  The first time they've ever had that position and I also am the president and CEO of J.H. Harris & Associates [Washington, D.C.] which is a promotional and public relations firm.
Story_ID: 218150
Speaker 1: Now, the next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and help us kind of establish a rapport.  So if you could just give me short answers to these questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that would be great.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Shrimp.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: December.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green, I think.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well thus far it has been Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, if I had one it would be, each one teach one.
Story_ID: 218151
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, if you would, let's talk a little bit about your mother.  Would you please tell us her name and where she was born and how she grew up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, she passed just two years ago, she lived with me.  Her name was Maud Marrie Hoston.  She was born in Monroe, Louisiana.  Her father [Joseph Swan (ph.)] was a railroad worker, her mother [Lena Swan (ph.)] was a domestic, and back in that day that's all you could be.  My mother never really worked.  My daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] didn't want her to work in anybody's house, kitchen or store.  So she was really a homemaker.  She was a seamstress by trade.  She was--she had an interesting life because she was very, very fair.  At all times people wanted to take her to be white, which she refused.  So if she didn't say anything, she could go in places that we could not go, but she would never do.  And so she had an interesting upbringing in the northern part of Louisiana.  If you anything about it, it's very, very racist.  A little bit now, but really a lot then.  So she had a pretty good life.  It was--she wasn't--she was raised maybe I should say middle, middle class, not upper middle class.
Story_ID: 218152
Speaker 1: And did she [Harris' mother, Maud Marrie Hoston] ever share any stories with you of people passing or that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, it was always fun stories about, she was a fisherwoman and her brother was a fisherman.  And we lived near the Ouachita River.  And they used to fish all the time.  And so they used to talk about stories about them catching so many fish and frankly taught me how to clean fish very well.  She talked about the fact that her father [Joseph Swan (ph.)], who was very, very fair, he was from Prussia, so I don't know if it's fair or should I say Caucasian, but he was from Prussia.  And he had an interesting life, because she didn't never know a lot about his past.  But he worked on the railroad and he got a lot of favors and a lot of perks because he was so fair.  And I don't know too much about his background, we've been trackin' that.  The only stories that my grandmother [Lena Swan (ph.)], my mother's mother, worked as a domestic.  I think I remember her sayin' she made, at first started making twenty-five cent a week and then she graduated to fifty cent a week.  And then maybe when she died she--before she died she wasn't working, but when she stopped workin' I think it was around $1.75 or two dollars a week, I mean, that's the kind of money she made.  And yet she looked very beautiful in church.  She was--always had her hat, gloves and pocketbook matchin' and she was always dressed very immaculate, and I often wondered, how could she do it with such a little money.  But they did; they survived.
Story_ID: 218153
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] ever tell you why she opted not to pass?
Speaker 2: Well she--'cause my daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] was--I don't think my mother ever wanted to, but if for any reason she wanted to, my daddy was there to put her back in her place.  My dad was very dark skinned, activist, strong will.  So she didn't have a choice if she ever wanted to, but never--she told us she never wanted to that she resented the fact that they wanted to give her all these perks, and yet her children couldn't get them, so.
Speaker 1: And what about as a child, did she ever want to as a child?
Speaker 2: No, no because her mother [Lena Swan (ph.)] was very stern.  Now her father [Joseph Swan (ph.)], who was very fair, I never knew how--he died when she was very young, too--well no she wasn't, she was a young mother when he died.  But I'm not sure how, he took her around because she never discussed that.  But when her mother took her around, there was never any problems.  But she got a lot of sneers because she was so fair and her hair was straight and very light then.  And so she got a lot of sneers.  She had a lot of problems being light skinned--
Speaker 1: --from--
Speaker 2: --in a black community.
Story_ID: 218154
Speaker 1: And did she [Harris' mother, Maud Marrie Hoston] ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her growing up, the things that she did and what she liked to do?
Speaker 2: Well remember, when she was--she was born in 1916, so she was brought up in Louisiana in a racist town [Monroe, Louisiana].  Wasn't anything she could do, or go to church and come home.  Go to the store.  There were no recreations centers.  There were no places for recreation.  So there wasn't much, played in the neighborhood at each person's house.  So that was pretty much her life.  And all blacks who lived in that town--that was their life.  You know, even my life was little bit more, but certainly limited even when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: I would describe my mother as not a typically black mother.  She was very good hearted.  She was warm.  She wasn't a kissy, kissy, huggy, huggy type of mother.  Okay, buy very direct.  She liked to do things.  She liked to have people in.  She liked to cook and have parties and there was always somethin' goin' on in my house (laughter).  My house was a house of fun.  People stopping by, havin' dinner, watchin' TV, you know, the first TVs when they came out, so everybody was there watchin' TV.  It was that kind of experience.  I think she was a good mother.  She, she provided a lot for us.  We had a lot of latitude to do a lot of things.
Story_ID: 218155
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father, starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up?
Speaker 2: His name was Eluen, E-L-U-E-N, Homer, H-O-M-E-R, Hoston, Sr.  My father was born in Monroe, Louisiana.  Lived a lot of his time in Pine Bluff, Arkansas and then moved back to Monroe.  Neither one of them [Harris's father or mother, Maud Marrie Hoston] went farther twelfth grade education during that time--eleventh grade, I think, during that time.  But it was interesting--my father was a strong-willed activist, always involved in, in things.  I would imagine as children, we experienced things that most kids did not in my neighbor--in fact in a class reunion we just talked about the fact that we had parties over at my house.  My daddy would have--I mean when we were older, I don't mean--like we were freshmen in college, he'd have people coming over to have parties.  Even high school we had parties.  And he'd call the parents to be sure what their kids could do, could not do.  He was one who's always lookin' out for black people.  He'd get scholarships.  He had Thanksgiving basket.  We were delivering baskets.  We were delivering food for Christmas.  We were getting buses to take people back, back to college, to go get them and bring 'em from Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and take 'em back.  My fond--I have several fond remembrances.  My guess--I guess more so much like my father, I'm my father's girl, you can tell.  But, I have a brother [Eluen Homer Hoston, Jr.] and a sister [Wilhelmina Hoston] so, but I'm really a father's girl.  In 1954, do you remember there was the Brown versus Board of Education decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]?  In my hometown blacks could not vote, could not even register to vote.  But my daddy decided that he was gonna be sure that blacks registered to vote.  So he let me know that my job was to teach them the preamble to the [U.S.] Constitution.  We had to learn the preamble to even register.  So my job was to bring all these people to the house and teach them the preamble to the Constitution.  My grandma was so excited that she was finally gonna get a chance to vote.  And we took 'em down to the courthouse after they learned the preamble.  If they missed one word they were sent back.  But the people were excited about the fact that they had the beginnings of registering to vote (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you were doin' this?
Speaker 2: I think I was tenth grade, ninth or tenth grade.  But that was one of fond remembrances of my dad.  He was that kind of a person.  He and one of the neighbors opened up the very first swimming pool for blacks in my hometown.  Blacks did not have a library.  He opened up the first library in my hometown.  The blacks had a library.  My daddy was a printer by trade and he had the very first black shoe store in the State of Louisiana.  A full-blown shoe store, hosiery, socks, shoes.  And kids teased me at the family--at the high school reunion [for Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana], they said we all wore Hoston Bootery shoes.  The name of the shoe store was Hoston['s Shoes and] Bootery [Monroe, Louisiana].  And see, we all grew up in Hoston Bootery shoes, 'cause we could pay for 'em on time (laughter).
Story_ID: 218156
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And even back then, blacks weren't allowed to try on shoes in other stores?
Speaker 2: That's right.  No, no you could not.  You could buy 'em and that was it.  So and that was--I think I was around, I've been tryin' to figure out when he [Harris' father, Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] actually opened that shoe store [Hoston's Shoes and Bootery, Monroe, Louisiana].  I must've been around ninth grade 'cause I finished high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana] in '56 [1956].  So I would imagine it was around '52 [1952], by '52 [1952], '53 [1953] and that was unheard of in the State of Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And did he have people from all over the state--black people from all over the state come to his shoe store?
Speaker 2: If they came through town, they came to see the shoe store.  And he had--when you walk in he had the same process.  He had the chairs and the things you hold your feet on and whatever, and I worked in the shoe store.  My mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] worked in the shoe store--that was her job.  So she finally had a job to work in a shoe store.  I worked the cash register and we both sold shoes.  So I have a real thing about shoe selling. But anyway that was fun.  And he had--he also had an insurance agency.  So he was a businessman.  He believed in making the money and saving it.
Story_ID: 218157
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, how far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if your people came from slaves or if they came from free people, how far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: I've been working on that.  I have not been able to go past 1800.  I mean I've gone back to the early 1800s, but I've not been able to crack the history code to go back any further.  I've gone to the archives, I've gone to the--I've just gotten some information from a cousin in Louisiana that might take me back a little bit further.  But I'm not sure on my daddy's [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] side, I think they all came from either Virginia or Arkansas back during that period.  On my mother's [Maud Marrie Hoston] side, her daddy [Joseph Swan (ph.)] came from Prussia so I have no clue about what that's all about.  But her mother [Lena Swan (ph.)] came from Louisiana, I think it was Sterlington [Louisiana].  So, but I can go back to great, great, maybe two or three greats back.
Speaker 1: But you think that they were mainly slaves?
Speaker 2: I think they came from plantations, yeah.  Yeah I don't think that--my daddy's daddy [Willie Davis Hoston] looked as if he was wealthy, but now he wasn't (laughter).  It's the look of perception you know.  But, no I think they came from slaves.  Now my mother's father probably did not of course.  And I'm not sure if my grandmother--my mother's mother came from that.  But I think my daddy's people did.
Story_ID: 218158
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your grandparents, starting with your maternal grandparents, your mother's [Maud Marrie Hoston] parents.  Can you please tell us their names?
Speaker 2: Okay, Lena Marie [ph.] Swan and his name was Joseph Watson [ph.] Swan.
Speaker 1: And could you spell Swan?
Speaker 2: S-W-A-N.
Speaker 1: And did you spend a lot of time with them?
Speaker 2: A lot of time with my grandmother.  My mother's father died when I was young.  But my mother's mother was my best friend.  I mean I spent a lot of time with her.  'Cause she lived really across--diagonally across the street from us [in Monroe, Louisiana] and kinda the beginning of the next block.  So I was always around with her 'cause she knew--she was by herself.  So I would go help her mow the yard and plant the vegetables and cut the flowers.  And I was just always there because she always--she was the soft, kind person.  And you know, she was active with church and so was I, so we went on a lot of trips together in terms of church trips.  So I loved both of my grandmothers.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your paternal grandparents starting with their names?
Speaker 2: Okay, you won't believe this, her name was Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, Davis Hoston, H-O-S-T-O-N.  His name was Willie Hoston, but it's Davis, not Willie Hoston.  So that--they both were Willies.  Unbelievable?
Speaker 1: How did they distinguish between the two?  How did other people distinguish?
Speaker 2: 'Cause they called her Will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they called him Willie, they called her Will.  So--
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, not with him 'cause he--I, I remember him because he worked at the Coca-Cola plant.  I just remember him drivin' him--ridin' his bicycle every day to work.  And it was the funniest thing.  You know, he would pump this bicycle and he would go to work.  And he'd come over, he didn't tell us a lot of stories.  He used to tell us about his--now his mother--let me say that--his mother lived in Monroe [Louisiana] as well and she had a big house.  It was like a mini farm out back.  And she told me how to milk the cow (unclear), then collect the eggs and help with the chickens.  I enjoyed that.  And she taught me how to churn butter, because she did all of that.  So I lived--I guess my grandparent I was really close to.  So I used to go over there and stay with her and--'cause I liked to be around the horses.  She had horses and cows and chickens.  She lived in the city, okay, kinda not downtown, but in the city.  But that was my paternal grandparent.  And then my grandmother, Willie Hoston, lived in Pine Bluff, Arkansas with her sisters.  I used to go up there every summer and stay with her, 'cause I loved to stay with them 'cause her sister had a huge farm.  So there were the horses and the cows and all of that, and so I enjoyed that up in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  Well my grandmother decided to come and live in Monroe.  So she moved to Monroe and stayed with us.  First she stayed at her own house and then my daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] built an addition onto the house and she lived with us.  But I loved both of my grandmothers, you know.  It was--yeah I can just see them, feel 'em at, at times.  'Cause they were so insightful and loving, and they taught me a lot.
Story_ID: 218159
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up [in Monroe, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well I guess I can remember being about three and having a duck for a pet, his name was Donald [ph.].  And he used to peck me all the time.  And he was--he got to be so ferocious so we had to get rid of him.  I remember that, I remember sittin' on the step taking pictures with this little duck.  And that was the earliest, that's about three--that's about the earliest I can remember and that is pretty good for my age (laughter).  I--
Speaker 1: Can you share some other special memories with us?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I was a born entrepreneur.  When I was young I used to always have some kind of little job.  The first little job I had was in junior high school [Monroe Colored High School, Monroe, Louisiana].  I used to sell crickets to the fishermen and bait, worms.  So I get up at like five o'clock in the morning, get my boots on, and I'd go out there, on the corner from my house was a ditch.  And I'd go in there and I scurry around and catch all the crickets, put 'em in the little container give 'em wet bread and sell 'em to the fisherman penny a piece.  Then my uncle had, who lived across the street, my grandmother's sister, they had some rich, rich dirt out back.  I don't know what kind it was, but in that dirt were Jumpin' Jack, they looked like little snakes.
Speaker 1: What are Jumpin' Jack?
Speaker 2: They're worms about this long and they look like snakes, they were black and they moved like snakes, but they were actually worms.  You could sell 'em for two penny apiece.  So I had my little worm in that little container.  So I used to sell worms and crickets to the fishermen.  That was my young job, my first job.
Speaker 1: What did you do with your money that you made?
Speaker 2: Oh I spent it.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you buy?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved candy.  I have a sweet tooth.  I love pickles.  So I'd buy pickles and candy.  Because my mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] made my clothes, my daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] had my shoes and socks, I didn't have to buy anything for me, it was just having a good time.  I'd go buy just junk, children junk.  You know, and I enjoyed that.  I could do whatever I wanted with my money and nobody told me to, to save it.  So that was bad, but so I just spent it--
Story_ID: 218160
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house, were they special times, Christmas and Thanksgiving, were they special times?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] decorated for every conceivable holiday.  There was, you know, Christmas there was a tree, the lights, tons of gifts, a big to-do about Santa Claus coming.  Thanksgiving was a feast.  Everybody came over to the house to eat.  We had hardwood floors, so I had to get down there and clean and wax the floors.  We had the French doors, I had to clean the mirrors and all of that.  And we put the lace tablecloths out.  I set the table.  It was all the formalities.  She loved that.  Easter, we had the big to-do, we had the Easter baskets and the clothes and all of that, and we'd go to church.  And we had the big Easter parade at church, and she made a big to do of that.  Fourth of July, they had a big to-do about that.  They'd--I'm tryin' to say New Year's Eve, my mother could shoot a gun.  She would get out and shoot this gun, 'cause that was a tradition down there.  My daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] didn't do much shootin'.  My mother would shoot.  She was real good at that.  That was a tradition.  But the big New Year's Eve party and then the gun shooting and all of that.  So every day was a big day and they enjoyed having events.
Story_ID: 218161
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what a typical day like was in your house growing up.  When you were a young girl, small girl, you'd wake up in the morning and then what would the day be like?
Speaker 2: I could never wake up on my own.  So somebody was always calling me.  Get up, get up, get up.  It's time to get ready for school.  I was a sleepy head in the morning and I'm still a sleepy head in the morning.  But I stay up late at night, but in the morning I'm just no good.  So I would--they'd wake me up in the morning to get ready 'cause the school bus would come and pick us up.  That's what--
Speaker 1: So you rode a school bus?
Speaker 2: Well only--I rode a school bus beginning in fifth grade.  The first through the fourth grade the school was in the next block so I'd walk to school.  And that was interesting.  I would walk to school.  But fifth grade I'd catch the school bus to school, which was cross town [Monroe, Louisiana].  I'd pass a hundred schools but to get across town to your black school, that's where you went.  So--and I'd get up and eat breakfast and have my lunch money, get my books and I'd go out to school.  When I'd walk down--my mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] would walk me down the block to the school.  But when I caught the school bus, the bus would pick us up in front of our house and take us.  And the kids used to get so mad, why is the bus picking you up in front of your house, and we have to walk to the corner.  I was never on time and the bus would--even the city bus--my grandmother worked for the city bus drivers, and so then Mr. Strong [ph.], Mr. Strong, or whatever his name was, but he would stop in the front of the house, the city bus, and he would pick me up in front of the house and take me on (laughter).
Story_ID: 218162
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, could you please give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself.
Speaker 2: Including myself, Janette Hoston Harris--well no birth order, my brother, Eluen, E-L-U-E-N, Homer, H-O-M-E-R, Hoston, H-O-S-T-O-N, Jr.  He was born November 28th, 1937, and he lives in northeast Washington [D.C.].  And I'm next, Janette Hoston Harris, September the 7th, 1939.  And my sister lives in Maryland--no she lives in, I think, Washington D.C. now.  And she was born January the 16th, and she is four years younger so she was born in 1930--
Speaker 1: Five [1935].
Speaker 2: --five [1935].
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry she is four years younger--no older--younger (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --oh I'm sorry, so she was born in 1942--
Speaker 2: --forty-two [1942], not '35 [1935].
Speaker 1: And her name?
Speaker 2: Is Wilhelmina, W-I-L-H-E-L-M-I-N-A, Suttles, S-U-T-T-L-E-S.
Story_ID: 218163
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about--can you describe your block in your community or your community for us, and do you remember the name of the street that you lived on?
Speaker 2: I lived at 3108 Jackson Street [Monroe, Louisiana].  Jackson Street was a highway, it was Highway 165 then, it was the highway that led one end of Louisiana to the northern part to the southern part.  I lived on a very busy street.  It was in that day it was an upper middle class street.  We had a principal, we had a business owner, we had professors, we had ministers in my block, and M.D., we lived next to him.  So we had--that was my block.  Our block had beautiful homes, seeing all this green grass, the kind you just step on and it goes just like a carpet.  All the beautiful crape myrtle trees, beautiful flowers.  All the houses were very nice.  So we lived in a really upper middle class block.
Speaker 1: And what was your community like?
Speaker 2: My community was the same.  'Cause if you go two or three blocks south of my house there were professors and teachers, and (unclear) schools I went to and churches.  And you go to the north of my house, I guess there were businesses, there were garages and stores, and more commercial and houses together in the next block down, but our house was strictly residential.  And they were pretty big lots, pretty big homes.  I grew up in probably around a ten-room house.  And so it was--the houses were pretty big.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: We all had gardens out there, don't forget that.  We grew our own tomatoes, our own cucumbers, our greens.  We had pecan trees.  My mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] even had chickens and we go out and get the eggs, you know what I mean.  In the city, back in that time, you had all--everything you needed in your backyard.  It just kept you from going to the store.  'Cause that was always a hassle.
Story_ID: 218164
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up [in Monroe, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Sights that remind me of growing up are the crepe myrtle trees I had in my yard, reminds me of my home.  Manicured lawns, hardwood floors, nice china, those things remind me of growing up.
Speaker 1: What sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Smells, food cookin', food cookin' that's the sound--smell I remember so much, always a feast, always food.  But I also remember the good smell of the flowers, the flowers had aroma, especially the magnolia trees, you know, and the smell of a flower.  That's the only smells I can associate with growing up.
Speaker 1: And what sounds?
Speaker 2: I don't know, it was a fairly quiet neighborhood.  The only sound I remember are the buses passing by.  These buses out here remind me of my street, busy street, buses passing by.  And there was a train yard.  There was a train, maybe the sound of the train, which was only two blocks away.  We'd catch crawfish over by the railroad tracks.  So the sound of the train, those are the two vivid sounds I can remember.
Story_ID: 218165
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, your life was, I guess, surrounded by the life of the church.  'Cause that's where you had your activities.  There wasn't many places you could go.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church that your family attended?
Speaker 2: St. James [United] Methodist Church [Monroe, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in church?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot.  I was active in a lot of things.  I could not sing.  That's the only thing I could not do and I tried, but it didn't work.  But I did everything else.  I was in charge of the Methodist Youth Fellowship.  And we would go to Gulfport, Mississippi.  Then--Gulfport is a gambling town now.  But back in that day, you could only go to the Methodist youth center in Gulfport [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Blacks could?
Speaker 2: Blacks could.  And they would escort you across the street to see the water, but you couldn't go in, okay.  But I remember that very vividly.  Another thing I remember, I guess, in high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana] I was a basketball player.  And I was very active.  And in my growing up, as you know back in the '50s [1950s], you could not drink.  You had to drink out of the white or colored water fountain.  I never got the colored water fountains.  So the police always took me out of the store.  I was thrown out of S. H. Kress [& Co.], I know, F. W. Woolworth [Company] on many occasions because I just refused to drink out of the colored water fountain.
Speaker 1: And what would happen, they would take you home or they'd take you to the police station?
Speaker 2: Oh no, they'd just throw you out the--just lead you out the store and say don't come back.  I'd come back the next day, didn't I tell you yesterday not to come back.  I said, I'm not the same girl.  She said we all look alike.  But this went on.  Basketball practice, when we would leave basketball practice we'd catch--we'd catch the buses home.  So I live on the south side of town.  So I had to drive a little distance like twenty minutes to get home.  And the bus driver, we'd be the only three or four people on the bus, 'cause it would be late at night and he would say sit in the back of the bus and we refused.  We would stand up to him and I said, "No I'm not sittin' back--I've never sat in the back of the bus in my whole upbringing."  And so he'd drive us around to the courthouse.  That was the jailhouse back in the South.  He'd drive around to the courthouse and call the principal and call my daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.], and they'd come get us.  My daddy said this is the fifth time I've been down here, no more of this.  But we just refused to sit--we never sat in the back of the bus.  Just absolutely never.
Speaker 1: But was your father kinda proud of you because he was an activist and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he had no problem.  My mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] would just have fits.  She said, "You just don't learn," you know, "we try to teach you.  You gonna get yourself killed or hung."  Because in my hometown [Monroe, Louisiana], the other sight that I can remember is the pickup trucks, you know like you see a lot of pickup trucks with the dog in the back and the shotgun in the front seat.  That was a vivid picture.  They'd just ride down the street as if--with a cowboy hat on, you know, "I'm bad."
Story_ID: 218166
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris tell me a little bit about elementary school.  Do you remember the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was called Mt. Nebo [School, Monroe, Louisiana].  I actually started elementary school when I was four years old.  And it was only a block from my home.  And I just remember it was a lot of fun.  I remember they had an awful lot of plays and productions, because they wanted the kids I guess to be on the stage and get a--to get a feel for being around people.  And they would always try to make me sing.  My mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] could sing, but I could not and they tried.  And I would get up and just, you know, be awful I thought.  And everybody would clap, but that didn't help any (laughter).  I remember, maybe I was in the fourth grade and we stole off up the street to one of the teacher's homes to get some mulberries.  She had this great mulberry tree.  And we stole off to get some mulberries.  I came back--and we said we had never--we had not gone off to school, no 'cause her nephew took us.  We said, "Oh no we didn't go anywhere," and she said, "well why is your mouth so blue."  We just forgot that they just colored our mouths, you know.  I'll tell ya our mouth was just blue as it could be.  And we said, "Well we didn't know."  And she told us to stick out our tongues out.  She had these big pair of scissors, she said, "I'm gonna cut your tongue off I'd you ever go off the campus again--go off the school property."  Well that just scared us to death.  We just thought we were gonna lose our tongues.  We cried the whole day we're home.  You know.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers at Mt. Nebo?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Mrs. Beckwith who taught me.  I remember Mrs. Jones [ph.] and Mrs. Dunne [ph.].  Mrs. Dunne was my favorite teachers.  Those are the only three I can remember.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, what kind of student were you during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: I thought I was a pretty good student.  Yeah mischievous, but pretty good.  I mean in terms of schoolwork, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: I think spelling.  I like math.  And I think that was probably--and whenever there was a production I liked to act, but not sing, but just be a part of whenever they were putting on a production for the parents.
Story_ID: 218167
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, during the elementary school years [at Mt. Nebo School, Monroe, Louisiana], did you have dreams and aspirations?  What did you want to be and do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a doctor.  I wanted to marry a doctor with a pink Cadillac.  I could remember that 'cause somebody in my hometown [Monroe, Louisiana] had this gorgeous pink Cadillac and I had never seen before, only one in town.  So I thought I was going to marry a doctor with a pink Cadillac.  Well I did marry a doctor [Rudolph Harris], but he didn't have a pink Cadillac (laughter).  And I guess I just wanted to be a doctor.  And everybody kept sayin', you should be a teacher, because see in Louisiana at that time the only thing you could do was teach.
Speaker 1: African Americans?
Speaker 2: African Americans could only teach.  I mean my father [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] was a businessman, but very few businessmen made it because there was no support for them.  But my daddy was just a go-getter, but it was just--he had to--it was all domestic work and all blue collar jobs.  And that's what I did not want, because I'd seen my grandmothers [Lena Swan and Willie Davis Hoston] and their sisters working in people's kitchen.  I'd go over there and visit my grandmother [Lena Swan (ph.)] workin' in this kitchen, you know, cleanin' up, yes ma'am, and no ma'am, and they didn't have all the money to pay other than give her a bag of clothes, you know, or some food.  "Lena, I don't have much money today, but here take this and here's some groceries, and here a few things you might want to wear."  That kinda stuff and that's it, you know.  And I'd be so angry because she didn't make all of her money, you know.  And she had to pay for her bills and she paid that little insurance of twenty-five cent a month or whatever that insurance was, Metropolitan Life [Insurance Company].  And she outlived it and got like a hundred dollars maybe.  That kind of thing, you know.  So my aspirations had--were much higher because I just wanted to be a little, do a little bit more than that--
Story_ID: 218168
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about junior high school now.  Did you--did elementary school [Mt. Nebo School, Monroe, Louisiana] go through up until high school or did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to junior high school.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Monroe Colored High School [Monroe, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, again?
Speaker 2: It was Monroe Colored High School, but it was junior high and high school combined.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your experiences in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Well in junior high school I could, I didn't participate in many activities that I can remember.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: I was just pretty studious I guess 'cause I was active in the church [St. James United Methodist Church, Monroe, Louisiana].  My daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] opened up--I think it was junior high, he opened up the--in the junior high he opened up a swimming pool for the--we didn't have a swimming pool at that time.  So he and Mr. Robertson [ph.] opened up the first swimming pool for blacks.
Speaker 1: How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well because we kept sayin', you know, we have no place to go.  It's so hot and all the kids--the white kids go across to their swimming pool and we don't have places to go.  So they opened up the first swimming pool and Mr. Roberts' son and I worked the concession stand.  My brother [Eluen Homer Hoston, Jr.] was a lifeguard.  And that's what--and so all the kids would come there, it was just--and that was the place to go, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: And how did the white people in town accept that, did they not care or were they nonchalant about it?
Speaker 2: They didn't care.  We were a black neighborhood away from them.  They didn't care.  Whatever you wanted to do, you know.  And my father and Mr. Roberts and a few others, Dr. Foster [ph.], they were very strong-willed business people, Mr. Pierce [Pierce's Pharmacy, Monroe, Louisiana], and they--'cause Pierce had a pharmacy across from my daddy's shoe store [Hoston's Shoes and Bootery, Monroe, Louisiana].  And so there was a soda fountain there and so we'd go there and sip--ice cream and it was just a fun place to go.  But that was the only place we had to go.  'Cause in the theaters, the Ritz Theatre [Monroe, Louisiana], the Ritz Theatre was a black theater.  So you could go in and sit wherever.  But when you could go to the white theater, you had to go all the way up to the balcony, walk up about ten flights of steps to the balcony to come back down to the restroom, to go back up, to get your popcorn, and that's where you sat and that's where you do the movie.  So we preferred going to the Ritz 'cause it was a black theater near the pharmacy, you get your soda and meet your friends and go in there, eat your popcorn and go to the theater.  And so my daddy was a very good friend of the man who owned the theater so we never paid to go to the theater, we just went in and sat down whenever we wanted to.  And it was always fun.
Story_ID: 218169
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about like during the high school years [at Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana], what kind of young lady were you developing into?  What kinds of things were you interested in and that kinda thing?
Speaker 2: I'm not--well several things.  I had my first real job, I call real job where I made money and my neighbor would take cotton pickers in the ninth grade, I was ninth grade.  He would pick up the cotton pickers over town and take 'em to the farm to pick cotton.  And he needed somebody to count the money and to add up all those figures.  So he kept talking to my mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] who decided that I should be the person to go.  So he would pick me up at four o'clock in the morning, I'd sleep the whole time, and take me out to this farm.  And each time people weigh in, I would put their numbers down.  I think he was paying two dollars a hundred.
Speaker 1: For a hundred pounds of cotton?
Speaker 2: Hundred pounds of cotton, which is a lot of cotton.  But they started out early in the morning like at six o'clock--no 5:30 when the dew was heavy on the cotton so the cotton would weigh more.
Speaker 1: And how long did it take to pick a hundred pounds of cotton?
Speaker 2: Well some of 'em--well pretty much a day and some would bring their children with 'em, their children who would have to pick.  But then they would buy stuff off the bus, the sardines, and the Vienna sausage and the crackers.  I sold all of them.  The cookies and so you deduct that from their pay.  So sometime they got a dollar.  Sometime a dollar and a quarter.  That was heartbreaking.  And I did that for several years.  And I just couldn't stand it much longer.  And then, the thing that really got me was that when we'd--one day he would say to me, "Let's go to the big house so I can get the strong box."  'Cause a lot of times he'd already have the strong box.  He'd said, "Come go," because that's the new procedure.  So I would go into the big house with, with him.  And there was this big white gentleman sitting there with the money in front of him.  He'd say, "Who is this girl you got here?  She's too young.  She don't know how to count money."  And I said, "You can't tell me what I know how to count."  And he would hit--the old man, Mr. Collins [ph.] would hit me on the leg and said, he called me Janie, he'd say, "Shut up, Janie."  He said, "You don't talk back to these people."  I said, "Oh" (laughter), and so we had this give and take.  And this man said, "I want to see what you can do."  I said, "That's not for you to do, you didn't hire me, Mr. Collins hired me.  I'm not going to sit there and show you how to count money. I just want to count what you gave me."  "You don't have to count what I gave you."  I said, "Yes I do."  So we had this give and take which he didn't like, but I counted this money in front of both of 'em before I took that strong box.  And they didn't seem to like that.  So Mr. Collins got home and told my mother that I talked too much, that I was talking back to the big man who paid the money and that wasn't what I was supposed to do.  And you know, they got after me and it was always that.  So I said, "Listen, this ain't going to work out, this job."  I did it for him a little bit longer 'cause he couldn't get anybody.  So that's why even today I don't use calculators nor adding machines.  I can count money looking at numbers 'cause I got training out there in that cotton field on how.  And one day I decided I was going to see if I could pick.  I said, won't work.  I picked three or four bolls, my fingers were all torn up.  I didn't know how to pull it out.  I said, you know, I'd never be--I'd never make a living doin' this.  So that was it.  But it was just an experience of what black people had to go through to make a living.
Story_ID: 218170
Speaker 1: --And were there a lot of people in that cotton field who brought their children with them, and were they small children (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Small children.  They just--they wanted to be able to pick a hundred pounds.  Some people picked 150 pounds a day.  But they wanted to have their children there and help 'em pick.  And they pick hard in the morning because that--it could weigh more and they would not do that much after one o'clock, it was just a little bit.  But morning time they would come and that's why we had to go so early in the morning, about sometime at five o'clock according to which farm they went to.  And I'd, you know, this is just murder for me.  I'd sleep on the bus and sleep and wait for the first weigh in.  But there was--we had fifty people on the bus and you had to keep all their weigh-ins and total 'em all up and you didn't get the strong box 'til the end of the day, so I could--I had to pay them on the bus going back.
Speaker 1: And what was--
Speaker 2: I had to keep everything in order and pay them going back.
Speaker 1: And what was the process like, did people constantly come have their pickings weighed in or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had to--well when they felt the bag was so heavy that they couldn't carry any longer, then they would at that point, they would weigh in.  Because they had to drag the bag, that was a pretty heavy bag.
Speaker 1: And you would keep track of each time they'd come to weigh in?
Speaker 2: Each time they come, fifty persons would come at least four times a day, four or five times a day and I had to keep track of all that.  To add it all up, then be sure the money was there to pay them.  'Cause before I left the field, I'd be sure to the money was there to pay the number of people I had.  Some days it wasn't all there, I had to go back and get more money before I left that field.  And then I'd pay them on the bus going home because then I had to deduct what they had eaten that day.  And then pay each one of 'em off on the bus.  So that was the process.
Story_ID: 218171
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about high school.  Were you still at Monroe Colored School [Monroe, Louisiana] for high school?
Speaker 2: No, we moved over to the new Carroll High School [Monroe, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, could you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-R-O-L-L, Carroll High School.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at new Carroll?
Speaker 2: Oh they were great.  I was a basketball player and so I thought I was a dilly.  You know, everybody liked basketball players.  So that was always fun travelin' with the team, goin' places.  I was in the--several clubs, like I was in the English club, and I was in the spelling bee, I was a pretty good speller.  And after I--I believe not after I-- while I was in college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] I came back to my high school and started the first girls drill team 'cause I was the head of the drill team in college.  So I came back and did that, that was afterwards.  But high school was fun.  I mean, I was mischievous.  We were--I just had a reunion and so we talked about all the things that we did that were just, you know, I'd known once I had this fight in high school 'cause this girl wanted--they used to call my daddy [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] Hoston Booty because his store was Hoston Bootery Shoe Store [sic. Hoston's Shoes and Bootery, Monroe, Louisiana].  And she'd say, "Oh that's Hoston Booty, and she's got a white mamma," you know.  And so we had this fight over this, whatever, this girl and I.  And the principal told us that you have to pick up bricks, they had a brick pile.  Take the bricks from that brick pile and take 'em to that brick pile, one by one, and this will teach you not to fight anymore.  So what happens that night, daddy happened to pass the place and see me on the brick pile.  And he made me scrub the house for one whole month.  He made me scrub the floors and the baseboard, clean all the windows.  I washed.  He worked me to death for a month.  He said, "If this is what you want your life to be like, you do that again.  Don't worry about people calling you things."  But before that I would never fight.  The kids in junior high would beat me up and I'd come home crying, clothes torn, and my daddy said, "Listen, you must defend yourself.  You can't let people beat you up, you have to fight."  I never wanted to fight.  So he said you come here and don't fight and defend yourself, I'm going to beat you when you get home.  I said, oh God, that means twice I'm beaten up (laughter).  So this one day this girl was beating me up, I was running home as fast as I could.  When I got to the door, but I don't know why my daddy was home, he was standing in the door.  He said, "You're not coming in here."  I was crying, you know, I said, "Oh please."  He said, "No you're not coming in here, you're going back out there and defend yourself."  So I went back down because I beat the girl almost to death, he had to come get me off of her.  So from that point on, I mean, I didn't have any problem.  You know, but--
Speaker 1: But was that a valuable lesson to you when your father made you clean the house like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.  But he said that, you know, you can't worry about people calling me names or your mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] names.  That's going to always be.  So you can't try to defend us.  You don't need to defend us.  But I was going to defend everyone, defend my honor (laughter).
Story_ID: 218172
Speaker 1: --During this time in high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana], did you still have the same dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah--
Speaker 1: --of being--
Speaker 2: --I wanted to be a movie star then.  I mean I was--what happened, we had some high school plays and my father [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] got the theater to let us put on our play on the theater stage.  It was called the 'The Chitterling's Switch' [ph.].  And it was a church scene, where the old ladies would sing and pray.  So my daddy had this--let us--he got the theater to do our production and all the folks came.  It was really fun.  So then I thought I was on my way to Hollywood, which I never made (laughter) so.
Story_ID: 218173
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about college?  What were you thinking about college in high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: We didn't think about college.  Our parents [Maud Marrie Hoston and Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] told us, they thought about it.  They told us from ninth grade, I mean, it was no question that we were going to college.  I knew where I was going, I knew I was going to Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] when I finished and there was no question.  We didn't have to think about it.
Speaker 1: Why was that so important to your parents?
Speaker 2: Because my parents didn't get a chance to go to college.  And they knew that the way to get out of that rut and out of the things that we were experiencing was to get an education and that was paramount.  So my daddy didn't have any thoughts.  There was no decision that you were not going, I mean, it was already made up.  He had already developed that in our minds and already paid the tuition.  When time came, it was--we were in eleventh grade, our tuition was almost paid to go to school.
Speaker 1: So was your father saving for tuition?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So that was kind of unusual back during that time.
Speaker 2: Well he was a businessman.  So he was able to make money.  He knew how to make money.  He, you know, he had an insurance company.  He had--in fact he was also head of the local projects where people stayed home, the homes.  He was director of the projects in the city.  He had the shoe store [Hoston's Shoes and Bootery, Monroe, Louisiana], he had the insurance agency.  So he could make money.  He knew how to make a dollar.
Story_ID: 218174
Speaker 1: In what year did you graduate from high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: And so--before you graduated, what did you think about Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] in 1954, that decision?  Were you thinking, wow, you know, I may actually get to go to an integrated school?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't think that.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: Because I wasn't looking to go to integrated school.  I enjoyed my school experience.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: In my neighborhood [in Monroe, Louisiana], we live on the main street.  Behind us were poor whites--had moved into those homes behind us.  And so we saw what they were like.  So we didn't want to go to school with them.  So we didn't have any aspirations to go to their schools.  And the Brown versus Board of Education, I mean that, that we knew--we heard about it, but it didn't impact us as kids.  Because we didn't need it, we had everything we wanted.  Our friends, our school, our little community, things we did on the weekend.  Our parents [Maud Marrie Hoston and Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.], you know, took care of us.  So we didn't look--if we were poor we didn't know it.  And, you know, if we didn't have it we didn't know we didn't have it.  'Cause what we had was sufficient.
Story_ID: 218175
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers in high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Coach Thomas [ph.], Ms. Bowden [ph.], Ms. Smith [ph.], Mr. Neals [ph.], he was my chemistry teacher, Ms. Washington [ph.], Ms. Thompson [ph.].  I remember a whole lot of 'em.
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life in high school, who was influencing you?
Speaker 2: I guess some of my teachers, Ms. Thompson, the principal Mr. Carroll, M. H. Carroll, and my father [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.].  Yeah.
Story_ID: 218176
Speaker 1: So [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, we're, you know, kind of at the end of high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana] and you're leaving to go to college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and so tell us what years were you at Southern?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956] to '60 [1960].  It was exciting.  I mean, just to leave home on your own.  Nobody's telling you what to do.  I mean, this was just like a new world.  Everybody was all excited and my dad [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.], you know, had this trailer on the back of the car and we takin' all these trucks and all this junk down to Southern, not equal to what they do today though now.  But for us it was a big to-do.  And so we, you know, we all went off to college and it was exciting.  My brother [Eluen Homer Hoston, Jr.] was already there, so I had somebody to see after me kind of.
Speaker 1: And do you--were still very active and tell me a little bit about the sit-ins that took place at Southern?
Speaker 2: Okay, well now that was the end of my year (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: In 1960--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --well, yeah let's talk a little bit about what you were studying and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I was--at Southern I, I--my first thought was a biology major because I loved the bugs, you know, crickets and all those things kinda got me involved in biology, so I was a biology major.  I was very active in the Methodist club at Southern.  I was one of the founders of Gamma Sigma Sigma [Sorority], which was a service sorority.  We went to church every Sunday, so we were all active in the religious activities on campus.  I was the captain of the girls'--first girls' drill team at Southern.  And we had about fifty people in that girls' drill team and it was quite exciting, different.  And so I was considered, I guess, a leader on campus I would guess by most means.
Story_ID: 218177
Speaker 1: And it was in my senior year [at Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that we really felt the impact of the Greensboro, North Carolina A&T [The Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] sit-in.  And we wanted to do something to support those students.  So we came together as leaders, I don't know how we were even chosen, but we all came together, 'cause the student president [Marvin Robinson] said, let's get certain people together and let's talk about it.  So I was one of those persons.  'Cause I had led a couple demonstrations on campus.
Speaker 2: What kinds of demonstrations?
Speaker 1: Against bad food.  LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which is a white university, would get all the good parts of the food and we ended up getting ox tails and pig feet.  And I couldn't ever stand chicken feet.  And we would get that part of the food that was, you know, just like the end of what they didn't want.  And so one day I said to my friend, I said, "Let's not accept this bad food, this is terrible.  We don't eat this at home."  So we decided, we came in from church one Sunday.  I had gotten up on top of the dining hall and three or four of us, I had people to throw the leaflets all over campus (laughter).  "We will not eat bad food anymore."  "We must have quality food."  "Our parents didn't pay for this kind of food."  Then on next Sunday we came in from church and we all go to the dining hall.  And we all got all this food on our plates and took it back and left it.  We refused to eat it.  And so the president called us in.  The president was a friend of my father's [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.].  So he called my father (laughter), my father called me and said, "Listen, this is not what you down there for."  So I'd done that a couple of times.
Speaker 2: Well were you successful?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah, they changed the food 'cause students didn't eat it and refused to eat it.  And so, I mean, most of the kids refused that.  My brother [Eluen Homer Hoston, Jr.] was one that ate I think.  A few people, you know, men, you know, they want their food.  But most of the cafeteria, at least three-fourths did not eat the food.  So the next time they gave us a little bit better food.
Speaker 2: How long of a period was it before they changed the food?
Speaker 1: I don't know, maybe a couple of weeks.  We started gettin' more chicken, chicken, chicken.  And some more beef and that--all this other stuff.  That was just--in my house we just didn't eat all that stuff, you know.
Story_ID: 218178
Speaker 1: There're a group of student leaders and you all are talking about how you can help support the students at A&T [The Negro Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) North Carolina A&T. So we all met at the law school at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and sat down and talked about the fact--we threw out three or four ideas of what we could do.  And I'm--it was my idea to the president--to the president of the senior class [Marvin Robinson] that either one of these things we are ready to do.  But do not tell us until the day that we do it.  If you tell us, there's people sitting around in the room and other people that are listening, the university will know, we won't be successful.  It has to be really planned this time.  We have to--nobody needs to know until the moment.  And that's what they did.  They decided.  They told us every day to have a little money in our pocketbooks, have some paper and pens every day, and we'll decide what we going to do.  And that's what we did.  And so--the guy came up, he touched me on the shoulder.  My roommate and I were walking down the corridor going to our room.  So he touched me on the shoulder and said, "Can you come with me," and then I knew that was the time.  I told my roommate, I said now, if something happens to me call my parents [Maud Marrie Hoston and Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] and let them know, if something real drastic happens then to call 'em right away.  She said, "You coming back, where you going?"  I said, "I can't tell you.  I don't know if I'm coming back or not.  But just be ready and listen to the news."  So I left her, gave her my books and turned around and came back with him.  And we went to the law school and the cars was sitting out there and they took us--we all got in the cars and as we were going downtown they told us what we were going to do.
Story_ID: 218179
Speaker 1: And how many of you were there?
Speaker 2: Seven of us.  And they said, "Look, we're going to go to S. H. Kress [& Co.], you're going to go in and purchase something, make a purchase"--
Speaker 1: S. H. Kress was a department store?
Speaker 2: It's a five-and-dime.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So we went in there and we all purchased something.  I purchased some cosmetics or whatever.  Everybody purchased something.  One guy purchased some socks and then we decided to sit down at the lunch counter and have something to eat.  I ordered oh I think a cup of tea.  And I didn't know I was sitting next to a manager, had no clue.  And so I just sat there next to this guy he was turning red and red and redder, and I was smiling.  You know, and I ordered this cup of tea.  And then the woman said, oh she got so flustered she said, "Oh no--oh no, no, oh no, no."  I said, "Oh yes, yes here's my money, I want a cup of tea."  And so the manager sitting next to me never talked to me, he talked to her through me.  He kept saying, tell her that she cannot be served here.  And I said, well ask him why.  And she said, well you'll have to go over there.  There was a little curtain in the back, and we knew where the curtain was and this little round table and you buy your tea, your cup of tea or your sandwich, whatever it is and you go to the curtain and eat it over in the corner.  Only two people or three people could stand there at a time.  A small table, tall table.  And I said, "No," I said, "we're not going over there."  I said, "We're going to eat right here."  And she said, "He says, you cannot eat here."  I said, "Tell him we can, 'cause we are customers.  We just made some purchases and we can eat here, this is for customers am I correct?"  And some man came out the back and said, "You cannot eat here, you have to leave, you have to leave.  You causing trouble."  "We're not causing any trouble.  We're not disturbing the peace.  We're sitting like everybody else.  We dressed nicely just like he is," you know.  We had on our little outfits and we're students.  So he said if we don't leave they going to call the police and we just sat there and they didn't want to bring us our tea.  I said, "I'd like to have my cup of tea," which never came.  And the paddy wagon came and the police came in, you know, with the big stick on his shoulder, his arm on his other hip and he's walking all, you know, very in control.
Speaker 1: And what were you feeling at that moment, what were you thinking?
Speaker 2: I said, oh well we going to get our heads cracked in today.  Because he kept holding his stick and the other guy was on me, I said, "Well this is our day."  I said, "We might not get back home."  He said, "Yeah I know."  And we just sitting there, you know, wondering what's going to happen next.  Again, he kept fidgeting with the stick, you know.  So I just thought he was going to crack us across the head.  But he says, "Get up you can't sit here."  And we said, "Why."  And he said because I, "The owner said you cannot."  That's why I believe it was the owner.  "The owner said you cannot sit here, that you're disturbing the peace."  "But we're not disturbing the peace."  He said, "Get up."  By that time we decided we better get up.  So (laughter) we got up.  And they just ushered us right on out of the store into the paddy wagon--to the paddy wagon.  One of the guys had--had a--has an artificial leg.  And so they were shoving him around 'cause he had to lift his leg up to walk, you know.  They were shoving him around and moving him around.  So we got in the paddy wagon and oh they drove us off, I mean fast and turning corners and turning corners.  We were sliding--the seats in a paddy wagon are metal on the side.  So we just sliding off and they did it on purpose, just turning real fast and we were falling off the seats--
Story_ID: 218180
Speaker 1: Were you scared?
Speaker 2: Very scared.  I mean, didn't know what to expect, never been in a paddy wagon.  And I said, oh my God.  So we all said, we're just going to hang tight.  That's what we said--
Speaker 1: But were you thinking, I'm in this for the long haul?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  We said, you know, this is what we wanted to do.  And we going to hang in there.  And they took us to jail, fingerprinted us, mug shots, and threw us in with real criminals.  The men, the men went in with people who are beating each other, not our men, they were beating other inmates and they--we could hear the screams.  And we went in with--there was only one other young woman who was a freshman and myself, went in with the women.  And the women were tough.  They had committed murder.  They had--I mean they talked about all the things that they had done.  And I said gosh.  And I was smoking there.  I was a smoker.  So I had these cigarettes.  I began--and I was so nervous I was putting 'em out and they were grabbing 'em as soon as I put 'em out, you know.  And then the warden came by and said, you have to take a shower and you have--lights out at eight o'clock, eight--nine o'clock.
Speaker 1: So you were in jail?
Speaker 2: Oh I was in jail.  And here's your food, a peanut--a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.  I was hungry so I ate it.  I was hungry.  And I looked over there at the bath--the shower, no door on the shower, toilet sitting in the middle of the floor.  So everybody's watching everything you do.  The shower had that much scum on the floor of it.  It just looked like you'd slide on it.  You know, I said, oh no.  They said you have to take a--I said, oh please.
Story_ID: 218181
Speaker 1: So you're in jail, were you thinking there's no way I'm going to spend the night here, I'm just going to go, have this process done and then I'll be back on campus [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't think that.
Speaker 1: You didn't?  You were prepared?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were not sure.  We thought, from the way the--prison officers were talking to us, they were talking like we going to be in there forever.  So they scared us to death, you know.  They made us think that this is it.  They were closing the book on us.  They said, you know, "You have no visitors, nobody can call you."  We said, "Can we have one call?"  No calls.  I mean it went on.  It was that kind of--it was frightening.  So we did get out that night, late.
Speaker 1: So, I'm sorry, so where we left off you--did you take the shower?
Speaker 2: No, didn't take the shower.  I was determined I wasn't going to take that shower.  I used the toilet 'cause I just had to, I was scared to death.  But that was just--I mean I'm sitting on the toilet and everybody sitting around looking at you--that was just too much.  And, and it was in March and it must have been about ninety degrees outside and they had army blankets on the bed, there were no sheets.  So even sleeping on the army blanket you felt like you were being stung to death.  And I kept saying what in the world is this.  So the men find out where we were and they could holler through the window.  Somebody said, "If you yell through the window they'll hear you."  So they were yelling through the window calling our name.  We would run to the window and answer them back.  Wanted to know if we were okay, we said, "yes."  "Are you all okay," they said, "yes.  We had a little--little issue, but we're okay."  'Cause they were having a little--I guess the beatings over there and all of that were very disturbing to them.  We would yell back and forth just as a comfort piece.  Then a knock came on the door and miss--warden came and said that I could come out.
Speaker 1: You could?
Speaker 2: I could, that I had been processed to be released.  And I said, "Oh no, I'm not coming out 'til everybody comes out, men and women."  And they said, "Oh no, this is just for you."  I said, "No, nope, nope."  So I wouldn't go out.  And the other one said, "You crazy girl, get on outta here, think about yourself."  And I said, "No, 'cause we started out together."  So I didn't come out.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it was you and one other female student?
Speaker 2: Right.  So late, late that night they signed all the papers to get us out.  Then we came back on campus and the whole campus was out, the students were out waiting for our return--
Story_ID: 218182
Speaker 1: How did you all get out [of jail], who signed the papers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) NAACP [National Advancement for the Association of Colored People]. The NAACP and the Urban--American Service Center [sic.], American Service--American Friend[s] Service [Committee] were the ones who actually helped, and our attorney, Johnnie [A.] Jones [Sr.] who was in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] who was working with Dutch Morial [Ernest Nathan Morial] who was the former mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] and Thurgood Marshall who was NAACP helped do all the papers to get us out.
Speaker 1: But since you couldn't make any phone calls, how did people know that you had been arrested?
Speaker 2: Oh, because our attorney knew.
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: Because the NAACP had already, we'd already contacted them before we went in.  So they knew that we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you said this--we're gonna be participating in a sit-in.
Speaker 2: So they, they kind of followed us, so they knew that we were going to be--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we'd already talked to them.  We didn't just go in without talkin' to somebody who we thought could help us if something happened, so that's what it was.
Story_ID: 218183
Speaker 1: When you got back on campus [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] what was the atmosphere like on campus?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was unbelievable.  Southern had a population of ten thousand students, and six thousand must have been out on campus waiting for our return and standing around a huge yellow bus.  So we all--they stood up on the bus.  The women couldn't get up that high, but we were on the side of the bus and the men sit on top of the bus.  And we addressed the student body. And told 'em what had happened.  And the next morning the president [Dr. Felton Grandison Clark] wanted to see us.  So we went to the president's house.  And he said he had been told by the Board of--the Louisiana State Board of Education [sic. Louisiana Department of Education] that we were to be expelled from school.  That we could no longer be students at Southern University.  So we went back to our dormitories that whole day and they were plotting to get us out before the students knew we were leaving.  We didn't know that, but my momma's [Maud Marrie Hoston] friend was on the switchboard, Mrs. Higgins [ph.].  And she heard the message that they had bought the train tickets and when it--as soon as it became dark they were gonna go get us where, from where--find out where we would be and put us on the train and send our bags later.  And she called me and said, "Pack up as much as you can pack up and I'm going to send Rodney [ph.] to pick you up," that's her son.  And Rodney came in a station wagon and picked me up, a little friends of my parents, and said get down on the floor, which I did.  And put my bags and took me to her house.  So they couldn't find me.  Some of the others went other places.  We all went some places, but we all decided we'd call and get--call Ms. Higgins and find out where each person was and we can come back together, and we did.  And so they put us up and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] put us up in a hotel down in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and that's where we stayed.  But we didn't come out until night.  The NAACP and those persons would not meet with us until night, late at night.
Speaker 1: How come?
Speaker 2: They were afraid of what would happen to them.  Because this first time this had ever happened in the State of Louisiana.  Remember this is a first.  So at nine o'clock at night, 9:30, they'd come get us in the car and we'd go to a lady's basement and they would come and we'd meet and strategize.  They'd go back to the hotel.  The next day we'd go to court.  There were all these court dates.  The NAACP had to work with our lawyer, Johnnie Jones, to address the court.  So we'd go sit in the court all day long to wait to be heard.  And then we'd come back and eat and talk about where we were and then we'd go back at night and meet.  So it was that kind, it was really--
Story_ID: 218184
Speaker 1: What were your parents [Maud Marrie Hoston and Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] saying at this point?  What happened--what did your parents say when they found out you had been arrested and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: That's why they wanted--my daddy was--had talked to [Dr.] Felton [Grandison Clark] and that's why they were trying to get me out of jail and that's why.  So my parents knew.  In fact my mother was--the story she told was that she was home watching her favorite, favorite soapbox operas ironing daddy's shirt when the TV said, "Bulletin, bulletin, bulletin.  Students at Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] exp- jailed for trying to eat at F. W. Woolworth [sic. S.H. Kress & Co.]."  And there was this picture you saw, saw you on the book, that book I showed you, the blue book.  That picture flashed, 'cause that was the picture that went everywhere, flashed on TV.  Mother said she dropped the iron, she screamed and--
Speaker 1: 'Cause that was a picture of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and those students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And the rest of the group?
Speaker 2: --and the police being led out.  So she screamed and hollered and put the iron--dropped the iron, she said, and then called my daddy who was at the shoe store [Hoston's Shoes and Bootery, Monroe, Louisiana].  And she was all upset.  And so he came home and they talked and he got on the phone and called around and so.  In fact, Dr. Clark asked when we got out of jail, and we decided to--the students went to the common theater, kind of convocation and we decided we're going to speak to the students at the convocation.  But we were not really invited to speak.  So we came through the back door.  We were going to get up and speak to the students anyway.  But we didn't know they had invited my daddy to come down to speak to the students.  To talk about what we had done was wrong that we should not have sat-in, that that went against the laws of Louisiana.  And my daddy came down and said just the opposite.  He got on the stage and said, you should follow them, this is what's it's all about; you got to stand up for what you believe.  Dr. Clark was so sick of my father after that, that--they kind of broke their relationships off after that.  But it was interesting.  It was that kind of--it was very--because people are so afraid.  Because see what happened--things happened to all our parents as a result of that.  One guy, his mother was beaten and fired from her job.  My dad was put in jail on trumped up charges.  They came to our house one day, the telephone company, and said to my mother, we coming your phone is not working.  So she didn't think nothing of it.  They said it's in the loft, we had a loft in the house, not an attic, but a loft you know.  And they went up there to the--up to the loft and bugged the house.  We had no idea that they had bugged the house.  So it was that kind of thing.  So it was a very tenuous situation--
Story_ID: 218185
Speaker 1: Were you ever thinking--did you ever regret that decision and were you ever thinking, you know, this was just too big of a price to pay?
Speaker 2: No I didn't.
Speaker 1: But you were at your senior year [at Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], you were expelled--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking--how were you think you would complete your education?
Speaker 2: I never thought I wouldn't complete it, I just didn't know where.  But that didn't enter my mind.  I just knew that somewhere I would go to school.  But I just didn't think about it.  But I did not know, 'cause see in Louisiana you had two schools: Grambling [State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and Southern.  Grambling was closer to my home than Southern.  I did not know until this summer when we went back to Southern for commencement that the Governor [Jimmie Davis] had issued a statement that we could not attend any school in the State of Louisiana.  I did not know that then.  I just figured I couldn't come back home and I couldn't go to school at Southern.  I didn't know he meant all the schools in the state, in a state-supported school.
Story_ID: 218186
Speaker 1: What was it like working with Thurgood Marshall and having him work on your case, and what was like the young Thurgood Marshall like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we only had one experience with him, only once.  Very, very meticulous, very stern, all about business.  And he had been fighting against these kind of things all of his life, so this was just another case that--but he--they decided to take it to the Supreme Court.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: To the Louisiana Supreme Court [sic. Supreme Court of Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: It first went to the Louisiana Supreme Court and there it was named Hoston versus the State of Louisiana, et al [sic. Hoston et. al v. Louisiana, 1961].  So I feel good about that and that was historical landmark, for me.
Speaker 1: Right, because you were named in that case.
Speaker 2: And from there it went to the United States Supreme Court [Supreme Court of the United States].  It was the first sit-in case [Garner v. Louisiana, 1961] to go to the United States Supreme Court of all the sit-in cases that occurred in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: On whether or not the sit-ins were unconstitutional?
Speaker 2: Yeah, whether we breached the peace, disturbed the peace.  And so our case was the first one to go to Supreme Court, which meant that historically our case was the one that desegregated all the restaurants in the country.
Speaker 1: And what year was this when it went to the Supreme Court?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: It went to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1961?
Speaker 2: January of 1961.
Speaker 1: And did Thurgood Marshall argue the case before--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thurgood Marshall, James [M.] Nabrit [III], Walter White, and what other guy, Walter White and there was another gentlemen from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: And what was the outcome?
Speaker 2: The outcome that we did not breach any peace.  We did not disturb the peace and we didn't break any laws.  Because our being there was not enough to disturb the peace.  And so it was determined that restaurants were opened to all United States citizens.  So that was a landmark for us.
Story_ID: 218187
Speaker 1: So this is 1961.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What--had you figured out what you were gonna do yet about your education?
Speaker 2: No, we went off to school in September.  See we were outta school [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--the sit-in [at S. H. Kress & Co., Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was in March, March 28th, 1960.  So we were outta school that whole summer with nothing much to do.  When I--we went around speaking to churches to raise money for our defense, because our defense was quite expensive.  And so that was important to raise funds for that.  And we went back and forth to court, back to Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  While I was home, and this is a historical note.  Let me go--let me back up a bit.  The NAACP [National Advancement for the Association of Colored People] had been outlawed in the State of Louisiana.  There was nothing in the State of Louisiana that said NAACP.  While I was home for that summer, I started up the youth branch of the NAACP.  My mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] almost had a stroke.  Because all this material was coming to my house.  So they labeled me a communist and labeled me with all this propaganda.
Story_ID: 218188
Speaker 1: --That summer where were you thinkin' you were gonna go to school?
Speaker 2: Well several persons had called my parents [Maud Marrie Hoston and Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.].  Not--yeah, in the summer.  Her friend, [Dr.] James [S.] Peters [II], Dr. James Peters with University of Connecticut, I think in Storrs, Connecticut had said to her, he used to live in Monroe [Louisiana], he said to her, "Why don't you let her come to University of Connecticut."  My mother said, "Oh no, there are no blacks up there.  That won't work."  They got [Dr.] Charles [H.] Wesley who was the president of Central State College [Central State University] then in Wilberforce, Ohio.  And Dr. Wesley offered us to come to Central State to finish our degree.  So my mother said, "Let her go to Ohio--Charles Wesley's black, well-known."
Speaker 1: So did all seven of you go to Central State?
Speaker 2: Three were in law school, so they went on to law school.  And then the four of us, I think we all--the four of us went to Central State.
Speaker 1: So this was in 1961 when you went to Central State?
Speaker 2: No, September 1960.
Speaker 1: Right, I'm sorry 'cause in March--
Speaker 2: --in March 1960.
Speaker 1: Right, so 1960 you went to Central State and how long were you at Central State?
Speaker 2: I had to do a year and a half.  Because they had defaced my transcripts so bad at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], so they couldn't even read all the classes I had taken.  So I changed my major from biology to psychology.  And I had to put in a year and a half at Central State.
Speaker 1: So you earned your--
Speaker 2: B.A.--
Speaker 1: B.A. degree--
Speaker 2: --in psychology.
Speaker 1: In what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962].  I finished midyear in '61 [1961].  So then I had to--I went back for commencement in '62 [1962].
Story_ID: 218189
Speaker 1: After that [graduating from Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], you began teaching?
Speaker 2: Well after that I couldn't go home [Monroe, Louisiana].  So I came--
Speaker 1: Why couldn't you go home?
Speaker 2: Because everybody was afraid of me to come back.  Because while I was in college, the marshals tried to come to Ohio and bring me back for trial, bring us back for trial in Louisiana.  And my--but [Dr.] Charles [H.] Wesley had to get the governor [Michael DiSalle] to issue an edict or whatever it is and said that they did not have jurisdiction to come into Ohio to take us anywhere.  So things like that had happened.  So people were not sure what the underlying reason was for people wanting to come take us back and calling and said that, you know, we could come back and stand trial and we missed the trial and all that kind of stuff.  So they thought maybe--my mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] said maybe you better not come back this way.  So the only relative I had that had moved out of the South was in Washington, D.C.  My cousin, Sam Hoston [ph.], had moved to Washington.  So I came to stay with Sam.  And so that's how I got to Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 218190
Speaker 1: And so you began teaching in 1964?
Speaker 2: No I came to Washington, D.C.  The first job was, I went to interview--I went to look for jobs and found this job for a psychology major with the Peace Corps.  And so I went down that morning.  You know, the process then was you go down on 16th Street to the solar building, look on the wall and they post all these jobs and you find these jobs and go interview.  So I immediately went to the Peace Corps to interview for this job.  They wanted eighteen or something psychologists.  Well I knew I was in.  Once I got there, this big guy sittin' there says, real southern, "Girl, we don't have no more jobs."  I said, "But it's only been up for thirty minutes, the sign, it was just put up this morning."  He said, "We have no jobs for you.  I'm sorry, we have no--jobs."  I said, "Why."  He said--I gave him my resume.  He said, "Not qualified."  I went back, I was so upset.  I called President John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] who was out of the country and told him that I had been denied this job, that it was unconstitutional and that maybe they did it because I had a jail record.  You know, on the federal form, they ask you, have ever been in jail, and you have to state yes, and explain why.  Okay.  So they called me the next morning and said that President Kennedy was out of the country, but asked me if I would come and talk to Robert [F.] Kennedy who was attorney general.  I said, "For real?"  And they said, "Yes."  So I didn't have all my clothes were not here from college [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], so my cousin gave me a hat to put on me and hat and gloves, you know, and my little dress and I went on down to--down to the attorney general's office.  And when I got in there, they had a folder on the table like that, it had from the day I was born 'til that day.  They had researched that fast, my whole life history.  Scared me to death.  All I could think about, what have I done wrong, what did I do, did I do something that I--you know, tryin' to anyway.  And they--he interviewed me and said to me that, you qualify for this job.  And this is not really a jail record.  This was a cause so they should have given you that job.  He called down there to see if there were any jobs left and they said yes.  So he told me to go back and call--gave me his number, "Call me from there if you don't get this job."  So I was really, you know, I was really bad.  I went back down there and I said listen, I came back for my job.  He said, "We don't have any."  I said, "The attorney general said you had jobs."  He looked at me, he couldn't--he said, "What attorney general."  I said, "Robert F. Kennedy."  He said, "Robert F. Kennedy don't have time to see you."  I said, "But he did.  And I'm gonna call him right here on your telephone if I don't get this job".  I mean he, he was so flustered he didn't know what to do.  He said, "Well girl."  I said, "Don't call me girl."  He said, "Well girl you'll only have it for six months."  I stayed there for two years.
Speaker 1: And what job, what kind of job was it?
Speaker 2: I was in the selection division, helping to select people to go overseas, and then I moved to the African division.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I enjoyed that, 'cause that was the early days of the Peace Corps.  So it was like all the activists and the revolutionaries working with the Peace Corps.  So it was really--it was a nice experience.
Story_ID: 218191
Speaker 1: And so from 1962 until 1970 you taught schools?
Speaker 2: I taught elementary school for a while and then I decided that I didn't want to do that forever.  So I went back--I decided--oh [Dr.] Charles [H.] Wesley retired as president of Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  I came to Washington [D.C.] headed up the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)] which was founded by Carter G. Woodson.
Speaker 1: And this is in 1970?
Speaker 2: No he came here in '68 [1968] I think.  He came--he moved--he retired in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: But you took this job in 1970?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I took the job in '69 [1969] I think.  I well, well I worked part-time with him '68 [1968] and '69 [1969] while I was teaching.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then he asked me to leave teaching and come work with him full-time, which I did.  And then he encouraged me to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and get a master's degree.  And I said, "No way, I have children--I can't go."  And so he said, "But you ought to go."  So he really forced me to go to--back get my master's and my husband [Dr. Rudolph Harris] decided he'd go back.  So we both went back to school.  And then Charles Wesley enticed me to get a Ph.D. in history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you got your master's degree in what year?
Speaker 2: I went to Howard from '70 [1970] to '75 [1975].  I went five years for a master's and Ph.D.  I got my master's in '72 [1972] and my Ph.D. in '75 [1975].  I went full-time for my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And you got your master's degree in history?
Speaker 2: Right.  And my Ph.D. in history.  I wrote my dissertation on Charles Wesley, on Dr. Charles Wesley because he had really, truly been a mentor.
Story_ID: 218192
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about what you did, so you were going to school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] full-time and you got your Ph.D. in 1975, and so what did you do after you got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Well before I do that, may I just backtrack a minute?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was married in 1962 to a wonderful Louisiana man, who also went to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], [Dr.] Rudolph Harris.  Okay and then we had two children.  So I missed that part.  That's most important.  So we had two children, Rylan Rudolph Harris [ph.] who's born in '64 [1964] and Junie Janette Harris [ph.] who's born in '68 [1968].  And so that part--that was the part that put my life together.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the (unclear) had it all together during that period.  And then I went off to school with the husband and the children, we both went off to school.
Speaker 1: So you were both in school and you were getting your Ph.D. full-time.  Was your husband going to school full-time as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah--he got part-time, but he got his Ph.D. at Catholic University [of America, Washington, D.C.] in biology.
Story_ID: 218193
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit in 1979 you worked for the Carter/Mondale [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr. and Vice President Walter Frederick "Fritz" Mondale] re-election campaign.  Tell me a little bit about what you did with them?
Speaker 2: I was the campaign manager.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: They were looking for a campaign manager and Sharon Pratt Dixon [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] then, and her husband Arrington Dixon called me up one night and said, "Jimmy Carter is looking for a campaign manager.  And we told him we needed the right person, and we want you to take the job."
Speaker 1: And had you ever worked in politics before?
Speaker 2: I said, "Listen, I've only done little things, worked with [Robert F.] Kennedy and that kinda stuff.  I said, "Now listen I've never ran a--I've never been involved in that high-level politics."  I said, "You think I can really do it."  And they said, "Yes you can do it."  They said, "You've got twenty-four hours to make up your mind."  Then they called back and said, "You really only have about two or three more hours."  So I asked my husband [Dr. Rudolph Harris], he said, "Oh, you can do it."  So I ran his campaign.  I ran the first campaign and then I was co-chair of his re-election.  I was campaign manager of his very first.
Speaker 1: You were Washington, D.C. campaign manager?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh that was great experience.  Yeah I had never gotten--I mean I went in and out of the White House [Washington, D.C.] as if I was just walking in and out of your house.  And I couldn't believe it, I was taking my dad [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] in, my mom [Maud Marrie Hoston], and we'd go to the White House and go through the--he just--he was such a free-hearted person, he just let you roam around.  And we just roamed around (laughter), you know.  And we went to the different activities.  And it was nice galvanizing the city behind the--behind the candidate 'cause I'd never done that.  To work with the council and the mayor [HistoryMaker Marion Barry] and all the elected officials, the school board people who would come and speak on his behalf and you'd schedule them out.  And Robert [S.] Strauss was his, I think was the overall campaign manager.  So he would come down and meet with me and we would be in the paper together and it was, for a young person, it was really, I mean, to me--kind of the launching pad for my political endeavors.
Story_ID: 218194
Speaker 1: And so you did that until 1980. And so what did you do from 1980 to 1982 before you went to work on the [District of Columbia] Statehood Constitution[al] Convention.
Speaker 2: When--right after I closed the [re-election] campaign [for President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr. and Vice President Walter Frederick "Fritz" Mondale] I went to Lebanon.  [Yasser] Arafat had invited, it was about eight of us--black women--through congressman [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy, to come to Lebanon and see the conditions of the children and see what was happening there.  How that country was being torn up by strife.  And we went over there for a week.  And that was really an eye opener.  'Cause number one, is that when you read it in the paper you have no idea that we talked about black people whose grandparents are from West Africa.  They said that I mean.
Speaker 1: When we talk about Lebanese people?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So I was--it was an eye opener for me.  But the, the strife and the way the country had been torn up in war was just unbelievable and children--orphans.  So that was an experience.  So that's what I did from '80 [1980] to '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: I mean, no, I went there in '80 [1980] and then after that I guess I was still--I was teaching at Federal City College [University of the District of Columbia (UDC), Washington, D.C.] then in '80 [1980], yeah I think I, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 1980 you were teaching at--
Speaker 2: I started teaching at Federal City College in '75 [1975] after I got my Ph.D. [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went to Lebanon for that summer, but I was still teachin' at the--at old Federal City College and then we moved over to the University of the District of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause Federal City College is now the University of--okay.
Speaker 2: Three colleges came in to make the university.
Speaker 1: What were you teaching?
Speaker 2: I was teachin' African American history and [Washington] D.C. history.
Speaker 1: And how did you enjoy teaching?
Speaker 2: I loved teaching.  I see students today who say what an impact I had on their lives.  I mean it's, it's a rewarding feeling.  I enjoyed teaching.  I say I was going back and teach a course, but I haven't done it yet.
Speaker 1: And how long did you teach?  Did you teach for five years?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four years before I retired.
Speaker 1: Okay so you taught from 1975--
Speaker 2: Until 1997.  Right, (unclear) '97 [1997] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you taught, you taught several different courses, you taught--
Speaker 2: Well I taught pretty much African American history was my main course.  I taught D.C. history which was a main course, and black women's history, then I taught senior courses.  But now in the middle of that, I worked on the campaign to, to elect Sharon Pratt Dixon [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] as mayor of Washington in 1990.  So I took a leave of absence from UDC and got her elected, and worked in her executive office from '91 [1991] to '95 [1995].
Story_ID: 218195
Speaker 1: And what did you do in her [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] office?
Speaker 2: I had two distinct positions.  When I first started off with her I was in direct--well I did three things.  I was director of educational affairs, then I rolled with her every day as kind of her scheduler and to keep her on schedule and I had to write out some of her speeches.  And I did that for a couple years.  A limousine would pick me up at seven in the morning and we'd go and get her and I would go with her all day long, sometimes eleven o'clock at night.  That was really interesting but tiring.  And then after that, she asked me to head up the council affairs, which I did not want to do because I didn't like legislation and I wasn't sure I wanted to deal with the council.  Because that was thirteen different people who were all very--strong willed and I said, "I don't know if I want this."  Well she said, "I need you there."  So I left the education and went to head up council affairs and that was quite an interesting--that was probably the most interesting experience I had had.
Speaker 1: Working with the city council [Council of the District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And legislation, being sure it's signed, being sure it gets to the right place, being sure there is much support for it.  That was really--and following the legislation through, that was really an experience--
Story_ID: 218196
Speaker 1: And what was the climate like in Washington, D.C. at that time, the early '90s [1990s], it was right after [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry and you know, what was the climate like?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: In the mayor's office and politically in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well I think it was time for a woman.  I mean they--I think they realized it was time for a change.  But you know in the--in the whole scheme of everything, this is a Marion Barry time.  I mean he was a consummate politician, masterful.  And she [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] won, but they were ready for a change.  And I thought she brought about a change.  She brought about a different kind of a government.  She was a good mayor.  But they were not ready for a woman like they thought they were.  Okay, so it was hard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How was she different from Marion Barry as mayor?
Speaker 2: Well she was different because she was, well she was a woman so she looked--came about--she came across looking at things differently from a woman's perspective.  But she was--she was a strategist.  She was a negotiator, 'cause she had been with Pepco [Potomac Electric Power Company] and you know, she knew that whole scene.  She had been active with the Democratic Party.  So she knew that.  So she was--I thought she was very strong-willed.  She didn't accept a lot of foolishness.  Okay, so she was a manager, excellent.
Story_ID: 218197
Speaker 1: So, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris one thing we didn't talk about, also in the early '90s [1990s] you became the first city historian for Washington, D.C., how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well having taught at UDC [Federal City College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and knowing about D.C. history, I felt that somewhere people were not pulling the history together.  And so I went to [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry with the proposal.
Speaker 1: Who was mayor at that time?
Speaker 2: Who was mayor.  I had just done a big exhibit for him at the Martin Luther King [Jr. Memorial] Library [Washington, D.C.], because he was leaving office.  He was getting' ready--this was his last term.  So I did this great exhibit on his terms as mayor.  And he decided okay, I told him, in fact I was interested 'cause I had taken a letter to him in '78 [1978] with the same proposal.  He didn't do anything with it.  So I brought the old letter back to show him and he said, "Okay, let's do it then," and he gave me an office.  He gave me some support, but since then I haven't had any financial support.  So I sort of been limping along just doing projects.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what you do as a city historian?
Speaker 2: Well I've done several things.  I've conducted an essay contest with elementary, junior and senior high school students.  I've gone on to schools to speak on the history of the District of Columbia.  I've spoken at churches on the history of the District of Columbia.  We've started Washington D.C. Hall of Fame [Society].
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Well we recognize outstanding Washington, D.C. residents who made the greatest impact on the growth and development of the city in twelve different areas: business, community development, cultural arts, communications, education, law, politics, religion, science and technology--politics and government--and sports.  And then we do our Lifetime Achievement Award and national award.  But these are people who probably don't get recognized.  And then we do the posthumous, we recognize four or five persons who have gone on who've made a great contribution.  So it's really nice because you can grab the history of these people.  I started that in 1998.
Story_ID: 218198
Speaker 1: And why do you think it's important for people to know about the history of Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Because the history of Washington, D.C. is grounded in the history of African Americans.  And unless we capture that history, you lose what we were, why we are where we are today, and the people who really made it work.  So the [Washington D.C.] Hall of Fame [Society] really captures the people in Washington who really made this city work in all these various areas.  And we have, we have the leaders in these areas who select these people.  The judges and the lawyers select the law people.  And the ministers select the religious people.
Speaker 1: And what is it--excuse me--that you think is like the biggest kept secret about Washington, D.C.'s history, and what is it about Washington, D.C.'s history that you really want people to know?
Speaker 2: Well Washington, D.C. has a history of neighborhoods.  The neighborhood history is a rich culture of the city.  That we're just not a National Mall, that's just one part of who we are and people never get beyond Pennsylvania Avenue.  To know that there's a city beyond the mall, and the history is in the cities--is in--I'm sorry history is in the neighborhoods and the communities.  And that's what people need to know.  And that, in fact, they just produced a D.C. history stamp.  If you look at the stamp, it's a national stamp.  It's the mall, it's the cherry blossoms, it's a few row houses, which does not describe who we are and a map, which is a federal map, which shows the history of the city.  Now, our flower is not a cherry blossom, our flower is 'American Beauty' rose, and our bird is a wood thrush, but that's not there.  So see, people forget who we are.
Story_ID: 218199
Speaker 1: What's your goal as the city historian [for Washington, D.C.], what is your main objective and your main goal?
Speaker 2: To just try to unearth the history of the--the true history of the community, of the neighborhoods, whatever that history is.  Whether there's a article, whether it's interviewing people, we do through the [Washington D.C.] Hall of Fame [Society], we're doin' the first park, it's an African--local park, it's African American.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that project?
Speaker 2: That part is at Ninth [St. NW] and Morrell [ph.] Avenue.  It is a small triangular park used to be owned by the federal government.  It was given over to the district government.  It's a half a block from Carter G. Woodson's home where he lived and worked and started the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)].  Where he started Negro History Month [Black History Month].  Where he started The Journal of Negro History [The Journal of African American History].  And he used to walk through that park to eat at the historical Phyllis Wheatley Y[WCA, Washington, D.C.].  And so I used--I was the national president of the association for two years.  And so I had a close affinity to Carter G. Woodson.  And so this park is a park where he strolled and he was a teacher and a dean in Washington [D.C.].  So we're gonna develop that park in memory of Carter G. Woodson.  Where you can go and see his saying's and get--feel a part of who he was in the city.
Speaker 1: And what's the timeline for it, the park?
Speaker 2: Well we have to raise some money, but I think we're going to be okay with that part.  We're just trying to get it all approved by this new [District of Columbia] Commemorative Works Committee and everything is ready for that.  And they seem to be very helpful.  The recreation department [Department of Parks and Recreation, Washington, D.C.] has approved it and so we're going to see them, and once they approve it, then we're just raising money to make it happen.
Story_ID: 218200
Speaker 1: What was your high school [Carroll High School, Monroe, Louisiana] reunion like?
Speaker 2: It was interesting, this is our forty-eighth year.  We had fifty persons to come back, I had about twenty friends.  And it was quite interesting because we went to visit the school and we relived some of those happy days, those fun times, and the teachers.  And we're really amazed at how the school has grown.  I mean computers, computers, computers, you know.  We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And is the school integrated?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  If it is, it's a very small number.  It's propaganda, that's Louisiana though.  Still predominantly white schools.
Speaker 1: And let me ask you this [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, as we also celebrate this fiftieth anniversary of Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], just what are some of your thoughts on integration.  Do you think that it helped us, it hindered us, what are some of your thoughts on integration?
Speaker 2: Well in some instances it helped and most instances I think it did not.  Kids were allowed to go to white schools, but then the rejection and the lack of socialization and the lack of empathy from the teachers left them kind of by themselves.  In predominantly black schools there is more of a nurturing teacher relationship and students feel like, that's my other mom and she really cares about me--learning and about me as a person.  They didn't get that--that was hard.
Story_ID: 218201
Speaker 1: And so when you went back to new Carroll High School [Monroe, Louisiana] just recently, was it kinda still the same as when you went there still, you know, a predominantly black school, of course the technological changes were there?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's Carroll High School--it looked the same, it looked the same from the outside.  The inside had changed drastically.  We laughed at all--the auditorium which is just about the same.  We began to go on the stage and sing and do the things that they did while they were there.
Speaker 1: And do you think that kids there today are getting the same level of education you got there back in 1956, in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, maybe they are because of advancements, but we had the old professors who really lived education.  Sometimes teachers work now just because it's a job.  These people worked because they enjoyed teaching, it was part of their lives.  They were trained to be teachers, they wanted to be nothing else but teachers.  So that made a difference.
Story_ID: 218202
Speaker 1: You also recently went back to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this year in 2004.
Speaker 2: Yes. Southern invited us back for commencement in 2004.  They called it Degrees of Appreciation because none of us had gotten our degrees.  So they gave the law school students their degrees and gave those of us who were undergrad [undergraduate] our degrees.  So it was quite a moving experience.  We were in all the newspapers and all the television stations.  It was a really, really a historical comeback.
Speaker 1: What was it like being back there?
Speaker 2: Really nostalgic.  I mean some people, you know, shed a few tears.  Some people had not set foot at Southern since they left, quite a few.  They invited me back once, one department, black--the history department to speak for Black History Month like five years ago.  That's the only time I'd ever gone back to speak, to be a part.  I'd gone back to homecoming once with my husband [Dr. Rudolph Harris], because he went to Southern.  So the relationship is still kinda there.  But most people had not been back since.  They were just that upset with the fact that they had been expelled.
Speaker 1: And what was it like to get your degree?
Speaker 2: That was moving, that was quite moving.  I mean, just to walk across the stage to get my degree and have the whole auditorium stand up to applaud what you had done and be appreciative.  That was--this is the first time Southern had recognized us since the '60s [1960s].  Half of the alumni did not know that we existed, that that sit-in [at S.H. Kress & Co., Baton Rouge, Louisiana] even occurred.  They had kind of swept it under the rug.  We didn't know that then.  We didn't know it now that they had swept it under the rug then.  So that was interesting.
Story_ID: 218203
Speaker 1: When was it safe for you to go back to Louisiana?
Speaker 2: I went back to Louisiana, let me see '62 [1962] I graduated [from Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  I went back probably in '60 [1960] once before I got married [to Dr. Rudolph Harris], but I married in '62 [1962].  I went back once before I got married.  And I didn't get a warm welcome, I didn't get a warm welcome.  I guess before I got married I went back up, my mother [Maud Marrie Hoston] was making my wedding dress.  And I went back home.  And I didn't get a warm welcome.  People were still afraid to associate with me because they thought someone had--they heard about all the things that happened to our parents and everybody else so they just thought if they associated with me, even my relatives, some of them said, "No, no."  I said, "Do you want me to come visit you?"  They said, "No, let's go down to cousin Lena's [Lena Swan (ph.)] house," that's my grandmother.  "Let's go over there and I'll see ya over there."  So it was that fear, 'cause you really didn't know--they could lose their jobs.
Speaker 1: And did you ever feel like, you know, that was really too big of a price to pay for what the sit-in [at S. H. Kress & Co., Baton Rouge, Louisiana] accomplished or do you feel like, you know, it was worth it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was worth it.  It was worth, I think, our sit-in accomplished not only certainly local level, but it accomplished something on the national level.  When we realized the impact of it, desegregating all the restaurants throughout the United States.  I mean, that's--that was a big order.  Oh there'd be other sit-ins, but they never got into United States Supreme Court [Supreme Court of the United States].  So we were just blessed that we had the kind of attorneys that could take our cases to the Supreme Court and make things happen.  So it became a landmark case [Garner v. Louisiana, 1961].
Story_ID: 218204
Speaker 1: And why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Because I think that, not only young people, but adults need to know where our ancestors have come from.  What they went through to pave the way for where they are today.  So they shouldn't really take it lightly.  They should under--they should be more involved themselves in preserving history and, you know, be like the Africans we are.  Transpose that--transfer that history onto your children and your nieces and your nephews so that they will have a sense of appreciation for what accomplished before them.
Story_ID: 218205
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: So many things stand out.  It's hard to select one.  I am always--say that I'm blessed to have such a wonderful husband [Dr. Rudolph Harris] of forty-two years this year, I mean a really great husband and wonderful children.  And that makes your life pretty complete.  If I go beyond that, I think the thing that stands out is the sit-ins and my father's [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] activism in their early years.  Those things stand out in my mind.  And having achieved to get the Ph.D. [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] which I rarely think about that part, but it is an important part, but I guess I've had it so long I don't think about it much, it kinda wears with you, you know.
Story_ID: 218206
Speaker 1: I know that you said it was kind of like a tradition in your family to go to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and it was just that was the rule.  Your brother [Eluen Homer Hoston, Jr.] was at Southern when you went.  Did, did your younger sister [Wilhelmina Hoston Suttles] go to Southern?
Speaker 2: No, because she came along at the time of all the sit-ins and my family was in such turmoil.  She came along the time when you gonna go to college when they had to pack up and leave.  So things just got too crazy so they decided to leave.  So she went to Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  She came to where I was at Central State.  So she attended Central State.
Story_ID: 218207
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about why you wanted to share your story.  What you think people can glean from your story?
Speaker 2: Well I, I think when they look at my story and realize that from a young person I've always been an activist.  And just because I have achieved where I am, I have not stopped.  That's important.  Because we cannot sit idly by and wait for the next generation, we must show them how to do it and help them move along.  And I say that 'cause my kids used to always be embarrassed when I'd go to a store (unclear), I've never tried on my own shoes and I'm almost sixty-five.  I demand for the shoe salesman to put my shoes on.  I ask him first.  Now some peoples know me in the stores and they'll come right over and help me.  But some people, I say no, do you have any problems putting my shoes on 'cause that's what I was trained to do with my father's [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] shoe store [Hoston's Shoes and Bootery, Monroe, Louisiana].  And we deserve that service.  When I go to a restaurant, there's one I go in, they change their gloves immediately when I come to the door to fix my sandwiches.  Because we have to be very vigilant that we demand the same kind of service.  I don't want those dirty plastic gloves on your hand to fix my food that you just took off from cleaning off the counter.  I mean and I do that, and I make people give us service, and I do it even at my age and I have no problems with it.  And that's what we have to do.  We can't get to a certain point and think it's okay.  It's not okay.  Because the young kids are still having the problems.
Story_ID: 218208
Speaker 1: And are you disappointed in the level of activism with young people today?
Speaker 2: Yes I am.  They have so much until--my daughter is very active.  She is about thirty-six and she is just like I am and, and my son, too.  They both demand.  But we have to demand that our children demand, and the parents have not.  They're falling down on their job and telling us--training them how to demand.  There's a negative way and a positive way, and they have not done that you know.  And I think that's, that's a problem.  I mean young people come along, all they want is a job paying a lot of money.  And they don't even know what giving service is.  Most of my life has been giving service without pay (laughter), and I still do it.
Speaker 1: And when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: At my age I still do it.
Speaker 1: And when you think about, when you look at the statistics in terms of like the number of young people who vote, is that a little disheartening to you when you remembered when you were in the tenth grade teaching people the preamble--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah so (unclear)--
Speaker 1: So they could, what are some of your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) It's hard. I get so angry.  I get angry because older Americans, even older African Americans they take pride in voting.  But you go to the polls, who are coming, the people with the wheelchairs and the canes and limping, they're coming to vote because it's--they fought for that right.  Young people, I don't need to vote, I don't care about politics.  They don't understand that politics governs your life.  The decisions are made at that level.  And so we have to be more involved, you know, we have to stand up.  But the young--so you have young parents who are twenty-five and grandparents who are thirty-five and forty, so what, what have they--unless they've been trained, what are they passing on to these children.  You know, they haven't--nobody is taught how to be a parent and that's the piece that's missing.  During our time, our grandparents helped teach us, they helped teach our parents.  They don't have that transition now.  So we gonna have to teach these parents and grandparents how to be parents to children, and that's the piece that's missing.
Story_ID: 218209
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, one of the things we didn't talked about--talk about that I'd like to, is some of your work with scholarship funds for young people, the Local 32 Food and Beverage Workers Union scholarship fund and also the Rothberg National Scholarship Fund [Michael Rothberg Scholarship Fund].  Can you tell us briefly about those two projects?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I got involved in scholarships through the Rothberg.  The Rothberg, let me just say, the Rothberg Foundation out of New York [New York] is a foundation started by two Jewish--by a Jewish couple and they believe in spirituality.  And we sat in at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], to him that was the spirituality working.  So they gave all of us scholarships, they actually paid for our schooling at Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and they paid for some of us to go to grad school.  So I became a fellow, one of their scholarship fellows and I joined their scholarship fund when I was--in 1975.  So I still am with the scholarship fund and my job was to help [Washington] D.C. students get scholarships.  So we would have large numbers of students here getting scholarships and the Rothberg funds still covers it, paying for scholarships.  Average is now two thousand, then it was one thousand.  From there, I guess I started working with Wash--the local union, the men--Christian--Milar Christian [ph.] asked me if I would come help him establish a scholarship fund.  And I established that scholarship--the educational scholarship fund which was quite interesting.  I did that for maybe three or four years.  And now I'm on Washington Gas, a local utility company, I'm on their scholarship fund.  I work with them.  And through the [Washington D.C.] Hall of Fame [Society], our organization, we have a scholarship fund.  So I've been active in that because to me, that's the key to upward mobility is to get the education.  And you have to help kids get it, get that--get to that point 'cause those families, education is so high now they just don't have the money.
Speaker 1: It's almost out of reach for a lot of families.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is out of reach.  You have to almost go to local schools, small colleges to--or even to be able to pay for it.  Thirty-five thousand dollars a year for a law degree over at George--I think Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] or George Washington [University, Washington, D.C.].  That's ridiculous.
Story_ID: 218210
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris, what do you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: What I really want to do that I haven't yet, we haven't talked about it.  I've written a couple of small love books.
Speaker 1: Romance novels?
Speaker 2: No, one is, how to keep your love relationship going and tight, and keep it wholesome ['Loving You Forever: Keeping Your Man/Woman Happy and at Home,' Janette Hoston Harris].  And the other is love poetry.  I'm married to a romantic [Dr. Rudolph Harris].  And people don't perceive African Americans as being romantics.  So I'm working on this love book, this real romantic love story and I want to finish that, okay.  That's one.  The second thing I would like to do is write a history--the true history of Washington, D.C.  And I've gathered a lot of information--a lot from the neighborhoods.  I want to write a neighborhood history.  And I really have enough information I can start doing it.  'Cause the neighborhood history to me is the rich history of Washington.  And another thing I want to do, is that I have an invention that I want to try to do.  So I'm working on this invention.
Speaker 1: If you shared it with us would that be giving it away?
Speaker 2: Oh I can't share it.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: But it would revolutionize the whole industry, the automobile industry.  So I'm workin' on that.  So those are things I would like to do.
Speaker 1: So you plan to continue being busy and being an activist?
Speaker 2: Yeah but I need to cut out some of the social things so I can do the things I really want to do.  'Cause I'm a member of many organizations which we never talked about, many, many organizations.  So I need to cut some of those out.
Story_ID: 218211
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you've done already that you wish you would have done differently?  Any regrets at all?
Speaker 2: No, not regrets.  I wished that I, I had stayed on course of some of the things I really wanted to do and I got sidetracked with some of the social organizations.  I'm a member of the Continentals [Continental Societies, Inc.], The Links [Incorporated], the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].  I founded the [Washington] D.C. Hook-Up of Black Women [Inc.].  I'm a founder of that group.  That group--see those groups all require you to come to meetings after work and I need to take a vacation or leave from the organizations and do the things I really want to do.  And that's about it I guess.
Story_ID: 218212
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who believed in helping others, teaching others, and service, giving of my time to better our community.
Story_ID: 218213
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community in general?
Speaker 2: That we can uplift the younger generation to feel good about themselves, to have more self-confidence and to believe in helping others.
Story_ID: 218214
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have pursued a different career path, like do you ever wish you would have pursued a career in psychology?  How do you feel about your career path?
Speaker 2: Well it was all right.  I wish I, I had pursued maybe a law degree or medical degree, more of a law degree to help the community.  But I was never--law never came into my vision in terms of an area to pursue.  So it was never there.  I just got thrown into a historian, working with a historian and so the history was it.  But I wish I had gone another route.
Story_ID: 218215
Speaker 1: And what do you think your legacy will be or what would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure what my legacy will be, I don't how people will perceive me.  I've done a lot, more than I--well when I started put out things for you, I realized how much I've really done.  So I don't know how people will perceive me.  I think when they put it all together it will be positive.  I hope anyway (laughter).
Story_ID: 218216
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris is there anything else that you'd like to talk about that perhaps we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: Not really.  We didn't talk about the religious background.  I was raised in the church and we're still very active, but we switched over to John Wesley A.M.E. Zion--African American Episcopal Zion Church [Metropolitan Wesley African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, Washington, D.C.].  We're very active with the church, my husband [Dr. Rudolph Harris] and I.  And we're active in the community.  I was the president of my neighborhood association.  And so we started--I started the orange hats--orange hat patrols to get--to get rid of drugs in the neighborhood which was written about in the Washington Post.  I've also started, this is my fourth year, the ringing of the bells for Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday.  Because we celebrate his death date and often people don't realize that before that there was a whole life of a man that we need to celebrate.  So we ring the bells for his birthday.  And I select a church and we actually pull the bell and ring the bell to commemorate his birthday on April 4th.  So that's always important.
Speaker 1: On January 15th?
Speaker 2: I mean--The 15th is his birthday.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: April the 4th was when [Carter G.] Woodson died and was Martin King's death date as well.  So--so that to me is very important.  Things like that that brings the history alive to people, that makes them realize what has happened is what I like to do.
Story_ID: 216593
Speaker 1: That picture was taken in the '70s [1970s] at the [Washington] D.C. Bar [Association] annual event--formal event.  That's Thurgood Marshall who was the honoree for that year.  One of his staff workers, my husband, Dr. Rudolph Harris and myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.  And did you say about what year?
Speaker 1: Oh year, '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah that's fine.
Speaker 1: That was taken at our annual Washington D.C. Hall of Fame [Society] when I'm presenting [HistoryMaker] Dr. Dorothy Height with a Lifetime Achievement Award.  That was in 2003.
Speaker 2: Okay. And we flip them in post-production, so if they're upside down or something like that, we flip them in post-production.
Speaker 1: That's my grandfather, my daddy's father.
Speaker 2: And his name?
Speaker 1: Will Hoston.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, his last name?
Speaker 1: Willie Hoston.
Speaker 2: Right--(simultaneous)--yes, you're right.
Speaker 1: H-O-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: That's right, the Willies.
Speaker 1: That was taken in '94 [1994].  I was the vice-chair of the [FIFA] World Cup soccer that came to Washington [D.C.].  And to my left is Pele, a well-known soccer player.  To my right is John Koskinen who was the chair of the World Cup soccer for Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: That's my mother and father, Maud [Marrie] Hoston and Eluen [Homer] Hoston [Sr.].
Speaker 1: That's a picture of a first sit-in students at Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and we had a reunion in nineteen--1990.  To the left is Felton Valdry, Donald [T.] Moss, Judge Kenneth [L.] Johnson, attorney John [W.] Johnson, attorney Marvin, I'm sorry he's not attorney, Marvin Robinson, businessman, and the seat in front of him is Jo Ann Morris, she was the first one to participate and myself, [HistoryMaker] Janette Hoston Harris.  We had a reunion after-party here at my house.
Speaker 2: And about what year?
Speaker 1: That was 1990.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's you right there, right?
Speaker 1: That's me, right.  In the African outfit.
Speaker 2: That's me as a darling little baby.
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: I guess I was probably about six months old.  I was born in '39 [1939], so that was 1939.  No it was--that was 1940, because I was born in September.  Right.  It looks like an old relic.
Speaker 1: That's me at Southern University sitting on the wall of the student union building as a sophomore, so that was probably '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 216594
Speaker 1: Okay that's me on graduation day from Central State College [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in 1962, May of 1962.
Speaker 2: That was 2002 when at the Washington D.C. Hall of Fame [Society] with Bill Cosby who came to introduce the honoree, Ben and Virginia Ali of Ben's Chili Bowl [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: That's in 1962, December 28th, the day I was married to [Dr.] Rudolph Harris and that's our reception in the Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity House, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was a picture taken, my dad [Eluen Homer Hoston, Sr.] was born in 1913, so he looks like he is about four years old, probably 1917.  That's my dad to the right, his mother, my grandmother, Willie Hoston sitting down, her niece Sadie [ph.] standing up and my daddy's brother Samuel Hoston [ph.] standing to the left.
Speaker 2: That's my grandfather at the old home where he was living.  And I don't know when that was taken.
Speaker 1: About--if you had to guess, what would you say?
Speaker 2: I guess I would think about 1930s.
Speaker 1: And what's your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Willie Hoston.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think that is Pine Bluff, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: And I just keep asking you that [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris because someone who is actually will be writing this down won't be me.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's my mother Maud [Marrie] Hoston and my sister Wilhelmina [Hoston Suttles] who looks like she is about three months old, and that is me standing to the right and I guess I'm about five or six.
Speaker 1: So that's about 1944--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945], okay.  Nineteen--early 1940s.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1940s.
Speaker 1: That's my husband, Dr. Rudolph Harris and his son, my step-son, Ronny Johnson [ph.] of Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken three years ago--no four years ago at my son's wedding.
Speaker 2: So 2000?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my mother's father, Joseph Watson Swan, S-W-A-N.  And that was probably taken 1920s.
Speaker 2: Okay, wow.
Speaker 1: That's my husband and I going on a cruise down the Potomac [River] on the Spirit of Washington.  That was about seven years ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, so late '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 1: Late '90s [1990s], uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And that's my family who went with me to Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to get my honorary degree, but that happened in May 2004.  To the far left is my daughter Junie Janette [ph.], Dr. Rudolph Harris my husband, myself and my son Rylan Rudolph Harris [ph.].
Speaker 1: And that's in the early days when I met my husband, and that was back in the '60s [1960s], no that was the late '60s [1960s].  He had shaved off all the bushes so that must have been late '60s [1960s] okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my high school reunion at Carroll High School [Monroe, Louisiana].  We're comin' down the hall after visiting the school.  To the right is a photographer, and that was a classmate that we called Devil.  In the back is Ronald Smith [ph.] and right behind me is Bare Chest [ph.], Norman Harris [ph.], California [ph.], and myself.
Speaker 1: That's my granddaughter and her graduation.  She's four years old.
Speaker 2: And her name?
Speaker 1: That's Candy [ph.] Gllatte.
Speaker 2: What's her last name?
Speaker 1: Gllatte.
Speaker 2: Could you spell that Dr. Harris --
Speaker 1: G-L-L-A-T-T-E.
Speaker 2: Okay and about what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: Oh that was this year, (simultaneous) that would have, that would be June.
Speaker 2: So 2004, okay.
Speaker 1: June 2004.  And that's her with a cap and gown with my son Rylan Harris, her father, at the graduation.
Speaker 2: 2004?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause this is the--that's the video that went across--the picture that your mother saw?  That's okay, it's like on--like you see it on the cover of the magazine.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's, that's an historical picture.  What happened, it's not comin' across?
Speaker 2: No it's fine.
Speaker 1: Yeah it looks good from here.
Speaker 2: So could you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah that's the policeman, he lead us from S. H. Kress [& Co.] in Baton Rouge, Louisiana on March 28th, 1960.  And that's me to the left, that's Jo Ann Morris the young lady right behind me, to the right of me is John [W.] Johnson, attorney John Johnson, behind him is Donald [T.] Moss and in the background is Marvin Robinson that you can barely see.  That's lead--that's leadin' us all out to jail. Um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 216595
Speaker 1: This is the day that we were getting ready to be expelled from college [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and we--all four of us were part of the sit-in. That's Jo Ann [Morris] with me under the umbrella and the two attorneys, Kenneth [L. Johnson] and John [W.] Johnson.
Speaker 2: And that's you holding the purse?
Speaker 1: I'm holding, holding the purse.  Back to the left is somebody, but one of the organization will help us with our lawyer fees.
Speaker 2: And then this one is the we're on our way (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Hold on one second Dr.--
Speaker 2: We were on our way, Marvin Robinson, student president, joined us there.  We're on our way to the president's [Dr. Felton Grandison Clark] house.  He had summoned us to come and talk to him.
Speaker 1: To tell you, you have been--
Speaker 2: That we were being expelled.  That was March 28th, 1960.  Forty-four years ago.
Speaker 1: This is [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Janette Hoston] Harris' seventh grade yearbook picture and that's her right there.  But the picture is kinda damaged.
Speaker 2: Somebody destroyed that yeah.  But you can see it, yeah.
Speaker 1: And about what year was that, so seventh grade, you like what, thirteen?  So that was about early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah that was seventh grade, so that was nineteen--what year is that book, what's the front of that book?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay that picture was taken at the White House, Washington, D.C.  [President James Earl] "Jimmy" Carter [Jr.] had a thank you (unclear) and a thank you party for those of us who worked with the [Carter/Mondale re-election] campaign.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture with Nelson Mandela in the--it was probably around '94 [1994].  He came to Washington.  I working with Sharon Pratt Kelly [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt], then the mayor, Mayor Sharon Pratt Dixon.  And Mandela came to town and so we had an opportunity to go and meet him on the tarmac and talk with him.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: And I went to South Africa many years later.
