Story_ID: 159947
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Anthony Poole [ph.].  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Yes, Robert Allen Harris, H-A-double R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 9, 1938, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm professor emeritus of conducting in the Bienen School of Music at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] and also director of music and choir master at Winnetka Congregational Church in Winnetka, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is August 25, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are presently in the studios of The HistoryMakers at 1900 South Michigan in Chicago Avenue--or in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159948
Speaker 1: So before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask and they only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Probably--I love seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably blue.
Speaker 1: Alright.  A favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Let's say fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: The United Kingdom.
Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  It's, it's better to have it and not need it than to need it and not have it.
Story_ID: 159949
Speaker 1: So now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first, and when we get that together, we'll ask about your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: --And then we'll put 'em together.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mary Lou Jenkins, J-E-N-K-I-N-S, was my birth mother.  I was adopted by at, at birth by my--my mother did not survive my birth and I was adopted by my mother's sister, who was Rusha, R-U-S-H-A, Belle with an E, Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were--your mother was born in rural Georgia, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, both were born in rural Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Near, near a town called Dawson [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Dawson.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now did your mother know she wasn't gonna survive?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was an interesting thing.  It's been--and that's had quite a bearing on, on, on my life.  When--I have two--I had two brothers, one was ten years older than I, one was eight, and when my second brother was born, my mother was advised that she should never have--never become pregnant again because she would not survive the pregnancy.  When she became pregnant, even back then, she could have, I understand, have had a therapeutic abortion, but she chose not to, stating the fact that if she was pregnant, there must be a purpose for this child being born, so she went ahead and fulfilled my birth and a couple days later, she died.  And it was already pre-planned, knowing that this was gonna be the--this was going to be the occurrence, that my mother's sister and her husband [Major Lee Harris] would be my adopted parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she basically sacrificed herself.
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's--that can be--that can weigh on you throughout your life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we'll get back more to that story, but I just wanna ask if, if there are any stories about your mother's ancestors--I mean, the, the ancestors on your mother's side, that go back to emancipation or back into--
Speaker 2: I, I know that my, my grandfather, Robert Lee Marshall--that was the maiden name--my, my mother's maiden names were--was Marshall, and Robert Lee Marshall I think had been born--his parents had been slaves and I am named after my grandfather, Robert.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was the son of, of slaves--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Enslaved people.  And did, did he have any stories about the--
Speaker 2: I never--he was--he, he was deceased before I was born.  He died in 1936 and I was born in '38 [1938], so I never met him.  And, and I--you know, I've heard some stories that were told, but nothing in, in great detail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was your mother like raised on a farm or?
Speaker 2: They were--they were--yeah, they were--I think my--I, I think my--my grandfather was a sharecropper and--until they moved to Detroit [Michigan].  I think they moved to Detroit in the '20s [1920s], so they didn't stay in the South that long.  My mother was born in, in 1898 and I think by the early '20s [1920s], they had migrated to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In the early '20s [1920s].
Speaker 2: But we had--we--I had relatives who stayed in Georgia because we used to go back and visit them, and they were still doing sharecropping and that kinda thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did your stepmother, your, your, your mother's sister and your aunt, did, did she have stories about growing up down there?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: She never really talked--did you get the impression that it was something they really didn't wanna talk about or?
Speaker 2: No, I think--I think--well, there were--there were stories of, of racism and that kind of thing, and of--and of being aware of the fact of people disappearing and, and an occasional lynching kind of thing, you know.  But that was not something they, they dwelled on, so they didn't spend a lot of time talking about it.  I think that was something they left in Georgia and were glad to be rid of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They--my mother's sister had a--had a half-sister who we used to go back and visit in Georgia, and they were, you know--they were still, still living in, in that kind of cabin kind of situation where they were--didn't have any facilities in the home.  They--you know, everything--the, the house was lit by oil lamps and fired by fireplaces, and, and outhouse and that kind of thing, so they never did get to the point where they were living in the way that we would expect to live.
Speaker 1: They were living much the same way that people lived in the 19th century.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably with a mule and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 159950
Speaker 1: So the family moved to Detroit [Michigan] in the early '20s [1920s].  Did--now--so you were raised by your aunt [Rusha Harris] and your uncle [Major Lee Harris] basically, right?
Speaker 2: My aunt and her husband.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So that would be your, your--well, it's uncle by marriage.
Speaker 2: No, it, it was by marriage.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: But it was, was basically my--the only--my father, really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So he was like, like a stepfather.  And what was his name?
Speaker 2: Major Lee Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an interesting name.  There's a--I don't know if they're related to you, but there's a Major Harris Boys Club I think here in Chicago [Illinois] on the West Side.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know--
Speaker 2: I don't think there's any--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --Connection.
Speaker 1: Alright.  But this is a name--this--his name was Major?
Speaker 2: His name was Major.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Wasn't a title.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now this is common in the South.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: In fact, my, my fath--he had a nephew who was named after him and, you know, his was--his name was also Major.  But he was Major Watson, but he was Major as well.  Yeah.  So that was kinda passed down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Do, do you have any thoughts about why people did that or?
Speaker 2: I have not the slightest idea.  I've often wondered.  And it was kinda funny and, you know, when you were a kid because kids used to tease you about your dad's name.  You know, what's this--what kinda name is Major?  You know, so it was--but that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know there's a fella that played for the [Cleveland] Browns called Lawyer Tillman.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is something that happens.
Story_ID: 159951
Speaker 1: Now did he [Harris' adoptive father, Major Lee Harris] work for the auto industry in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a laborer for Ford Motor Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he worked for Ford and where did they live on--in Detroit?
Speaker 2: On the West Side of Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My parents bought their home when I was five years old.
Speaker 1: Did your adopted parents have a chance to go to school and, and--or, or finish school or go to high school or?
Speaker 2: I think they went to high school in, in, in the South.  But, but the interesting thing is, even though they did not have a lot of extensive formal education, they were very educated people because they read.  You know, we were--I mean, they were--they, they knew history, they knew the language.  You know, they would never allow me to misuse the language.  You know, I can remember my mother [Rusha Harris] correcting me on things and I would wonder, how in the world does she know that kind of thing.  My mother taught school I think in the South, so--but that means--that means she had a very limited education, but she was able to, to teach before coming to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Now that's significant.  I mean, people often taught--in some areas depending on how rural they were, they were teaching with a high school degree.  Some, some would go to what's called a normal school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Two-year.  Did, did she--do you know if she--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know that.
Speaker 1: It's either one or the other, though--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to qualify her to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --teach.  So, so she was--okay, well read and what about your father?
Speaker 2: Also very well read and, you know, I mean very articulate.  As I said, you know, the--it was very interesting that, you know, they both were real students of the language, you know.  I can remember one time saying something--I don't know what, what the--what the construction was, and my mother said, "You can't say it that way. You have to use a helping verb," and I said, how does my mom know what is a helping verb.  And then she explained to me what it was.  I'm thinking, oh, you know.  So--and, and--but this was the case throughout our family.  Everybody in the--I mean, with aunts and uncles and everybody, everybody, you know, spoke, spoke the language well.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: This is a tradition, an education tradition--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that trends in as economic status--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on some level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) families of sharecroppers usually don't talk--don't, don't know what a helping verb--
Speaker 2: But then--but then again, the churches we went to had very, very highly educated ministers, and I think--and, and that may have had some bearing--I mean, I'm, I'm sure it was a part of the whole process, but it was very--it was very interesting to me that, that where I would hear other people not always be as articulate as I think they might have been with the language, my parents and, and aunts, and uncles were very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They met in Georgia. That's all I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They--yeah.  And I think my father left Georgia first and I think he went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] for a while before coming to Detroit, and then when he came to Detroit, my mother joined him there.  But I think they were married in Georgia before that happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I should be able to remember that because I'm trying to think--when they had their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary, I was--no, I--they probably got married up in, in the North because I was--I was ten when they celebrated their twenty-fifth anniversary, so that meant--'38 [1938], '23 [1923]--yeah, that was--they got--probably got married in 1923 or '24 [1924] so that would've been when they got--when they were in Detroit.
Story_ID: 159952
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your birth father, your actual--
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a part--he was a--he was a part of my life when I was young but, but at a distance.  He also lived in Detroit [Michigan].  His name was William Jenkins.  And I had two brothers [William Maurice Jenkins and Harold Jenkins] who also lived with my birth father.  They did not live with us as--with my adopted parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was born in South Carolina, and that's all I know about his history because we were never--we never lived together and I never learned anything about his history.  And in, in fact, when I was young, until I started school, I was--my, my name, my formal name was Robert Allen Jenkins Harris, and when we went to go to start school, the, the, the administration of the school said I had to drop the Jenkins because they were only gonna put three names on the--on the whole thing.  And that was the--that was--but, but I remember when people would say, "What's your name?"  I would say, "Robert Allen Jenkins Harris" because that was what I was told it was.  And, you know, the thing is, it's interesting, I didn't--I didn't know the complete history of, of all of this until much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't aware of what--I knew that, that, that I called my birth father Daddy Billy, but I didn't know why because for some reason, my parents never explained that whole thing to me and it was a--it was--it was confusing in a way, but being young, I didn't question it until one--until a, a circumstance happened one day that made me go and ask my parents what the deal was.
Speaker 1: Now, that raises an interesting question, too.  So your, your father raised your two brothers.
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Speaker 1: But was there a reason why your mother [Mary Lou Jenkins] decided to give you to her sister?
Speaker 2: I think my--I think that might've been a decision made between her and my father--and my birth father because he may have thought he couldn't raise an infant.  Because my, my two brothers were eight and ten years older than I, and my father at that point was--obviously wasn't married because his wife had just--has just died, so--and that might've been--and I think that's what my mother explained to me.  She said it, it was the fact that your, your dad, Daddy Billy just decided and the decision was made by--in conjunction with my grandmother [Hattie Marshall] who was the maternal head of the family, that I should be adopted by my mother's sister.  And, and it was--it was a--it was a decision made between two sisters.  One was my--was my, my--the mother who raised me and then another sister.  My, my birth mother had two sisters.  And my other--the other sister became my godmother.  So I was--it was always a connection there.
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay.  We--we've interviewed people in the past who were raised by--who were given to other relatives by their mother to a, a sister that didn't have children or--did, did your--did Rusha Belle Harris have children?
Speaker 2: Nope.  And I think that was the reason why it was decided that she would take me because I think she was unable to have children, and so my grandmother said I think that Rusha Belle should, should do it rather than, than Pearl, who was the other sister.  Because she said, "Pearl, you're still young enough.  Belle's not--never gonna be able to have kids," so--and that's the--and, and that's the way that worked out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.
Speaker 2: So it was all predetermined, you know.
Story_ID: 159953
Speaker 1: Now when you consider all of the--or what you know about all the people that had something to do with your parentage, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think--I think my birth--I mean, I think my father [Major Lee Harris] and mother [Rusha Harris], my adopted father and mother, had a great influence on my life.  But I think--I think it was more extended family because the family was very, very close.  I mean, my mother had two brothers who I was close to who kind of took, took, took me under their wing as well as my dad.  My birth father [William Jenkins] was never really in my life except around Christmastime.  I mean, I would see him two or three times a year, but never to the point where he would've had any influence on my life until I became much, much older.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this extended family had more influence on you you think than, than any one individual or, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I think my father and mother because of the fact that they were very religious people, that they started me in church at a very, very early--I never--I've always gone to church.  I mean, it was--and, and my father used to--we used to sit down and, and learn the Sunday school lessons together and, you know, I think they had--they've had a real influence on my life because they were very religious people. They had very high principals, very high morals, and they instilled those things in me as far as going to school, talking about education, my religious training.  My mother was a Methodist, my father was a Baptist, and we all went to church every Sunday.  It was interesting that my father's church was a Baptist church, and I used to go to Sunday school with him, and then walk over about six blocks away and go to church with my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which one did you like the best?  I mean in terms of the school--the church--the, the churches.
Speaker 2: I think they both had an influence on me in different ways.  My father's church had an influence on me as a musician because it was a church where they--where they--he was a member of the choir, he was a chorister, and they sang extremely good music from the--what I mean by that, they sang masterworks.  I mean, I remember hearing anthems and hearing, hearing oratorios, cantatas, and that thing in that church because that was the kind of church it was.  The minister was a man by the name of Jesse J. McNeil who was a Ph.D.  He was--he was a doctor--I mean, a Ph.D. even way back then, and he, he stood for, for wonderful music.  And the choir director's name there was a man named Charles Spates [ph.] and, and the choir did excellent music.  The Methodist Church also had great music, but it was not at the level of the Baptist Church and--but I think--I think there was a spirituality in the Methodist Church, in the A.M.E. Church where my mother went, and that was where I was confirmed. That's where I decided to join the church on Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: My father was a little upset by that.
Speaker 1: So the, the, the Baptist Church was Tabernacle [Missionary Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Tabernacle Baptist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --In Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: And the Methodist Church was?
Speaker 2: St. Stephen's A.M.E. [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Stephen's with a P-H, or?
Speaker 2: P-H-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159954
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your siblings.  Can you list--can you name and list your siblings for, for us and put yourself in order?
Speaker 2: Siblings?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: Alright.  My oldest brother was William Maurice Jenkins.  He was born in 1928 and died on his sixty-third birthday, which would've been 2001, I guess, yeah.  Or would it have been '91 [1991], '91 [1991], maybe--'91 [1991] I guess it was, anyway, sixty-third birthday.  And my other brother is Harold Jenkins who is still alive and lives in Detroit [Michigan], and then I would've been the third son.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  And did you mention a sister or something?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No one else.
Speaker 2: There was no--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's it.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  And my, my adopted parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris], I was--did not have children.  I was their only child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So when you were growing up, the family consisted of your, your mother, father, you, and was that it?
Speaker 2: That, that was basically it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in that household.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: But as I said before, we had--the, the extended family was very close and we had uncles and aunts and cousins and everything who were--who were very closely united, very closely knit family.
Story_ID: 159955
Speaker 1: Describe your neighborhood in Detroit [Michigan].  Now you grew up on the West Side of Detroit--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right?  And did it have--did the area you grew up in have a particular name or?
Speaker 2: No it didn't.  Just the West Side of Detroit, but it was a very, very stable neighborhood.  It was the kind of neighborhood where everybody owned their own home, where all the neighbors were extremely meticulous about keeping their lawns manicured and cut.  It was the kind of neighborhood where parents, where people sat on their porches in the evening and talked and, and had that kind of interaction.  It was the kind of neighborhood where if you were five blocks away from home, someone would say, "Does your mother know you're over here?"  And if--and by the time you got home, your mother had known that you had--'cause she had called and said, "I saw Bobby over here doing something," and so it was a very close knit neighborhood.  I mean, everybody knew everybody, and I got to know almost everybody on the street because I was the paper boy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I mean, I can remember--I could remember all the addresses at this point of all my customers on that street 'cause I delivered papers there for twelve years.
Speaker 1: So this is--I know this is a mostly African American community, right?
Speaker 2: Yes it was.  But the school I went to was interracial.  It was interesting that the--there is a--there was a street called Tireman [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan], T-I-R-E-M-A-N.  Everybody who lived on the west side of Tireman, that was the black part and on the other side was basically white, and the school, Sherrill Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan], was in that particular area.  So--but I was always in integrated schools.
Speaker 1: And what was the--what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Sherrill.
Speaker 1: Sherrill.
Speaker 2: S-H-E-R-R-I-L-L, Elementary in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what street did you live on?
Speaker 2: American.  American Avenue [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: American Avenue, okay.
Speaker 2: 7826 American Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Sherrill Elementary School.  So did you live there your entire--
Speaker 2: I lived there from--
Speaker 1: --childhood?
Speaker 2: --from the time I was five years old until, until, until I left home to, to get married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lived with my parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] the whole time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what was the main street?  Was there a main street that, that everybody--a commercial strip that runs--
Speaker 2: Tireman Avenue and Warren [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Tireman, okay.
Speaker 2: Tireman and Warren.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: W-A-R-R-E-N.  Those were the borders of the streets.  They ran east and west and the streets they have--the streets we lived on ran north and south.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tireman and Warren Streets.
Story_ID: 159956
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and we ask it like this.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Playing sports with the boys.  We--I mean, we were--there was a lot--there were a lot of boys in the neighborhood [West Side, Detroit, Michigan] and we--you know, playing football in the street and playing, playing baseball and having baseball teams, I mean being very active in that.  The neighborhood was basically, other than the kids, as I said, the--a basically quiet neighborhood.  As far as sights, again, everyone as I mentioned earlier took care of their property, you know.  I mean, you know, we, we painted our house every four years and everybody--you would see neighbors out cutting their grass and trimming hedges and that kind of thing.  So from that standpoint, it was a very stable neighborhood and, and I remember it from that standpoint, that regardless to where you went up and down the three blocks between Tireman [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan] and Warren [Avenue, Detroit, Michigan] on that street, you always saw people sitting on the porch, you saw people taking care of their property.  It was a proudness, a pride in that neighborhood, which I think all of us felt.  And, and quite a few of the kids in that neighborhood were successful.  They grew up and, and most of them went to college, and they became teachers, and they, they--you know, that kind of thing.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other sights, sounds or smells?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds.  I cannot--nothing comes to mind right now but--
Story_ID: 159957
Speaker 1: What about music since this has been your career?  I mean, what, what--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --Kind of music was available?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, you know, we had doo-wops on the corner with the boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But there was--there was music in the schools.  I mean, I played in, in--even in elementary school [at Sherrill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], there was a band and orchestra which I played in, sang in the glee clubs.  We--the, the churches were always thriving with music.  And as I said, the guys would stand on the corner and sing and have fun.  And then, then of course when we had--we had our house parties, so there was always the records being played and dancing and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about--did your parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] play the radio a lot at home?  Did they?
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and we, we played the record--I mean, we played music on the radio.  I started at a very early age collecting classical records, buying them--buying them at the--at the grocery store for a dollar forty-nine a piece or something, so we were always, always--and my brother--there was a point, too, when my oldest brother [William Maurice Jenkins] after having been in the [U.S.] Army came to live with my parents and me.  And he was--he really was the person who indoctrinated me into, into--'cause he was very much into jazz, so he brought his complete record collection over.  So I would listen to Bird [Charlie Parker] and Diz [Dizzy Gillespie] and, and the Monk [Thelonious Monk], and all those things as a--as a--as a young teenager, so I became influenced by that as well.
Speaker 1: Had he been stationed in Germany or?
Speaker 2: He had been stationed in Germany, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now I don't know why, but I just--that just came to mind.  I, I don't know what it is about a brother stationed in Germany, they come back with a real jazz--love of jazz.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they didn't have it before, they have it when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well I think he may have had it before, but, but, but the point was, he had--you know, in fact, I'm sure he did because he had a very extensive record collection before being drafted, and then--and then, and then when he came back from--'cause he had lived with my birth father [William Jenkins] before he was drafted.  When he came back from the army, he came to live with us and he brought all his records and everything with him.  And he went out--I remember him going out and buying a stereo set at that point, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you grew up when the, you know, big band jazz was--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --very popular, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And I mean I heard everything--you know, from those recordings with--that, that Maurice [Jenkins] had, I mean, I heard everything.  I heard--you know, he was very much into bebop, you know.  And, you know, he would--he would--somebody--he would hear something and say, "That's [Stan] Getz," you know.  I mean, he knew the--he knew by style who everything was and, and I, I became--how--I learned how to listen from listening--from--you know, how to listen for the specifics of things more so--and of course having, having, having good music teachers in schools and everything, too, that all was a part of it, and I also took piano lessons when I was a kid.  So it was a house that was--that was full--now, my parents were not musicians, but the house was always just thriving with music.  It was amazing.  My father sang, and he would sit down at the piano sometimes to, to practice his parts for his--for his choral singing, but my mother never played.  But there was a piano in the home, and I started taking lessons when I was five years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, as I said, once again, this is an age when you were born, I guess, real big bands were popular, but then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, [Count] Basie--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Duke [Ellington]--things along that line, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then things kinda get towards the mid '40s [1940s], bebop starts.
Speaker 2: Yeah, then it becomes more soloistic kind of things.
Speaker 1: Combos.
Speaker 2: But you--but you still had--you still had Basie and people like that with the big bands, yeah, 'cause that was still goin' on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you consider your, your, your older brother more of a bebopper?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was into--he was into, as he called it, progressive jazz, yeah.
Speaker 1: There you go, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 159958
Speaker 1: These musical influences--we were just talking off-camera about Detroit's [Michigan] place in music history.  Now you were--you were a good kid going to church and stuff.  Did you ever have a chance to go to--did you ever go to Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan] or, or--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't 'cause that was--
Speaker 1: Not, not, not Black Bottom, but--
Speaker 2: --That, that, that--
Speaker 1: --What do they call it?  The Paradise Valley [Detroit, Michigan] or, or--
Speaker 2: The Paradise Theater [later Orchestra Hall, Detroit, Michigan] and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember going to the Paradise once, and that was when my parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] and I went and I remember it took me a long time to put it all together, but that was when the Will Mastin Trio was there with Sammy Davis, Jr., and, and I remember I must've been about seven or eight or nine years old.  I mean, so, so I recall--or maybe--I don't--I don't know how old I was, but I remember being a kid and going there and, and--because my parents wanted to see that, you know.  But, you see, you know, there was this big thing about being on the, the West Side [Detroit, Michigan] versus the East Side [Detroit, Michigan], you know, so the--there was a--the East Side unless--especially the Near East Side had kind of a--had a, a negative kind of connotation to it.  Far East was fine, so--you know, it was--but the West Side, everybody thought they were better than everybody else for some strange reason.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So there's a lot of--well, the, the jazz--the jazz is down there near the, the Paradise Theater and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --The live jazz.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the clubs that were there, yeah, right.  I'm tryin' to think--'cause I didn't go to the--to the clubs that--'cause I wasn't old enough at that point, but there was a place called the World Stage Theater [sic, World Stage, Detroit, Michigan] where kids could go and listen to the players.  And this is where you would go and listen to people like Barry Harris, you'd hear Yusef Lateef, you'd hear Bernard McKinney [later Kiane Zawadi] who was a euphonium jazz player, you'd hear Johnny Griffin.  I mean, you would hear all of these amazing players.  And, see at that point, I thought I was gonna be a jazz musician.  I mean, I was brought up with that kind--until I found out I didn't have the talent for it and went in a different direction.  But there were--but also, you see, in, in the schools, we all--we, we went to hear the Detroit Symphony [Orchestra, DSO].  I mean, in elementary school [at Sherrill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], you would have field trips where you would go to hear the Detroit Symphony, and you would be well prepared on the music that they were going to perform as a part of your studies in school, and so when you--and, you know, that would be a time when you would dress up, put on a shirt and tie, and go to hear the DSO, yeah.
Story_ID: 159959
Speaker 1: Well, let me kinda go back to Sherrill Ele--
Speaker 2: Sherrill Elementary [School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: --elementary, yeah.  What were you interested in in school?  Did you--now you were taking piano lessons--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I also played clarinet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I played in the band and the orchestra, and I sang in the glee clubs in elementary school, and continued--that, that was--that was a--an elementary school that went through the eighth grade, so it was a K-8 school.
Speaker 1: Now were there any significant teachers or mentors at Sherrill?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were.  I mean, I can remember a lot of the people who, who had influence.  The, the band director's name was Mr. Zapalowski [ph.], Z-A-P-A-L-O-W-S-K-I.  The orchestra's teacher's name was Mr. Kraemer [ph.], spelled with a K-R-A-E-M-E-R.  The general music vocal teacher was Mrs. Heath [ph.], H-E-A-T-H.  And that was also the time, too, when all the boys took shop classes, so Mr. Pugh [ph.] was the shop teacher.  And I mean, I--it's amazing that things we learned in shop, you still use today as far as doing things at home, you know, how to fix electrical cords and all that.  People say, "How'd you learn that?"  I said, "Learned it in shop."  But, but the music there was, was very--in elementary school was very, very important.  And then when I got to high school [at Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan], it became even more so because we had specialists in high school as well.  See, the thing about Detroit [Michigan], is they had specialists teaching.  It was not--it was not the home room teacher who taught music as an aside.  They had people who were specifically trained to teach music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is why Detroit became, as I said before, a mecca for music, because all the schools had it.
Speaker 1: Now did you have to purchase your own clarinet?
Speaker 2: I did.  My--we--eventually, I bought mine.  But at, at first, they had--the school had their own instruments, and eventually I bought my own clarinet.  My parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] bought me a clarinet.
Speaker 1: But if you did not have one, if you were a student who didn't have one, you could--
Speaker 2: There were school instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So, so theoretically, a student could learn how or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or borrow an instrument before he could get his own.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: And that was a good way of learning whether or not you were--your parents wanted to invest in it to see what you were going to do with it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--and, so you, you started Sherrill, so, in say, well 1945?
Speaker 2: Three, '43 [1943].
Speaker 1: '43 [1943]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from, from kindergarten to--
Speaker 2: Kindergarten through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, K and eight, so--alright.  So by 19--
Speaker 2: I started--
Speaker 1: 19--
Speaker 2: --This is '52 [1952].
Story_ID: 159960
Speaker 1: I graduated [from Sherrill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] in--well, it would've been January of '52 [1952] and then I started Chadsey High School [Detroit, Michigan] at that point.
Speaker 2: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: C-H-A-D-S-E-Y.
Speaker 2: Chadsey High School, okay.
Speaker 1: And that was those days where you had mid-year graduations and that kinda thing.  So I was--because my birthday was in January, I started school in the winter, so everything happened mid-year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So went to Chadsey from--and, again, that was a, a great school from--again, an integrated school, participated in sports and music as well--but, but, but my curriculum was college preparatory.  I was a college prep student.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so did you play any--I mean, you said sports.  Which, which ones did you play?
Speaker 1: Track and tennis.
Speaker 2: Oh, track and tennis, okay.  What did you run in track?
Speaker 1: Quarter mile.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Badly, slowly.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) and, and tennis, were you a good tennis player?
Speaker 1: I was a pretty good tennis player, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.  And you said--now, now were, were your heroes musicians at this point?
Speaker 1: You know, that's interesting.  I think I had sports heroes.  You know, whoever was--I mean, you know, that, that was the time when, you know, when Jackie Robinson broke into the league, the thing.  And I used to--I was a catcher on the baseball team when--'cause, I mean, we also had--we also even--we had recreational baseball teams, you know, and I was a catcher, so Roy ["Campy"] Campanella became a hero and people like that.  I'm not really sure at that point that I had music heroes.  I think heroes were people that, that you heard your parents talk about like Benjamin Mays and people like that who, who they thought a lot of and, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay now, now, now that's--that's interesting, too--
Story_ID: 159961
Speaker 1: So your, your people know about Benjamin Mays--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and talking about--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --him.  So even though--had, had anyone in your family been to college that you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --know of at that point?
Speaker 2: No, I'm the first college graduate in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that is even more interesting that Ben--Benjamin Mays would be a hero--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for people that had never been to college, so they--
Speaker 2: My father [Major Lee Harris] was--and, and, and then I had an uncle who was--and this is an--this--we still talk about this, my cousins and I.  His name was Thomas--he, he was my mother's--he was my grandmother's brother.  His name was Thomas Griggs.  But Uncle, for some unexplainable reason that we couldn't figure out, who had never been formally educated, knew everything.  There was nothing, no topic that you could talk about that he could not give you more information about than you knew.  I remember when I was in college [at Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], my first year, and this is probably getting ahead of the game, but I'll--we can do it--and I was--we were--we--well, we were in English class reading the essay, 'On Liberty' by John Stuart Mill, philosopher.  And I was having a heck of a time understanding that piece, and Uncle came over for dinner one Sunday, and he says, "Well, tell me what you're doing in school, son."  And I said, "Well, Uncle, I'm trying to read this, this essay on John Stuart Mill."  "Oh, that's a great essay," and then he went ahead and gave me a complete synopsis of that thing.  And I sat there and listened to him talk about that.  You know, he could talk--he could--if you were--if you were dealing with Shakespeare, he knew it.  And, and it was nothing he--when he--when he would read my papers, for instance, if I got--if I got--if I wrote an essay or something and I got a C, he said, "Let me read it," and he would read it.  And he said, "Well the reason you got a C was you didn't deal with this, you didn't deal with that, you should've dealt with"--you know, you know--I mean, it was just amazing.  And so we, we used to sit there and say, "How does Uncle know all this stuff?"  Well when Uncle finally died and we went in to clear out his room 'cause he stayed at my grandmother's house, he never left that house, he must've had a thousand books.  He was a self-educated man.  He knew architecture, he knew history, he knew literature.  I mean, it was just--and that--and I'd have to say, that was an influence about having a person in your family who was articulate and could speak on anything well, plus the fact my parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] had books, you know, on Benjamin Mays and, and--I mean--and, you know, [W.E.B.] Du Bois and things like that.  I mean, all that stuff was right there in the house, you know.
Speaker 1: Now that's, that's something that's--your, your uncle's story, you know, I know people like him and there, there aren't that many of them, but there are--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --people that will set their own mission.
Speaker 2: Always had on a shirt and tie, always was well dressed, you know, shined shoes, you know.  And he would come to our house for dinner every Sunday and could sit and talk about anything.
Speaker 1: That's something.  What, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was just--I think Uncle was a butler and that kind of person, domestic kind of person.  I think--I think a lot of--I think he acquired a lot of his books and things from people he was working for, you know.  I never knew any--never knew him to have a job other than that kind of thing, you know.  He always worked for wealthy white folk.
Speaker 1: Is that a thread that runs through your family, that, that kind of connection with, with wealthy--
Speaker 2: No, Uncle was the only person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  My, my, my uncles--as I said, my father was a laborer at Ford, my uncles, my mother's brothers worked--both--all worked for Ford until they decided to do something different and my uncle became a--one of my uncles became a car salesman and the other--I forgot what uncle, but, but, but that was basically the kinda thing they did.
Speaker 1: So he was--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --He was an inspiration.
Speaker 2: He was an inspiration.  And, and he was--he was an anomaly.  I mean, you just--you just couldn't--you know, I still think back on that and think about some of the conversations we had in high school and, and how he was just--he knew it.  My cousins and I would say, "How did Uncle learn all that?  You know, where'd he learn all that?  He didn't go to school."  Yeah, and was extraordinarily articulate.
Story_ID: 159962
Speaker 1: Now, was he [Harris' uncle, Thomas Griggs] a member of any organiza--or your parents [Rush Harris and Major Lee Harris], any organizations in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: No.  The Urban League [of Detroit & Southeastern Michigan]--I think my parents were a member of the Urban League.  But I don't remember Uncle having any affiliation like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know when, when we were in--
Speaker 2: Or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: I think there was a black history organization formed by [HM] Damon Keith's brother--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --around that period of time and I--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I don't--I can't remember the exact name of it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but it was on the West Side--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Detroit, yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it--not at the Nacirema Club [sic, Nacirema Club was founded in 1922 by Raymond H. Menard and Julian Archer], was it?
Speaker 1: I'm--
Speaker 2: That was the--Nacirema was a--was a social club on the West Side of Detroit, and Nacirema was American spelled backwards.
Speaker 1: It might--I--it might've been.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I, I can't remember now.
Speaker 2: Because they used to have--they used to have people--book study things and all that kinda thing going on at the Nacirema Club as well as social activities.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The, the person that was telling us about it was [HM] Luther Keith who wrote for the Detroit Free Press and that was his father that had the history club, and I think he became the Detroit rep [representative] for the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [later the Association for the Study of African American Life and History, ASALH], at least for a period of time, so that's--I wondered 'cause these, these, these study groups are another part of history that people--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Don't talk about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --That people, you know, actually came together for intellectual enrichment and did things like that.  So, so your, your, your Uncle Thomas Griggs.  Okay, so as far as you know, he wasn't in any, any group or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: As far as I know, no.
Speaker 1: They got that great library in Detroit, the Burton Collection [Burton Historical Collection, Detroit Public Library, Detroit, Michigan], down there with everything and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You, you can find a couple people that are something like him there right now (laughter) reading everything.
Story_ID: 159963
Speaker 1: Now--when you were in high school [at Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan], did you get involved in student government or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I was on the student council.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was on the--I was on the staff of the--of the school paper.  But primarily, I was involved in music activities 'cause, I mean, I took every music class I could.  I was in band.  I was in orchestra.  I was in jazz band.  I was in the choirs.  I was in glee clubs along with my normal studies for college prep curriculum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So were there any particular teachers or mentors in high school that you remember?
Speaker 2: My band director's name was Samuel Barnett [ph.], and he just died a couple years ago.  In fact, when we had a fiftieth reunion a few years back, I went over and picked him up and took him to the reunion, and he was an amazing man.  And then the, the person who probably had the most influence was my choral director whose name was Doris Lenz, L-E-N-Z.  And even after--and she continued to teach in the--in the school system long after I had graduated from high school and college [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  In fact, she had me come back to one of the schools 'cause she was teaching as a guest conductor once. I remember that.  But she--these two people had a--had a real influence on me.
Story_ID: 159964
Speaker 1: Now when did you start collecting classical music and start really paying attention to classical music?
Speaker 2: When I was about ten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what--was it because of school or?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--yeah, that, but plus, I was--I was just drawn to it.  And, and there was--there was these records that you could buy at the supermarket called Music Treasures of the World and I would save up my allowance and buy them and just listen to the symphonies of, of these things on, on, on the--on the stereo.  You know, they were like--I think they were a dollar forty-nine a piece or something like that.
Speaker 1: Is that the kinda deal like the encyclopedias where you get the first one free and then you--the rest of 'em?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think you got the first one free, there's--you just--I think you just bought 'em.  And, and every, every--I think every so often, there would be different ones, so I used to collect them and listen to 'em.  And I think--I think being influenced, too, by the music, being involved in music in the school, being influenced greatly by the music I heard in my dad's [Major Lee Harris] church [Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, you said--
Speaker 2: I remember one time--the, the, the choir director as I mentioned earlier at my father's church was a man by the name of Charles Spates [ph.], and he used to use a baton.  And I remember going up to him one day and saying after church one Sunday and saying, "Mr. Spates, what is that stick that you use?"  He said, "That's my baton," and he explained to me that it gave him a chance to be more precise and the choir had a better idea of what he wanted if he used it.  And I asked him, I said, I waited for him, and I said, "Can I have it?"  And he said, "No," he said, "But I'll tell you what, when I buy a new one, I'll give you the old one," and he did.  And, I'm, I'm wondering if that might not have been the impetus for becoming a conductor.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it.  How old were you when you got it?
Speaker 2: Probably nine or ten years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's something.  Okay.
Story_ID: 159965
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the composer or the work that you first, first hooked you on classical music?
Speaker 2: I think--well, first of all, the, the choir at that point--at that point in, in Detroit [Michigan], there was--in, in the churches that, that we attended, there was very little of what we would consider gospel music.  It was all anthems and, and spirituals.  And the spiritual tradition was very, very strong, which is--and, and I'm sorry to say that has kinda gone by the wayside nowadays in most churches, but they sang spirituals and anthems and they sang--I heard 'Messiah' for instance, I heard 'Elijah,' I heard the [Theodore] Dubois 'Seven Last Words of Christ.'  I mean, I heard all these things by my father's [Major Lee Harris] choir in a black church [Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Kind of explain those, those different genres to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who, who--whoever manages to listen to this later on.  Tell me the--
Speaker 2: Well, of course, everybody knows the arrangement and those spirituals, okay.  But anthems--
Speaker 1: Well spirituals are--now, that's--it's important to explain that.
Speaker 2: Okay, well a spiritual is a religious folk piece, and they were arranged by basically educated black musicians like William [Levi] Dawson, William Grant Still, well a couple--let's see who else should come to mind real quickly--well I should--I should know--Hall Johnson, people like this.  And, and, and what, what they did was take the spiritual melodies and put them into a more sophisticated arrangement so that they were more--they were more structured, and these were all printed, and so--I mean, so all of the things like 'Ain'-a That Good News' and, I mean, all the spirituals that, that had--that were meaningful at that point by, by any given arranger were, were put into published arrangements that were done by choirs that could read music or could learn music from the printed page.  So rather than--but, but--basically spirituals are just folk pieces.  They're the melodies themselves, but what these particular musicians did was take them and harmonize them in such a way that they became a little bit more sophisticated in the way that they were put forth.
Speaker 1: An example of a spiritual would be--in that form, would be?
Speaker 2: Well, anything by William Dawson or [Francis] Hall Johnson or Still or Eva Jessye or these people who were very much--who were learned musicians of the time.
Speaker 1: Give us an example of a song, a specific song.
Speaker 2: 'Ain'-a That Good News.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'There is a Balm in Gilead.'
Speaker 1: And it goes like, "Ain-a that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (singing) "I got a crown up in the kingdom, ain'a that good news.  I got a crown up in the kingdom, ain'a that good news."  And then, (singing) "There is a balm in Gilead to make the wounded whole" that kinda thing, and these things were for choir, not just for solo voice, so you had the choir singing harmony and singing interweaving melodies and counterpoint and things along that line, which they made--make them--which made them put them on another level as far as sophistication is concerned.
Speaker 1: These are the songs that emerged--
Speaker 2: These are--
Speaker 1: --organically from the people.
Speaker 2: These are songs of the people.  Yeah, these were the songs that, that our forefathers sang in the fields, and, and in their own religious services without them being in any particular arrangement.  They would just be--you know, a deacon may light it up in a--in a--in a hymn.  He might say, "There's a balm" and then everybody would go, (singing) "There is a balm" and, of course, there was no sophistication to it, it was just--and no accompaniment, just people singing.  Well what people that I--the people that I've just mentioned would do were take these melodies and arrange them in such a way that they could be learned by choirs in a more formal arrangement.
Story_ID: 159966
Speaker 1: And then we had anthems, which were just pieces which were composed works for church, for choirs that were basically based on religious or scriptural texts.  Okay, then we had oratorios, which were the things like [Johann Sebastian] Bach and [George Frideric] Handel and [Felix] Mendelssohn, and major composers like that.
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute.  Now, can you give an example of an anthem and kinda sing a few bars of one for us so we know--have a--
Speaker 1: It's kinda hard to sing a, a few bars of an anthem because--well, I'm thinking--you know, it's such a wide variety of pieces like that.  Back--
Speaker 2: Well, what are some of 'em that are popular?  I mean that we would hear.
Speaker 1: Oh, there are thousands.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think.  If I--if I think back to something I may have heard at that time, (singing) "Let Mount Zion rejoice, let Mount Zion rejoice."  These are--this is what I would've heard my father's [Major Lee Harris] choirs (singing)--"Zum-bah-bah-bah-bah-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee, dah-dun-dah-dah-dah-dah-dee-dee-dee" and these are all the things which are with organ or with piano, and they would--and they would be harmonized for the--for sopranos, altos, tenors, and basses by the full choir.  And these would be--I mean, these were the kinds of things I heard, which were more formally--these were pieces which were written by people based on the European tradition of composition--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Primarily.  The genre itself now is, is, is widespread.  I mean, there are different--and as, as the--as we have progressed into our time now, I mean, there are all--there's all different kinds.  But, but then again--but everybody would know 'Messiah' for instance.  I would've heard that oratorio in the church.
Speaker 2: Like Handel's 'Messiah?'
Speaker 1: Handel's 'Messiah,' yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  That's the--that's the number forty-one.  That's the fine--that's the big chorus in 'Messiah' that everybody knows.  But I would've heard the whole thing.  There were fifty-three pieces in that, fifty-three selections in that oratorio.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: At one point or another, I would've heard them all because they would've--they would have done the Christmas portion at one time, they would've done the Easter portion at another time, but by the time I was an adult, a young adult, I had heard the whole thing done at that church [Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--Handel wrote--it was basically the life of Christ in music, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, it's just--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the 'Messiah' is the life of Christ.  But it's an interesting oratorio in that it never mentions Christ's name, never says Jesus, never says Christ.  It talks about--it goes to the very, very beginning going back to the prophecy, "And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed," all of these things, which come from, from--from Elijah, from Isaiah, and it takes you right through to the--to the--through the crucifixion through the resurrection.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: An anthem--
Speaker 1: An anthem--you know, we--for instance, in my church [Winnetka Congregational Church, Winnetka, Illinois] right now, I might take one movement out of 'Messiah' and, and call it anthem for the church service, okay.  An anthem is a sacred piece for choir and organ primarily based on a religious text.  But it's, it's not an arrangement as a spiritual would be. It is an actual composition, so someone has to have a text, sit down, and write the music to this.  It's not based upon something he or she may have heard before.
Speaker 2: Now we were moving on to another form, which was--that you had almost gone to it when I had to--drug you back to anthem.
Speaker 1: Well that was--that was the oratorio.
Speaker 2: Oratorio, okay.
Speaker 1: That would be Handel's 'Messiah.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That would be [Felix] Mendelssohn's 'Elijah.'  And then it would be a cantata, which could be something like, 'The Seven Last Words of Christ' by [Theodore] Dubois or things like--I mean--which is like an oratorio, but it's a little shorter--cantata would be a shorter version.  An oratorio is basically based on scriptural texts. A cantata does not necessarily have to be, but it's still an extended work for a choir and orchestra or choir and, and organ, or whatever the case might be.
Story_ID: 159967
Speaker 1: What work, I guess--
Speaker 2: Was an influence?
Speaker 1: Yeah, hooked you on classical--I mean, there must've been something you heard first that, that you said, "Ooh--"
Speaker 2: I don't know, I was just--I was just drawn to it by--you know, just listening on the radio and then getting those records that I used to get.  I was just drawn to it--I'll tell you something that did have a, a strong influence, though, well that was Leonard Bernstein when he had this, this 'Young People's Guide to the Orchestra' [sic, 'Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra']--I mean, this, this, this television thing that was on every Sunday where he described music and he just--that was just mind boggling.  I mean, you just couldn't--you were just totally focused on his teaching about that.  I had a chance to meet him later in life and told him how that had been an influence on my life.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember watching those, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When he would--
Speaker 2: I mean that was just--because he was such--you know, Bernstein is probably one of the greatest musicians produced in America because I can't think of anybody else, one of the greatest I'm saying, who was a world class composer, conductor, pianist, and teacher.  He excelled in all areas.
Speaker 1: And created for the popular--the Broadway stage--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --As well as the--
Speaker 2: Composer, yeah.  Classical music, Broadway music. The man was a genius, absolute genius.
Speaker 1: I think the, the line was in those days that you couldn't do both.  You couldn't do Broadway music and classical.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but Bernstein broke that barrier down because he did 'em and he excelled, so they had to accept it.
Speaker 1: So this is--other musicians we've interviewed also mention Bernstein and, and the, the position that they're in as African American musicians, where they have a musical tradition that's not classical, usually that's the--that's the one they adopt, but they have another musical tradition, and they try to balance these two traditions.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah--well, you know, case in point was Wynton Marsalis.  Wynton started--Wynton, Wynton made his mark as a--as a classical trumpet soloist, you know, playing all the concerti for trumpets before he finally decided, enough of that, I'm gonna--because he was always a jazz musician, but he was also a highly, highly trained trumpet player as a classical musician, and he bridged both areas himself.  At this point, however, he's, he's not doing any classical stuff anymore, but he's doing primarily jazz, but--and he excels in that, and he's also a very gifted composer.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think I mentioned before we started, Detroit's [Detroit, Michigan] own [HM] Charles Burrell who--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Went from, you know, a jazz bass to--he plays in the Detroit Symphony [Orchestra, DSO].
Speaker 2: I, I do remember that name.  He was a little before me.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I remember his name in Detroit [Michigan], yeah.
Speaker 1: He should be in his eighties now, Charles Burrell, right.  He's the uncle of Dianne Reeves.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he, he talked about that same kind of, you know, tension and balance, and, you know, between the two.
Speaker 2: It--it's kinda hard to have been in a way--even though--this is not--well I know people who didn't, but, I mean, I, I had a lot of, of people who I--who I was associated with when I was coming up who were really involved in classical music who did not really have an affinity for jazz.  Even though they may have appreciated it, they never were involved.  I think about some friends that I had who were mentors to me.  But for some reason because--I think because of my brother's [Maurice Jenkins] influence, I, I was going back and forth.  And, and as I said before, I thought I wanted to be a jazz musician until I started hearing what the, the real people were doing and decided, no, I'm not that good.
Speaker 1: Now, now was this on the piano or?
Speaker 2: On piano, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: For some reason, the clarinet gets left out (laughter) of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --jazz, you know.  I mean--I mean Dixieland [], it's--it has a presence, but--
Speaker 2: But there was some--there were some fine jazz clarinetists.  In fact, I have a very close associate right now, Victor Goines, who is an extraord--incredible jazz clarinetist, yeah.
Story_ID: 159968
Speaker 1: I don't know. I find it hard to believe when I interview a good musician that, that they, they don't think they're good enough to play something, but you, you, you never liked your, your own jazz?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't that good.  I mean, you know, you, you come--I, I thought I was good until one day I heard--you may know the name, her name was Alice McLeod at that--she became Alice Coltrane.  She--I was at a--at a--at a dance once and we were--where we used to go and used to have jazz and, and, and so, I saw this band setting up and I went over and, and talked to the piano player and said, "How you doing?"  And she said, "Fine."  And I said, "Are you the singer with the band?"  She said, "No, I'm the piano player," and I said, "Oh, I play, too."  And she said, "Oh, well maybe you can come in and sit down--sit in with us tonight."  And I said, "Oh, that'd be nice."  And then I heard her play and I stayed as far away from that band as I could, and I knew at that point that I didn't have it.  I didn't have that kind of inventiveness as far as--as far as improvisation.  And--I mean, I just--I just realized at that point--'cause I--what I really thought, I was gonna go to the Berklee School of Music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts] when I graduated from high school [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan] and study jazz, but at that point, I realized that it wasn't--you know, you, you, you come to realize where you have talent and where you don't, and I'm glad I recognized it at that point because it would've been--I wouldn't have been that good.
Story_ID: 159969
Speaker 1: So in high school [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan], did you--now you were in a college preparatory course and I'm sure your family--your, your family, who was education oriented, they're pushing--they want you to go to college, right?  Did you have any doubt you were gonna go to--go to college?
Speaker 2: The interesting thing about this is that I can remember being a child and saying when I go to college, I'm going to do so-and-so.  And I didn't--and when I think back on it, I don't ever remember having heard what college was, and I don't ever--I don't really think I knew what it was, but for some strange reason, somewhere that word had popped into my thinking and I used it all the time, when I go to college, when I go to college.  Because I don't ever remember my, my parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] talking to me about that.  Now I do remember that when I was in elementary school [at Sherrill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] and it was time to graduate from elementary school, that we had to declare what curriculum we wanted when we went to college--went to high school.  And Ms. Thompson [ph.] who was the assistant--and became principal said, "Now you go home and talk to your parents.  You can either go into trade or you can go into commercial or you can go in this and you can go into college prep," whatever it was, okay.  So I went home and I said, "Momma, we have to make a decision tomorrow about what we wanna do when we go to high school," and she said, "Tell 'em college prep."  I said, "Okay," so I went back the next day and so when it came to me and they said Robert Harris, what--I said college prep.  Now, Ms. Thompson said, "Well now, Robert, now, you know, maybe you ought to think about going into a trade or maybe--"I said, "Ms., Ms. Thompson, my mother said college prep."  And then she went on and she tried--she said, "Well maybe you ought to think about doing"--I said, "My mother said college prep."
Speaker 1: Now how were your grades at that point?
Speaker 2: I don't know, they were satisfactory.  I mean, I was--I mean, I don't--I was in elementary school, I don't--I mean, I was--I was smart in elementary school.  I mean, I was one of the best readers in the class and that kinda thing, but I don't remember being an exceptional student.  But the point was, I remember this person trying to talk the black kids out of taking the college--and she talked some of 'em out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I said, "My mother said college prep," so that was the curriculum I had--
Speaker 1: Well I asked that question just to make the point, but we've heard this story a lot with (laughter) the teacher, the white teacher that tries to discourage--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, I mean, it's even--it's in the autobiography of Malcolm X and, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I guess there are hundreds of people we've interviewed having the same--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they--that was that time.  They, you know.
Speaker 1: So. Anyway so you took college prep anyway--
Story_ID: 159970
Speaker 1: In terms of other black folks, was it--was it lonely in class--
Speaker 2: No.  I mean--
Speaker 1: --At that school?
Speaker 2: --You know, I mean--
Speaker 1: --High school [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: --I don't--I'm trying to think--there were--the majority of my peers who were African American kids didn't--were not in the college preparatory curriculum, but we all had the same classes together.  I mean, you know--I mean, there were certain courses you had to take but you know we were--we were--the classes were integrated from the standpoint of, of people with different--now the kids who were in trades--Chadsey had a very strong department, trade department where you could become a welder or you could become a--all that kinda stuff, and you could become a cook, and all that, so you had that kinda thing, too, so those kids, we didn't see much.  But the kids who were in--in the--in the--in the regular curricula, which was commercial or whatever it was--I forgot what they called it.
Speaker 1: General courses.
Speaker 2: General, yeah.  We would have certain classes together.  But, but, but, you see, the, the curriculum that I was in, you had to take algebra, you had to take geometry, you had to take Latin for, for two years.  You know, I mean, I had all that stuff, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was--I was a mediocre student for the first two years.  And, and then I remember saying something in high school to my counselor about getting ready to go to college, and she said, "You--you're really thinking about going to college?  Have you looked at your grades?"  I mean, I was gettin' C's and, and I just--and she said, "You're not gonna get in any college."  And I remember that, that was my first semester junior year when she said that to me, so for the second semester--no, first--that was the second semester sophomore.  From the rest, junior, senior, A's and B's, just (snaps fingers) do it.
Speaker 1: You just--you just hadn't applied yourself?
Speaker 2: Just hadn't applied myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So you had like STEM [science, technology, engineering and math] courses, the sciences and higher math.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, they didn't have higher math.  I didn't--I took geometry.  I didn't--I didn't take trigonometry 'cause I figured I'd still be in high school if I had to take trigonometry, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 159971
Speaker 1: Now what was your counseling like in high school [at Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan] in terms of college?  Did they still try to kinda discourage you from--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I remember, you know, it was--I--you know the interesting thing is--this, this is going to--I tell people this and it's interesting in a way--from the time I started elementary school to having received a Ph.D., I never had a black teacher.
Speaker 1: Now that's remarkable.  That's--especially growin' up in Detroit [Michigan], you would think that there'd be at least one.
Speaker 2: Which has kind of, you know--kind of influenced me to try to be a, a, a great teacher and mentor to my students, you know, because--you know, I've had--I've had--I've had--I know that I've had at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], 'cause I taught at Northwestern for thirty-five years, I know that I might have been, by, by the way certain people reacted, the first black professional that many of these kids ever saw.  Because, you know, a, a great number of the students--this is not putting anybody down, but a great number of the--of the--of the white people who come to Northwestern are, are wealthy.  And I'm sure that, that, the only interaction they may have had may have been with domestics or something, you know.
Speaker 1: That's, that's pretty much right, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when--so when you were a senior and were on the verge of graduation, you, you said you were in student council, right?  You played tennis.  Were there any other activities that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Other than musical activities, no.  The student council--and, and then of, of course, the--I was in the, the journal--journalism club because I--I thought I was gonna--I thought I wanted to be a journalist at one point, so I was on the student--on the student paper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So this is something that you were interested in as--did it have the same pull as music?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  You see, I, I didn't--I hadn't made the decision to, to major in music in college.  I thought I was gonna be--I thought I was gonna be a--I wanted to be a--I think I put on my college application, pharmacy, journalism, and then music in that order, and my counselor said, "What is with this pharmacy stuff?"  I said, "Well, you know, it's--I think it would be a nice profession," I said because, you know, "I, I have a nice relationship with our neighborhood pharmacist because I have to go there to get my mother's [Rusha Harris] meds all the time."  She said--she said, "Journalism?"  I said, "Well I like being on"--she said, "Robert Harris, let me ask you a question.  What activity have you been doing consistently without a doubt four years in this high school?"  I said, "Music?"  She said, "Uh-huh," so at that point, we scratched out everything and we started over again and put music.  And I remember that in my senior year.  That was when I made a decision that I was going to go to college and become a music--I mean what I was gonna major in when I got to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--now, now was there anything special about graduation?  Did you get a chance to lead chorus or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was--yeah, at graduation, I, I conducted the, the band and, and the--played in the band, conducted the band, and conducted the, the, the hymn and all that stuff, so they let me do that for graduation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there--do you recall what it was like when you first got the baton to conduct a, a chorus or choir?  I, I mean--
Speaker 2: It was scary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--that was--that, that was the moment.  That was in high school getting ready to graduate and they put that thing in my hand and I didn't know what to do with it, really.  I mean, I hadn't had any conducting practice.  I hadn't had any, any lessons in conducting.  I had watched my teachers but, I mean, I wasn't aware of, of exactly what--how they did--what they did technically and how it affected, I just knew that I'm--I knew that we followed it, but I didn't--I wasn't aware of the--of the technical aspects of conducting at that point.  And so I got a real quick mini course so that I would not make a idiot of myself at graduation.  And, of course, then in high school--in college, of course, we studied it formally.
Story_ID: 159972
Speaker 1: So you went to Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: Went to Wayne State, yeah, for two degrees.
Speaker 1: Now did you consider going anywhere else?
Speaker 2: No.  You know, it's interesting, too.  I didn't because, you know, I was born in Detroit [Michigan].  I never even thought about even going to Ann Arbor or the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  I never even thought about going to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  Wayne was in town. I was living at home. I could live at home and go to school.  Never--it never crossed my mind.
Speaker 1: So you must've been pretty happy at home.
Speaker 2: I was happy at home, had a good--I had a good home, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So what was Wayne State like?  Now, so, so you commuted--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --To Wayne State.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--you graduated from high school in '56 [1956]?
Speaker 2: '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: 1956.  This is the year of the, the completion of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, was in the news--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --As Adlai Stevenson runs against [Dwight] Eisenhower but he loses.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is--you know, I'm just gettin' some--you know, the Civil Rights Movement is just really starting to hit national news.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I think my mother [Rusha Harris] voted for Eisenhower.
Speaker 1: Did she?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I--and I--and I, and I think she did that because I think that was the time--was it Korea [Korean War, 1950-1953] was just--I think--was it Korea at the--at '50 [1950]--
Speaker 1: Korea had, had ended up by then I think--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--or he--but anyway, I think as a part of his platform, he had said that he was going to get us out of Korea, and my mother was thinking, "That's gonna keep my son outta the [U.S.] Army."  I, I mean, I think that was part of her thinking, yeah.  But, I mean, I think she voted for Eisenhower.
Story_ID: 159973
Speaker 1: Detroit [Michigan]--what was--what were things like in Detroit for black folks then?  You got--it was--should've been--this is the Golden Age of Detroit on some levels, right?
Speaker 2: Well, the music school, the music building in Detroit at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] was on, on a street called Cass Avenue [Detroit, Michigan].  Right across the street was a restaurant called Cobb's.  I remember one day, one of my professors, another man who had a great influence on my life, his name was Malcolm [Maclean] Johns, said, "I don't feel like teaching today.  We're all going for coffee."  And there were two or three of us black kids in the class who start walking the other way.  He said, "Wait a minute, we're all going to Cobb's for coffee."  And we said, "Mr. Johns, Cobb's doesn't serve colored people," and his remark was, "I'll be damn. You're going to Cobb's with us."  So we went and we sat at the table and the, the waitress came and she gave this person water, this person water, she skipped over me, and she gave this person water.  He said, "You didn't give him water."  We integrated that restaurant that day because of Malcolm Johns.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story.  So he took it right to the--
Speaker 2: Took it right--
Speaker 1: --Street.
Speaker 2: Took it to the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that day, for the first time, they served black people.  I had a similar experience when I was in college when we went--when--I'm an Alpha [Phi Alpha], and we had a national convention in Washington [D.C.] at a Sheraton Hotel, and one of the things that it said--when you, when you checked in, they said if you're--if you are staying at the hotel, you have access to the pool.  Well, some of us put on our bathing suits and went down and get ready--they wouldn't let us into the pool.  This is Washington, D.C., in probably 1958, '9 [1959], somewhere in there.  And we said, "But we're staying in the hotel," and he says, "Well you have to be a member of the private club to be in the pool."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So anyway--now you cannot tell a bunch of fraternity men who are staying at a hotel they can't do something.  So everybody put on their bathing suits, and we went down there en masse, and we integrated the pool at the Sheraton Hotel in Washington, D.C., at the--at that Alpha convention.
Speaker 1: Yeah, D.C. was still the South.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Still Virginia or Maryland--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This was in '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Somewhere through there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, still--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Still segregated.  So--
Speaker 2: No, that would've been probably '61 [1961], '62 [1962] 'cause I remember I had a brand new car and I didn't get a car until I was teaching school, so '61 [1961], '62 [1962], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's even worse than if it's that late.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.  President [John F. Kennedy] has to address civil rights issues going on in Alabama and, and Georgia, and other places when (laughter) right outside of the, the White House, you know, the same segregation is going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 159974
Speaker 1: What were your studies like at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan] and who were your mentors there?
Speaker 2: The man I mentioned, Malcolm [Maclean] Johns.  A wonderful woman whose name was Ruth [Shaw] Wylie was my first composition teacher, James Gibb, and he's the man who all these jazz musicians used to come back and be in class with because he was--he was--he, he for some reason was able to, to get them excited about what they were learning.  And, and, and the thing is, it would be interesting for those of us who were to some extent theoretically oriented, guys like Yusef [Lateef] and, and people would ask him a question about something which would interest him, and he would almost leave what we were talking about to, to address that because it was exciting to him, and this is--and so this is why it was a very interesting time to be in there.  His name was James Gibb.  He was a wonderful theory, theory teacher.  Ruth Wylie, Robert Lawson who was also a theory teacher, and Harry Langsford, who was also a choral person and a theory person.  The only--the only person there--James Gibb did not have a doctorate agree, Robert Lawson did not have a doctorate degree, but these people really made the word professor significant.  They were definitely professors.  They were not doctors, but they were professors.  They knew their business, and they were very, very influential.  I remember one time Mr. Gibb gave me a C in a course, and this was unheard of for, for--to get a C in a music class as a music major.  And I went to him and I said, "Mr. Gibb, you, you gave me a C in counterpoint."  He said, "Yeah."  I said, "Mr. Gibb, I don't get C's."  He said, "But you did C work."  I said, "But, but I--but I'm an A student."  He said, "Mr. Harris," he said, "You know, you can matriculate at Wayne State University and you can take--get a C in every course you take for four years and we'll still give you a degree.  It's a perfectly respectable grade."  I said, "But it's not respectable to me. I'm taking this class again."
Story_ID: 159975
Speaker 1: When you are a music major in school [at Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], do you have to learn how to play every instrument?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, you have a major instrument at that--yeah.
Speaker 1: It seems like so many do.  They come out with--they're, they're able to pick up this and pick up that.
Speaker 2: Well there's some--yeah, there are a lot of people who are.  For instance, if you're a woodwind specialist and they--for instance, right now, you learn to play saxophone, clarinet, flute, and all that stuff, see?  But at that point, I was in music education curriculum.  I was--I was training to be a music teacher, and my emphasis was in choral music, so I was a--my voice--voices was my major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And piano was my minor.
Speaker 1: Alright, so music education.  So was there--was this when you decided to give up jazz as a--when you were in, in college?  I, I think you were alluding to this--is it--this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still playin' a little bit, but I realized the fact that was not gonna be my forte, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So, so Wayne State--so you're there from 1956 to 1960 to get your bachelor's--
Speaker 2: Bachelor's, right.
Speaker 1: --degree?  Is it--did you have to produce a, a piece as a capstone piece for your bachelor's?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did for the master's but not for the bachelor's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, alright.  So, any stories about Wayne State or, or your, your studies that are significant?
Speaker 2: No, I think--I think--I think it, it was a--I think it was the right place for me at the right time.  I think that--I think I, I highly respected the teachers.  I think they respected me as a student, and that became evident when a couple of years later after, after--two years after I got my master's, I was invited to come back and join the faculty.
Story_ID: 159976
Speaker 1: After you graduated [from Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], you went on to teach in the public schools?
Speaker 2: Public schools.  I taught in the public schools for four and a half years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  While working on your master's degree [at Wayne State University]--
Speaker 2: No, I finished my master's in '62 [1962].  I had--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I had finished my master's in '62 [1962] and I had already started my doctorate at the University of Rochester in '63 [1963] on going part-time in the summers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --You didn't start teaching in the public schools until '62 [1962] then.
Speaker 2: I started in '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: '60 [1960], that's when--yeah, that's when I thought--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I--and then I worked on my master's while I was still teaching--I mean while I was teaching.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  That's what I--that's what I was saying--trying to say (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anyway, okay.  So you're working on your master's and teaching at the same time.  Now that--was, was that difficult to--
Speaker 2: No, it was part-time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, it just took me two years rather than one because you--you know, I mean, you're right there in town [Detroit, Michigan] and you took the courses that were needed to take, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did the--your, your studies overlap with your work in a way where you could--you could try something you were, you know--
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: --Working on in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I suppose all education does because I was teaching.  And any--anything that you're--when you're learning, you--I mean, that's always gonna take, take--to some extent influence how you teach, you know.
Speaker 1: And what, what, what schools did you teach at?
Speaker 2: I taught at Keating Elementary School [Detroit, Michigan], K-E-A-T-I-N-G, and then Webber Junior High School [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: It's W-B-B-E-R?
Speaker 2: B-B-double B-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159977
Speaker 1: And then it was while I was teaching at Webber [Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] that I was invited to come back and join the faculty at Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.  Now how did that take place?  Did, did you expect that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got a call out of the blue and, and, and they said, you know, that a professor there, her name was Mary LeBeau was going to be going on a one year's leave and would I entertain coming back and, and replacing her for one year.  And of course my aspiration had always been to be a college teacher, to teach on the college level.  And so that meant I had to give up a lot of things that I had acquired and learned and attained teaching public schools, 'cause I couldn't take a leave of absence to go somewhere else and teach, so I had to resign, and I had--I was about to be appointed the department head in a school and all of that, and I kept thinking, "Do I really wanna sacrifice that for a one-year appointment which means when I come back, I have no seniority anymore?  I gotta start back--at the beginning again?"  And I talked to my principal about it and he said, "I think you're making a big mistake, because I have the kind of influence that would get you the kind of position you want in this system, and I think your giving that up for a one-year instructorship is ridiculous."  And I said, "But I always wanted to be a college teacher."  He said, "Well you gotta give it some thought."  Well then when they--when the appointment letter came, it was for an assistant professorship and--rather than instructor because of the salary that they would have to pay me.  They were going to match the salary I was making with the public schools, and I said, well, I'm taking this risk.  And that one year turned into six because the lady never came back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the rest is history.  So I taught at Wayne for six years.
Story_ID: 159978
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit and ask you about your thesis, I guess, and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you had to do something.
Speaker 2: I had to do a thesis for my master's degree.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So what, what did you do?
Speaker 2: It was a--it was an oral history, isn't this interesting, called 'Serious Music and the Negro Musician Between 1920 and 1924:  An Oral History.'  And what I wanted to do was to, to trace what had happened with black musicians who were classically trained rather than in jazz in the early days, and so what I did was with the help of a--of a librarian and a--and a--and a gentleman by the name of Kemper Harrell who also became an, an influence and mentor, was to--he gave me the names of many living black musicians who had, were performing during that time like Roland Hayes, Carl Diton, I mean there was--and so we earmarked five people.  And what I did was I went with a tape recorder and I formulated a series of questions that I would ask everybody and then specific questions for that particular individual, and went to New York [City] and Boston [Massachusetts] and interviewed these people on tape, and then transcribed those tapes as a part of my--that was my master's thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So interviews with five people?  And Roland Hayes was one?
Speaker 2: Roland Hayes was one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who, who else?  Roland Hayes--
Speaker 2: Carl Diton, D-I-T-O-N, who was a composer, Melville Charlton, C-H-A-R-L-T-O-N, who was a concert organist, Charlotte Wallace Murray who was a concert singer--who else was there?  There's one more person I'm missing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--
Speaker 2: I interviewed [Francis] Hall Johnson, too, but I couldn't--but he was--he had just had a stroke so I couldn't use that because he could hardly speak, but I did get a chance to meet him.  There's somebody whose name--it'll come to me in a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--and so what I did was transcribe these into a format with question, answer, question, answer, question, answer, and then at the end, summarize what were the findings of how black musicians--and the reason I--the reason I--I stopped at 1924 because that was the time when Roland Hayes made his Town Hall [Carnegie Hall, New York, New York] debut and he was the first black artist to make--to sing in, in, in Carnegie Hall--Town Hall, in New York [sic, Sissieretta Jones first performed at Carnegie Hall in 1892].  So I was interested in what--and, and the whole thing was, we just found that the churches had always been the, the, the venue where concert artists would, would perform because they were not allowed to perform in concert halls.
Speaker 1: Were the black universities or historically black colleges [HBCUs]--
Speaker 2: That, that would be different--yeah.
Speaker 1: --Producing most of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and they could perform at--in, in, in black colleges and churches, but not in, in traditional concert halls.  And so Roland Hayes made his, his Town Hall debut in 1924, which was the first time that that had happened, and then after that, of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this predated Marian Anderson and this predated--Paul Robeson was, was, was along at that time, too, but he was a young man at that point, yeah.  I didn't get a--he was--he would have been a part of that, that, that age group at that time, but he was not one of the people--persons I had the chance to interview.
Speaker 1: Right, I think he was--
Speaker 2: He was born somewhere around 1890 [sic, 1898], wasn't he?  I think somewhere in that--around that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was kind of in--this time was a--or by '62 [1962], he was almost in seclusion or something.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he had gone through that thing about being a Communist and all that stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, he passed away in '76 [1976] I remember now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: But he was--he had been pretty much in seclusion almost for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, by that time--
Speaker 1: --For about ten years.
Speaker 2: --He, he was probably eighties.  You know, he couldn't--you know, but he was--he was a force to be reckoned with as a musician, as an actor, as an activist, you know.  I remembered in Detroit [Michigan] when I was the music--minister of music at Hartford Avenue Baptist Church [later, Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan], Reverend Charles A. Hill who had been one of the first black people to run for the city council in Detroit used to bring Paul Robeson in to do concerts.
Speaker 1: And so did you see him live at--
Speaker 2: One time--yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's something, yeah.  Yeah, one of the great musicians, singers, as well as an activist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did he give a message in his--
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't--I don't remember him speaking, I mean, except while he was singing, but, but he was such a powerful presence.
Speaker 1: The songs were like freedom songs--
Speaker 2: Freedom songs, spirituals.
Speaker 1: --They had themes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And he--but he also did a lot of, of German lieder [songs] and things along that line.  He did a lot of stuff from the European tradition.  He was a very highly trained singer.
Speaker 1: There's a history of blacks in classical music that goes way, way back and--who was that, Sissieretta Jones--
Speaker 2: Sissieretta Jones.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was known as the Black Patti, Sissieretta Jones.  And, and her name came up a lot when I was talking--doing my interviews with the people that I--comprised my, my thesis.  And--I'm tryin' to think, there's another singer who, who also, in, in addition to Sissieretta Jones whose name kept coming up.  I can't remember who it is now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah there's a--there's a book--now was the book--we interviewed--we had a chance to interview him before he passed away, but we interviewed [HM] Raoul Abdul, the author of 'Blacks in Classical Music.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was that available when you were--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Story_ID: 159979
Speaker 1: You start a career as a professor at Wayne State [University, Detroit, Michigan] now?  Okay, and what, what were you teaching?
Speaker 2: I was teaching music theory, music literature, and conducting an ensemble.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your ensemble stuff?
Speaker 2: The Women's Chorale.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were, were there a significant number of African American women in the chorale at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there quite--there would've been, yeah.  Wayne State was, you know, had a good number of African American students--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --It being a metropolitan university in Detroit [Michigan], more so than other places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were the--you weren't the first black faculty member, were you or?
Speaker 2: The first black faculty was a woman by the name of Celeste Cole.  She taught--she--I was the first full-time.  She was a part-time voice teacher.  Her name was Celeste Cole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were the first full-time--
Speaker 2: In the--in the music department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well that's significant.  I mean, you would think--
Speaker 2: Well, same thing at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So, so you were--you really had to represent.  As you were saying before, you're the first black professional in this position that anyone is gonna meet at Wayne State.
Speaker 2: In the music department.
Speaker 1: Yes, in the music department.  Were there--were there other professors on campus, I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In, in other disciplines, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, in other disciplines, okay.  So--alright.  So, so you were at Wayne State from '64 [1964]--
Speaker 2: '64 [1964] to 1970.
Speaker 1: '64 [1964] to 1970.  And are there, there, there any significant stories and activities in that time that you wanna share with us?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, I think, I think, I think I was able to produce some good music with the ensemble, commission some works--some works for--from, from various composers.  But I, I don't think--I can't think of anything that would just stand out as being something noteworthy at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were the jazz musicians still coming over to Wayne State to take music theory classes and--
Speaker 2: Not as much as they had been earlier, yeah.  I'm not really sure if they changed the program so that--so that people couldn't come in and just take a course.  Because at that point, you know, you could just--if you--even though you weren't a student, you could just sign up for a class and come in and take it, which is what my--those gentleman who I mentioned before were doing.  I'm not really sure if that--if that whole process changed or not, but I don't recall--for instance, when I was teaching music theory, I didn't have anybody coming in taking my classes who was not a student.
Speaker 1: It does seem to be--the, the musicians we've interviewed and people we've talked to in Detroit, there seems to be a respect for classical music amongst the jazz musicians.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not like they dismiss it or--
Speaker 2: No, they're--it's, it's--you know, the more training you've got in, in the tradition, the, the more you know what you're doing, you know?
Story_ID: 159980
Speaker 1: Were you a part of or did you know of classical musical ensembles in the black community, you know, composed of black musicians in town [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were several.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a--there was a, a gentleman by the name of Anderson White [ph.] who had started a, a black--an orchestra doing classical music with black musicians.  He's now deceased.  And I had--I had started an ensemble doing that kind of music.  It was called the Robert Harris Singers, which was a chamber choir.  There was the Talmage Turner Chorale.  There were several ensembles of, of--which were--who were doing classical music at that point comprised of primarily black people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  I know there are societies in Chicago [Illinois], too, the [Chicago] Sinfonietta and other things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So had the classical musicians around the country formed a--an association?
Speaker 2: Well, there's always been the National Association of, of, of--NANM, National Association of Negro Musicians.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's an old organization you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It goes back to--
Speaker 2: That goes back to--going back to the '20s [1920s], yeah, and it's still very much prominent today.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And there are two chapters right here in Chicago.
Story_ID: 159981
Speaker 1: In 1970, you're asked to join the faculty of--or, or how did it happen when you joined the faculty at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I had started my doctorate work at Eastman School of Music in Rochester, New York, and I had gone there to study with a specific composer.  His name was Bernard Rogers.  And when Mr. Rogers died, that along with a couple of other significant situations, I decided to leave.  Eastman at that point was not necessarily a bastion for minorities.  There were some problems, okay.
Speaker 1: Can you--well can you tell us about some of this?  'Cause this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you one specific instance--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Okay?  I was taking a music literature course with a gentleman and when I took the class--when I--we, we had to write a, a, a research paper, and he gave me on the paper a B-plus-plus.  Okay, so I went to him and I said, "Dr. Proctor [ph.], I'm just curious as to this grade."  I said, "You know, I've--I worked pretty hard on this paper and I know we have another one due in another three weeks.  I'm wondering if you can let me know where you feel this paper fell short so that I can make sure the next one is, is better."  So, so, so he told me.  He gave me several points.  And--no, I think he had given me a B-plus on that paper.  So I did the next paper and he gave me a B-plus-plus.  So I went back and I said, "Dr. Proctor, do you--do you recall that three weeks ago?"  He said, "Yes."  I said, "You--do you recall I asked you for a specific instance--things that you thought I should improve?"  He said, "Yes."  I said, "You, you mentioned so-and-so and so-and-so."  I said, "I tried to do that better."  He said, "It was much better."  I said, "You mentioned such and such and such."  And then I went through the whole litany, and he said, "Yeah."  I said, "Well, I don't understand why I got a B-plus-plus."  And he looked me right in the eye and he said, "Mr. Harris, I cannot bring myself to give you an A."  And so I looked at him and he looked at me, and there was nothing else to say.  I said, "I understand."
Speaker 1: Yeah, this happens and so--this is--
Speaker 2: I just cannot bring myself--okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So how many--the question is--
Speaker 2: Shake your hand and leave.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: So anyway, then my teacher died.
Speaker 1: So you, you wonder how many pluses it would take to get to an A, you know.
Speaker 2: I think--I think--I think at the--we had a little bit more conversation. I think he changed it to an A-minus-minus, but I got a B in the course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, B-plus I guess in the course, whatever, but A-minus, not just a A-minus, but A-minus-minus.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Two minuses.
Speaker 1: So was this individual critical to you achieving your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I left.  I left Eastman.  But I--but he still wouldn't have been.  I mean, I would've still--I would've still done it 'cause, I mean, well that would've been the only course I took with him and been done with it.
Story_ID: 159982
Speaker 1: So then I went to Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] because, again, the, the person--the degree for which I was--wanted to achieve and the person with whom I was wanting to study was at Michigan State.  Now the interesting thing about that is that my assistantship at Michigan State was in conducting, not in composition.  But because of the success of the ensemble that I conducted, they said, "Would you like to come here and teach?"  And I said, "Yes I would, but I have to go back to Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan] I have another year I have to fulfill,"--they said, "We'll hold the position for you."  So another year--so I've been real fortunate in--from the standpoint that the only position that I've ever had--that I ever applied for was to become a music teacher for the Detroit Public Schools.  The other--my university positions have always been invitations.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You were at Wayne State--I didn't mention this, but you were at Wayne State during the--when that--the, the Detroit Riots [1967] and a lot of the other urban upheavals and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did, did, did that affect what you were doing at all or, or--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --did it affect--okay.
Speaker 1: No.  I mean--I mean, it affected--it affected the city, but it didn't affect me personally--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and no more than it would any other citizen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I just wondered.  And by--now the city--well, [Mayor] Coleman Young didn't--he started--when, when did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Coleman wasn't, wasn't mayor yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It wasn't until the--
Speaker 1: Maybe '66 [1966].  I think at that--no, I think he didn't become mayor until I was teaching at Michigan State because that would--and I went--that was in the '70s [1970s] that he became mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  So you got your Ph.D. from--
Speaker 1: Michigan State.
Speaker 2: From Michigan State, okay.  Alright.  Now who was your advisor at Michigan State?
Speaker 1: A composer by the name of H. Owen Reed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was my advisor and my mentor there.
Speaker 2: And what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 1: It was a large scale composition for chorus and orchestra called 'Requiem:  A Canticle of Immortality.'
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--and this is basically a, a, a piece of music just composed--and--alright.  And arranged--with arrangements for--
Speaker 1: It was a composition.
Speaker 2: A, a composition, okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this is a choral arrangement of--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Is this a choral arrangement?
Speaker 1: It was for chorus--soloist, chorus, and orchestra.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Alright.  Okay.  All right so--and--so you're at Michigan State until 1977.  Now what was--what was it like at Michigan State, you know, throughout most of--
Speaker 1: Michigan State was a--
Speaker 2: --The '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: --Was a--was a good place to go to school and was a good place to teach.  I think--I think a lot--I think for African American people, it was probably--it was a very open kind of a situation.  I mean, it doesn't mean you don't have problems.  But I mean, I think, those of us who taught there and those of us who studied there would have no--nothing negative to say about it, that experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think Michigan State's consciousness kinda woke up--I mean, it was, was awakened in the early '70s [1970s].  I know [HM] Robert Green was there, the educator.
Speaker 1: Bob Green.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Robert Green--yeah, Bob Green.  Yeah.  And Thomas Gunnings and Joseph McMillan, people like that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright.  So that was an age when there was a lot of, of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we had a very strong black faculty alliance, so, you know.  I mean, we--the black faculty met together and it was--it was a very strong community from--of, of black faculty.
Story_ID: 159983
Speaker 1: What were some--I know that, that you composed other works during this period of time, that you must've really been excited at this point to--and you wanted to--
Speaker 2: Well, I was composing chamber music. I was composing a lot of choral music, not much orchestral music because--mainly because it's, it's hard to get it played.  But I was active as a composer at that time, but primarily as a conductor because I was director of the choral music program at--and, and conducted two ensembles at that point, so it was a matter of trying to develop that program to, to a strong level, which is what led me to get to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what kind of music--when you're at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] during this period, I guess in the '70s [1970s], what kind of music--I mean, or who's music did you kinda gravitate towards?
Speaker 2: I gravitated toward the, the old masters, but primarily 20th century composers as well.  So, I mean, I did all the [Johann Sebastian] Bach works, I did [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart and [George Frideric] Handel and all those kind of things, but also a lot of, of contemporary American composers 'cause I thought we should and, you know, so I was an advocate for American music as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you had mentioned Eva Jessye earlier and we didn't stop and talk about her, but she lives in--near Michigan State, right?
Speaker 2: No, she, she was at [University of Michigan] Ann Arbor [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Ann Arbor, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was--she was I think a scholar in residence at Ann Arbor at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you meet her during those days--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I met her, but I never had a lot of interaction with her.  We, we may have met and had a conversation or two, but nothing--I never got to know her the way I would've liked to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she arranges choral--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did.
Speaker 1: --Pieces.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she and [Francis] Hall Johnson in--on that group were, were very, very important for--at that time when they were doing things like 'Green Pastures' and musicals like that.
Speaker 1: Right, that subsequently became a movie.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And she--I think her--the Eva Jessye Singers [sic, Eva Jessye Choir] I think was the primary choral ensemble for that particular movie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she a lifelong Michigan resident?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, but I don't know that.  I don't know where she was born.  I--no, she was primarily in New York [City] for a long time, too, because that's--would've been where she did all the stuff with theater, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  I, I wondered.  I didn't know if she originally was from Michigan or where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't think--I don't know, but I don't--I would think not.  I would guess not.
Story_ID: 159984
Speaker 1: In '77 [1977], you joined the faculty at Northwestern University's Bienen School of Music [Evanston, Illinois].  Now, now you were recruited again, huh?  Okay.
Speaker 2: The way that happened was, I had taken my Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] choir to sing at a conference in Kansas City [Missouri] as an--we were invited to sing at a conference.  And the choir sang very well, and at the end of that performance, I was approached by a gentleman by the name of Marceau [Chevalier] Myers who was a dean of the school of music at North Texas State [University College of Music, later University of North Texas College of Music, Denton, Texas], and he told me that he had been at the concert and had enjoyed it very much, and could he take me to lunch.  He wanted to talk to me about something, and I said certainly.  What he wanted to talk to me about was the possibility of would I ever consider leaving Michigan State to come to Texas because he was gonna have a position in a year and he thought that I would be a good person to be considered for that position.  So we had lunch, and while we were having lunch, he, he said--he excused himself.  He said, "I have to make a phone call. Why don't you order some dessert and coffee? I'll be back in a few minutes."  And I said fine. So he left the table and as he was--as I was sitting there, I heard someone at the next table say, "That's the guy I was telling you about."  And I turned my head, and the person said, "How are you, Dr. Harris?" I said, "I'm fine."  He says, "I understand you had a wonderful concert today."  I said, "Well thank you very much.  I was very pleased."  He says, "Well I'm Thomas Miller, dean of the School of Music at Northwestern University."  And I said, "Oh, it's a wonderful institution, wonderful school."  And I just, as aside, said, "I understand Ms. [Margaret] Hillis"--who was the director of music, choral music there,--"is leaving."  He says, "Yes, would you like to talk to me about that job?"  And he says, "I noticed the fact that you're with Dean Myers. I will not infringe upon that, but if you're interested in talking to me about it, could you come to my suite at two o'clock today?"  And I said, "Yes, sir."  And that's the way it happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went up and had a conversation with him and, you know, we talked--he says, "Can you come over for an interview and an audition," I said, "Yeah," and next thing I knew, I was going to Northwestern.  I stayed there thirty-five years.
Story_ID: 159985
Speaker 1: Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], so--well, tell us about what the atmosphere was there and, and was like there and--
Speaker 2: It's a completely different situation than Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  It was like going to a different country.  As I said, you know, I, I was talking to you about or mentioning the fact that for African Americans, Michigan State was kind of a mecca.  I mean, it was--it was a very open--I mean, there were people who still had attitudes, but, but overall, it was a very engaging place and it made it easy to study there, it made it easy to learn, it made it easy to teach.  Northwestern was a different kind of climate.  Michigan State was friendly, warm.  Northwestern was a bit stuffy, a bit formal.  I remember during the interview process after having done, done the audition of sitting at a table with all of the professors who were on the search committee, and them being somewhat stuffy people, and one of them said, well, Mr. Harris, "Why do you want to come to Northwestern University?"  And I said, "To be perfectly honest, sir, I'm not really sure I do.  I am a tenured professor at Michigan State.  I'm not looking for a job.  I have a job."  I said, "I was invited here by your dean."  Well, well then they--of course, then they started telling me why I should want to come to Northwestern University.  You know, it's a good thing to be--to be looking at a job when you don't need it because you can--you can be yourself.  You don't have to put on anything, you don't have to try to impress people, you just--and so that was a good situat--I had just been appointed a full professor with tenure at Michigan State.  I didn't--I had a house there, family, I didn't need a job, you know.  But, it was, in fact--I knew professionally that if I were at that university, it would take--it would be on another level because it was one of the top schools in the country.  And I had some--there were some, some real attitudes there when I first got there.  But, you know, the first year was very difficult, mainly because I had left my family back in East Lansing [Michigan].  I was there on a new--you know, someone once said that three of the most--three difficult, difficult things to do would be to relocate, have a new job, and have a different family situation.  Each of them separately is stressful.  I had all three at the same time.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of your family situation, now--
Speaker 2: I had--see, because, because I was gonna try to-- I didn't--I didn't--I didn't resign from Michigan State, I took a leave 'cause I wanted--I didn't wanna give up everything I'd acquired and, and find out it wasn't right, so I took a leave for a year.  So I left my family at the--at our house in East Lansing, so I would commute back and forth on weekends, so--but it was--it was a difficult situation.  There were people there who I don't--I'm not saying that it was necessarily racist but that who really had attitudes that made things a little difficult.  There were some of them--some--you know, we know when things are racist, and there were a couple people there who really had problems, you know.  But--and it was not--Northwestern being the school that it was at that time was not the kind of institution where you had--where you formed close relationships with other faculty members because everybody did their own thing.  At Michigan State, it was more friendly, you know.  So--but it was--you know, I'm, I'm glad I made the change.  I mean, it was--the first couple of years were difficult, but I think the thing that made it work primarily was the fact that one of the stud--one of the criterion for me going was the fact that I was not going to give up my tenure nor was I going to not have my rank of full professor, so when they made that concession that I would come in as a full professor with tenure, then I knew I was safe.  I'm not really sure I would have been safe to be perfectly honest if I hadn't done that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what were the--
Speaker 2: In retrospect.
Speaker 1: How did you--what, what--so, you had latitude to create and do what you wanted to do, right?  You know--though--
Speaker 2: Well, within, within the parameters of the job description.
Story_ID: 159986
Speaker 1: Did you have to change your approach to anything by coming to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, I think the thing was you--overall, you had great students at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan], but not at--but Northwestern was just a different level of student.  The--I mean, you had some talented people at Michigan State but you had considerably more of 'em at Northwestern.  It was just on another level as far as the students throughout the entire university were concerned, especially from the standpoint of the talent level.  All of 'em were smart.  All of 'em were extremely talented.  It was not like you had a few or--and, and the rest--and there was a, a middle echelon, these were all top notch people.  So what it did was to challenge you to be on top of your--top--at the top of your game all the time, which made you a better scholar and musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: You couldn't--you couldn't get away with--you couldn't get away with not being prepared because somebody would know.  You, you might be able to hedge a little bit at another school, but you couldn't hedge at Northwestern.  You had to be on--you had to know.  And you learned to say I don't know if they ask you a question that you couldn't answer.  You didn't try to bullshit, you just told 'em, "I'm sorry.  I don't--I'm not really sure about that.  Let me--let me look into that and I'll get back to you on it."
Speaker 1: Did you--did you see someone actually try to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They were trying you all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and especially again, too, you know, I was in a precarious position, too, because here I was, the first black person to be in that position following a person [Margaret Hillis] who had been an icon.  I mean, the person who came before me was known throughout the world as a great--she was the person who had started the Chicago Symphony Chorus, an amazing musician and a--you know, and so I was following a person who had--who had a world-wide reputation and, of course, I think being African American.  So, yeah, you were being challenged all the time.
Story_ID: 159987
Speaker 1: Now were you the first African American hired in, in that department [Bienen School of Music, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, I was the second.
Speaker 1: Second, okay.
Speaker 2: The second was--the first was a woman named Leona Wilkins who was a professor of music education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember when I first got there, she said, "You have no idea how glad I am to see you."  She said, "It's been quite lonely here for many years," yeah.
Speaker 1: So did, did the black family of staff have kind of a bond that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not like it did at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: They didn't have one--
Speaker 2: Nah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nah, huh-uh.  We tried, but it didn't go anywhere.  I mean, it was--there were a couple of times when they would get together, but it was not the same kind of thing.  Everybody was--it was a school where everybody did their own thing.  Everybody had his own niche and that's where he or she was.  And mainly I suppose because, you know, you had to keep your head above the water all the time.  You didn't have--you didn't have time to do a lot of other stuff.  It was--main thing--doing your research, trying to keep everything at the level that you knew it needed to be.
Speaker 1: Did, did you find like-minded musicians in terms of, I mean, people that had the same--I mean, I guess--or same or similar appreciation for the music that you liked to do the best?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, everybody--I mean, everybody there was top notch in their field and, and all had respect for, for great music.  You know, there was--there was--there were--there were no weak links I don't think in that--on that faculty, you know, musically.  Socially maybe, but not musically.
Story_ID: 159988
Speaker 1: Did your, I guess, composition focus change any at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] from what it had been?
Speaker 2: No, I think it became enhanced more.  I think--I, I began to, to write more music.  But I--but I think--there was a time there when, when because of the fact that I felt such a need to do research and to--and to keep, and to--and to be a better teacher, a stronger teacher, that I may have not written as much as I wanted to, but I think the quality of the music that I wrote was probably better.  Well, I was--I, I knew more about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  The person you replaced is Paul Aliapoulios.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't replace him.
Speaker 1: Not him?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  Paul Aliapoulios was a colleague.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Alright.  Alright.  Okay.  Oh, he's--okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: I replaced Margaret Hillis.
Speaker 1: Margaret Hillis, okay.  Alright.
Speaker 2: Paul was--Paul became my best friend on the faculty.  He and I kind of gravitated toward one another.  We became good friends.  He probably was the only real friend. I had colleagues, but he became a friend.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you work on projects together?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I mean--well, I, I, I had him--I brought him into my department.  I was the head of the choral department, so I would--I engaged him to conduct one of the ensembles within the department, so from that standpoint, we worked together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Did you--well, during this period of time--now you, you were there for thirty--
Speaker 2: Thirty-five years.
Speaker 1: --thirty-five, five years.
Speaker 2: I just retired last year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--what was your, I guess--you, you taught courses in, I guess, music theory again or?
Speaker 2: No, I taught conducting.
Speaker 1: Oh, conducting, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So what, what are the core principals of conducting?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--conducting brings everything together, all the aspects of music, the historical, the theoretical, the performance area.  As a conductor, you have to be aware of, of historical music practice.  You have to have--you have to be aware of, of theoretical practice.  You have to be--have good conducting technique.  You have to have good ear training.  It--it's, it's the one discipline that brings all of the aspects of performance into one area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you were fully aware what to do with, with, with a baton by this time (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  If not, you're in deep trouble.
Story_ID: 159989
Speaker 1: You know, when you watch a conductor when you're in a band, you see the--you know, you respond to the conductor's signals to either quiet down or raise the tempo up and that sort of thing.  But, like, when you, you were explaining some, some of the nuances of the vision of the conductor and--
Speaker 2: The conductor has to be able to take a piece of music and internalize it.  He or she has to try to put himself in or herself into the--into the thinking, what is the--what did the composer want to have happen with this piece?  What--and, you see, what we are doing is we are standing in for the composer.  There's a great book by a conductor by the name of Erich Leinsdorf called 'The Composer's Advocate' and that's what we do.  We, we, we are--we take all our training and all of our innate musicality and we impose that or connect that with the theoretical training that we've had, with the historical training that we've had, and to try to get a vision of what this piece of music is supposed to sound like.  Now, of course there's--personality comes in it to some extent, too.  You and I might do the same study of the same piece, but we may not come out with the same--exact same tempo--we, we, we--because we're different.  But we have to work within the parameters of what the score has told us.  The musical score is the bible.  We, we can't change stuff because we--at a whim.  We have to think about this is what he had in mind.  And you might find the three different composers--three different conductors might do a Brahm [Johannes Brahms] symphony differently, but it's still--but you can still tell it's Brahms because they've, they've, they've delved into what makes the composer--makes that piece what the composer had indicated.
Speaker 1: So the, the composition is a template but it doesn't--
Speaker 2: Can't tell you everything.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, he might say allegro, which means fast, but he doesn't--but he may not tell you how fast.  I, I remember when I was a student, one of our assignments was to listen to 'Mozart Symphony No. 40' and different--six different versions and compare 'em.  And these were all by master conductors, [Arturo] Toscanini, Bruno Walter, people like that, and they were different.  But, but, but they were still [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart.  I mean, Bruno Walter may have--his tempo may have been slower than Toscanini's.  Toscanini's may have been (singing) "bah-dah-dun-dah-dah-dun-dah-dah-dah-dun, dah-dah-dun-dah-dah-dun-dah-dah-dah-doh."  Bruno Walter may have been (singing) "dah-dah-dun-dah-dah-dun-dah-dah-duh-dun, dee-doh-deet-dee-doh-deet-doo-doh-dee-doh."  So--but--so there--that's the way--you know, we, we all have personality.  We all have our own psyches, musical psyches, as to how we wanna make things work.  So there's gonna be differences but there has to be within a given parameter.  I used to tell my students, as long as you're within here, you're right.  It's when you get our here that you're wrong.  You have all this space to be right.  But if you get way out here or way out here, then you've crossed over into wrongness rather than being in rightness or being in what is the potential for being correct.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.  So within those parameters, there is--there is difference.
Speaker 2: Variances.
Speaker 1: There--there's, there's room.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's room for, for individuality.
Speaker 1: Can you listen to a piece and tell often who conducted it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can often--you can often tell a composer--I mean, a, a, a conductor by his particular--his or her particular way of thinking.  Just like we--you know, I mean, if you--if I go out in the--in the car in the driveway when I put the radio on and, and if it's [Johann Sebastian] Bach, I don't have to have anyone tell me it's Bach.  And, and you can tell sometimes.  It's, it's harder to tell who the conductor is than it is who the composer is, but you--but you know--you, you can hear it and you know it.  And it's not because you've heard that piece before, it's just because that's the style that you--that you've, you've studied and you know that's who it is.  You know Mozart when you hear Mozart.  You know [Joseph] Haydn when you hear Haydn, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's a--there's a rule--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a language.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's a language.
Story_ID: 159990
Speaker 1: Do you have like favorite conductors?
Speaker 2: I think for specific pieces, you know.  It might be--but I mean I'm not one who has to--has to have [Georg] Solti or has to have [Arturo] Toscanini or something.  I just--you know, I--I'm more about the music than I am about who's conducting it.
Speaker 1: Now, what's your own philosophy of conducting?
Speaker 2: My philosophy of conducting is that I must do the very best job I can of making what is on that paper come alive so that the listener will hear it and be pleased by what he or she hears and knowing the fact that it's being done with a--with thought, with integrity, with honesty, which is what I always try to, to get my students to understand, that the compos--that our purpose is to reveal the composer, and if we are going to do his or her music, we must do it to the very best of our ability with all the studying and insight that we can.
Speaker 1: Is there a--is there a certain composer whose work is the most challenging to conduct?
Speaker 2: It's all challenging.  But I would think--it--it's, it's challenging in different ways, you know.  I'm--I'm a strong--I mean, I think if there's one composer that--if you were to say to me you could--you're going to a desert island, you can only take one piece of music, what would you take?  I'd take [Johann Sebastian] Bach, okay.  Because I feel it--I--I'm drawn to the intellectuality of that--of his music, of the way he thought, of the--of the--of the way his concepts of structure, his concept of counterpoint.  I mean, that's--that's just where my mind goes with that, you know.  I often tell people that of all my conducting teachers, Bach was the best one, you know.  But, but, but all composers--I mean, there's--all of it has its challenges.  I mean, obviously music of, of later composers, which is very, very intricate and very involved may have a different kind of challenge.  I mean, I've conducted some very new pieces, which took an awful lot of work to delve into them because you're, you're not only learning the new piece, but you're learning a new style.  You're learning a new language of a--of a new composer, you know.  A piece I did--we, we did the American premier last year as my swan song at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] of a British composer's piece called 'Not In Our Time' by Richard Blackford which was a piece that basically commemorated 9/11 [September 11th, 2001] even though it wasn't specific, but it did.  And I had to learn--I went over and studied the piece with the composer in order to get--to delve into it.  And I was in England when, when it--when it was given its premier performance, and I went to all those performances and rehearsals, trying to see how this piece is working.  I had done my homework, but then to, to get a more insight, I spent time in England studying it before doing it here.  And then, of course, he was here for the compose--for the performance, and that was even better.
Speaker 1: Was he satisfied with--
Speaker 2: He was very pleased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159991
Speaker 1: You ever been in a situation where someone composed something and was not satisfied with the performance of it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I've seen it happen.  I haven't--I've, I've--I think when I've done the work of a composer that he or she has been pleased with the performance.  I've had some of my own music done where I have not been pleased with the performance.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: Is it--would it be because it's--well, you know, in, in a specific case, was, was the--was it too fast or was--
Speaker 2: I just think--
Speaker 1: --The dynamics wrong or?
Speaker 2: I just think that the--I just didn't think that the, the, the amount of preparation--that the quality of the preparation had been what it should've been, the quality of it either from, from the conductor's point of view or from the ensemble's point of view.
Speaker 1: So wasn't enough nuance in it to--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Wasn't enough nuance in the--
Speaker 2: Just, just not enough insight, you know.  Certain pieces take a little bit more, more depth of study than others.  Some pieces you can look at and you can do 'em off the top of your head. Some pieces you can't.  Some pieces you gotta live with for a while.  And, and--I mean, like the piece I was talking about that we did last year at, at Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois], I lived with that piece.  I mean, I--you know, I slept with it, I ate with it, I talked with it, I walked with it, trying to delve into what it really, really was about and what it meant.  And I think I--I think I got it because I think--I think the performance and the conductor--the performance was very satisfactory to the performers and it was very pleasing to the conduct--to the composers, so that made it work.
Speaker 1: Now it seems like--I, I know actors when they get a script--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --They have a read-through.
Speaker 2: They gotta live that--they gotta live with that role.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but they, they have a read-through and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --And, and the director--you know, they go over--well, you know, what does this mean?  I mean, what, what are we tryin'--what is this, this character saying to this other one and what--and how does that fit in the overall theme of what's goin' on here?  In music, do you--I mean, it, it seems like it, it would be open to more interpretation in, in a sense than--
Speaker 2: There are certain pieces that give you a little bit more leeway.  There are certain pieces which are very, very specific and you--and you can't deviate from that because of, of the intricacy and the--and, and the complexity of the piece itself.  I mean, there are certain pieces for instance--we mentioned [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart a few minutes ago, and I've said if Mozart writes allegro, he doesn't say how fast or how, how fast it has to be.  That's something you live with based upon the ensemble that you have, how you perceive the piece.  If you're dealing with a piece by a--of a more--of a composer who was much--let's say [Igor] Stravinsky or something, and he says, "I want this piece to be 120 to the quarter," then 112's not gonna work, that's too slow, 132 is too fast.  You, you gotta be where he said in order for it to work because he has been that careful in the way that he has per--that he has conceived of it and composed it for it--it has to work.  I mean, you know, there might be a little bit of a hedging, but not much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, but, but in--a piece can be more general.  I mean, for instance, in a earlier composer's things--I mean, again, we're, we're still speaking within here, within a certain framework.  We can't get way out there someplace, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So a composer can be really specific about certain--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He can be--yeah, and, and modern composers are much more specific than were composers of earlier times.
Story_ID: 159992
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned [Johann Sebastian] Bach, so I'm tempted to go back to Bach and just ask you what pieces by Bach you like the most and why.
Speaker 2: I like all the great oratorios, the 'B Minor Mass,' 'St. Matthew Passion,' 'St. John Passion.'  I love the, 'The Brandenburg Concerto.'  I mean, there's, there's, you just--it's just right.  You know, there are--there, there are two composers or maybe three whose music in its original conception was just perfect. There's no flaw.  Bach is one of those. [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart is another.  It's just perfect.  There's, there's never a time when you listen to this music you say, I wonder why he did that or I wonder why he didn't do this.  It's just right.  Even though [Ludwig van] Beethoven struggled in his compositional process, when he--when it's down there, it's right.  There's no--there's nothing that you can--you can question.  Now there are--there are certain composers and, you know, who--you know what I'm sayin', he--that piece is just--you know, I mean, you can find--you can--you can have some--you can have debate with yourself about whether it's--what it is.  But there are--but Bach's music is just perfect.  It's just perfect.  There's--it just works.
Story_ID: 159993
Speaker 1: Now were you in touch with the other African American composers in Chicago [Illinois] with the--they were doing classical music, the different organizations we discussed before like [Chicago] Sinfonietta and--
Speaker 2: You mean--well, you mean the conductor?
Speaker 1: I mean, well other, other classical, I guess, organizations in Chicago.  Is there a classical music community I guess is what I'm trying to find out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Not one that, that is organized, but you know people and you know--you know, I know--I mean there are certain people that you've met that you--and you, you listen--you know their music as conductors or as composers and you know who they are.  But there is no--there is no Society of Black Composers like there used to be in New York [City] one time.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you see that on the horizon at some point?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: So it's nothing that's really needed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not really sure it'd be--you know, your music--I don't--you know, there used to be a time when that was probably a method of getting more performances.  In, in fact, it probably would be valuable now when I think about it from that standpoint.  You know, there was a time when black composers of serious music were not getting the kind of play or the kind of notoriety that they may have--that they've deserved, and so there were--that's when the Society of Black Composers was formed in New York, in order to get people to und--to come and get this music.  I think--I think right now, the, the--there are several very prominent black composers who get played by everybody, you know, the Chicago Symphony [Orchestra, Chicago, Illinois], everybody.  If, if the music is good, the conductor will find it, yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what are the most popular?  Who are the most popular black composers?
Speaker 2: Well, there's [HM] T.J. Anderson, is one.  He's probably in your archives.  [HM] Olly Wilson is another, Adolphus Hailstork.  I noticed the name [HM] Julius Williams who I saw his, his, his box--I saw his name there.  I mean, these are a few people that come to mind right away, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 159994
Speaker 1: In terms of your own compositions, was it--well, you were in a, I guess a position at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] where you could get them performed, you know, right?  I mean, it wasn't hard to get 'em actually--
Speaker 2: Well, I--you know, I, I, I think I'm, I'm not a self-promotor, so I'm--I would do a reasonable amount of my music, but not a lot, because I figure, you know, it's--there are too many composers out there whose music needs to be heard and I would--I would program some of my pieces, but not an awful lot and then hoped, hoped that other people might, you know.  Some people tell me that I should've done more, but I don't know, perhaps.
Speaker 1: Where has your music actually been performed in, in--
Speaker 2: It's been performed all over, I mean all over the country in different--in, in Europe, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Is there any one instance or can you tell us about a time when it was, you know, performed to your satisfaction that you really thought (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, okay.  I have a--I have a piece that's going to be performed in New York [City, New York] next May and also it has a couple of performances coming up in the fall. In Denver [Colorado] that was performed--I've, I've done it here, but I had a student, a former student of mine who performed, his name was Greg Hobbs, who, who did, who performed this piece for chorus and orchestra in Dallas [Texas] a couple of years ago and I was very, very pleased with the performance that he did.  He understood the piece quite well, and so that's piece--I think it's a piece which is going to get a quite a few performances as long--as it becomes more well-known.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what--what's the name of the piece?
Speaker 2: 'Gloria.'  It's, it's a setting of the Gloria from the mass for soprano solo, chorus, and orchestra.
Speaker 1: Now is that your favorite piece of music or, or--
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's my favorite, but it might be my most extensive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: You know, they're all my children.  How do you pick which child you love the most, you know?  Yeah, I have some pieces that I think are probably better than others and maybe have more, more, more essence, more meat to them.  One would be a piece called 'Two Elizabethan Lyrics' which is for, for chorus and orchestra based on, on two, two writers of the Elizabethan period, Christopher Marlowe and Sir Walter Raleigh.  I do a lot of church music.  I mean, I--when I say that, I mean, I do a lot of music that's set to religious text, and I think that's--I think those are my strongest pieces.
Speaker 1: The music that's actually performed in churches that you compose, is it--is it strictly classical music? Okay. Alright.
Speaker 2: I have some spiritual arrangements, too, but primarily anthems.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  In terms of, of those, which ones are--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  A piece that I wrote several years ago that, that kind of got a lot of performances around the world was a piece called 'Canticle:  The Hungry Angels' which was--in, in fact, I was in Sweden and I found--I found this piece on someone's desk over there.  You know, it's Canticle, colon, The Hungry Angels which is a, a, a piece that I'm particularly fond of 'cause I think--I think--I think my whole methodology of writing changed with that piece.  I think that was a piece that, that kinda took me in a different direction that I kinda followed along after that.  So that's kinda hard to explain, but it was just--it was a piece that, that was at a--at a certain point, you would--you'd come here and then all of the sudden--you wrote this piece and all of a sudden what you did after that kinda took you in a different direction.
Story_ID: 159995
Speaker 1: Now do you write for a certain vocal range?  I mean--
Speaker 2: It depends.  Sometimes I write under commission.  If I'm writing for a, a commissioned piece, then I'm, I'm, I'm given the parameters of what they want.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But I try to write music that is practical.  I mean, I'm not one who writes a lot of experimental stuff.  I like--I like music that people enjoy singing and enjoy--people enjoy listening to.  So it's going to be basically more of a conservative than it is a far out type of thing in, in the music I write for choruses.  For instrumental music, it might be a little bit different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you don't like single out one, one type of voice for a--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Or you, you are a little more comfortable with one range than another or?
Speaker 2: I'm not really sure I'm understanding what you're asking.
Speaker 1: I, I, I would think--now I don't--I mean, correct me if I'm wrong, but I would think that a composer composing a piece would envision it being sung by a certain kind of soprano or a certain kind of tenor or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you're writing for a solo voice--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you would, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm, I'm primarily writing music for choral ensembles, which is gonna be sopranos, altos, tenors, and basses, and, and I'm, I'm trying to write music that's gonna be of interest to them, still have a bit of challenge to it, but still be of interest and, and be rewarding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't focus on who you're, you're--what voices you're gonna feature or--
Speaker 2: No, not necessarily, huh-uh.
Story_ID: 159996
Speaker 1: So your music in the community has, has been church-based music and, and have the--what churches in Chicago [Illinois], I mean, in, in this area, you know, are--have a--as, as you said in Detroit [Michigan], not all the churches, you know, do classical music of any type, you know.  So, so what, what churches in this, in the Chicagoland area are--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --more likely to do it?
Speaker 2: --I don't know.  I mean, really.  I should know that because I'm not in the city that much.  I'm basically in the suburbs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm trying to think of--I know that there are a couple of, two or three or four churches where--for instance, there's, there's a church in--two churches here in the city who do annual performances of [George Frideric] Handel's 'Messiah' and, and that--and they're--and it's well known as being a good performance and, and, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: I believe St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois] is one that does.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]?  Is that--is that a church?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a--there are some Morgan Park churches.  I'm not sure which one, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --St. Edmund's Episcopal probably.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: But there's--especially when it comes to the South Side, I'm not that aware.  But they're--I mean--but, but, you know, Chicago is a mecca for choral music.  I mean it's, it's--there are a lot of fine church choirs throughout the city.
Speaker 1: Make sure I've turned this off (laughter).  Do you have a--is there--in the Chicagoland area, I mean--meaning in the Chicago and suburbs and stuff, do you have a favorite church venue?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I mean, you know--what, what you do is you find out what's, what's being performed somewhere and you go to hear it, you know.  Fourth Pres [Fourth Presbyterian Church of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] downtown has good music.
Story_ID: 159997
Speaker 1: Who are some of your top students?
Speaker 2: Well, there's Heather Headley who has made quite a name for herself in Broad--on Broadway and in, in musical theatre.
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's, let's talk about her for a minute 'cause I know you--you've had a--you have a story about Heather Headley, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Heather was a--Heather came to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] as a--as a undergraduate and sang in my choirs, and I also hired her as my section leader at my church.  In fact, I gave Heather her first professional job once she got here, and that was singing in a performance of the Duke Ellington 'Sacred Music' that was done at Johnnie Colemon's church.  What was the name of that church?
Speaker 1: Christ United [sic, Christ Universal Temple, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, whatever it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and on that performance, she was billed along with some very important people like Clark Terry and [HM] Oscar Brown, Jr., and people like that.  And, and that was a--that was a piece, a concert that was produced by [HM] Josie Childs [ph.] and I was the music director for that.  And Heather sang in that and really just knocked the socks off of everybody.  She--that is one of the most talented people.  I mean, she's just gifted, personal--from the standpoint of personality, from the standpoint of--she was in 'The Lion King' on Broadway.  I mean, she's just--she just knocks people's socks off.  She's very special.  There are other people who have gone ahead to make their marks in opera like Daniel Washington, who is now on the faculty of the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] after having had a very nice career.  You know, in thirty-five years, I've come across some pretty good people.  But the--but the thing is, not a lot of African Americans at Northwestern 'cause it doesn't--'cause there hasn't been a lot of 'em, African Americans at Northwestern.  So I've had several people who have had great careers, but the majority of them have not been African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, are they--of, of the others, I mean, do you consider yourself like a mentor to many?
Speaker 2: I think--I think I've been a mentor to a lot of people, especially who've gone into conducting more so than, than singers.  I mean, I think the majority of the people who, who were my conducting students at Northwestern are now working professionally in the field, and that's, that's a good--that's a good--that says a good thing about the program and the teaching they got.
Speaker 1: Heather Headley just for those--anybody watching this, I mean, we, we interviewed [HM] Al Stiles from Fort Wayne [Indiana] who I think kind of discovered her at his Talent Factory in Fort Wayne.  She's from, what, Trinidad, right?  And grew up in Fort Wayne and then--
Story_ID: 159998
Speaker 1: Now you have been a guest conductor in South Africa and in Taipei, and other places around the world.  Tell us about some of those experiences.
Speaker 2: They've been wonderful experiences.  I mean, in Korea, for instance, I was invited to conduct the, the top professional choir in Korea, the Incheon [City] Chorale.  I've conducted in--I've done--taught and conducted in, in South Africa, as you mentioned in Taipei [Taiwan] and Hong Kong, in Europe.  I mean, I've had, had some good exper--you know, music has been good to me in that way.  I've--and I've, I've had a chance to do a lot of things and with different peop--with some very, very fine, fine musicians around the world--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as well as here in the country.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Is there--are you called upon to conduct, like it could be, I mean, new works that you haven't seen?  Or, or do they bring you in to conduct something you already--
Speaker 2: No, normally speaking, you pick the program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You pick the program that you wanna conduct.  But I have--I have conducted new pieces like the one I mentioned that we did last year in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois] and I've--I mean, I've, I've done several first performances of pieces that have been newly performed, newly composed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In 2000 at Carnegie Hall [New York City], you conducted the New York premier of [David] Fanshawe's 'African'--
Speaker 2: 'African Sanctus,' yeah, that was the New York premier of that piece, which is a piece--David Fanshawe was a British composer who just died two years ago who wrote a piece called 'African Sanctus,' which was an amazing piece of music because he based it a lot upon having done research in African music and fused the--some of the thematic ideas that he found in African music into a, a, a piece that used not only traditional instruments but also nontraditional instruments, and it was--it's, it's a--and I, I had performed the piece twice at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] after having heard it, and then we had a chance to perform it--I was invited to perform it at Carnegie Hall, which was the first New York performance of that piece.
Speaker 1: By nontraditional instruments, you're meaning--
Speaker 2: African instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That are not in the European--
Speaker 2: Not in the European tradition.
Speaker 1: --tradition, okay.
Speaker 2: But it also used--it used two--both, both.  And also used an African drummer who understood and we--so it was--it's a--it's a real interesting piece.  It's been performed thousands of times in the world.  I mean, it--it's the piece that probably made his name as a composer.
Speaker 1: So--alright.  It strikes me as--well, okay.  In, in a piece like that when you have an African drummer, so the, the drummer's music is written out specifically--
Speaker 2: He has written--he's given--he's given leads, lead sheets.  But a good drumm--for, for a person for instance who's not an African drummer who needed to have that.  But for a person who's steeped in the--in the tradition, then--there was a gentleman who joined us the last time we did it who came from Minneapolis [Minnesota] who's, who's an African drummer. He's an African master drummer.  So, I mean, he didn't need the lead sheets.  I mean--he--and he just brought things to the piece that you just couldn't believe, yeah.
Speaker 1: Are, are there directions in there about what--I mean, I know an African drummer and there's certain--if you're a djembe player, there's (unclear), there's Lamban, there's other things everybody knows how to play, you know, when they hear 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now this gentleman had the whole, just all kinds of--he may have used instruments that were not even designated in the piece, but he knew what to do.  In fact, David Fanshawe said this is the most amazing drummer I've ever seen.  And he was just open--whatever he wants to do is fine.  And, and--but, but the piece itself is scored.  I mean, the, the conduct--and not only that, but the piece also uses prerecorded African music that the conductor has to have earphones on and be listening to as he's conducting the choir to make--to make sure that everything lines up. It's an amazing composition.  And the first time I did it, I wasn't as in tune--see, I was primarily listening to the choir and trying to keep--and, and it was not until the second time that I did it that I understood the fact that you have to listen--be more involved with what you're listening for on the prerecorded stuff in order to make it all work well.  So it was a learning process on this piece.  The second and third time I did it was much better than the first.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is classical music with a twist.
Speaker 2: With a twist.  It's, it's got both elements.  It's got both European tradition and the African tradition all connected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now have you ever conducted a piece that had a infusion of jazz?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've done a couple jazz masses, things along that line, yeah.
Story_ID: 159999
Speaker 1: So we were talking about 'African Sanctus' and, and the Duke Ellington piece ['Sacred Music'] you mentioned before, you know, combined elements of African music and jazz with classical music.
Speaker 2: Well, primarily jazz and classical, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and from the standpoint--it's very much a jazz idiom but, but you--it's very--it's very clear that, that he had a solid understanding of musical structure in the way that he wrote music.  This is why he was such a genius.
Speaker 1: Duke Ellington?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, just--it's just highly structured and, and--but, but beautifully written music.  He along with [William Thomas] "Billy" Strayhorn who was his primary collaborator.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  So--now do you look forward to doing more of this kind of collaboration in the future?
Speaker 2: I look forward to just making music, you know.  I mean, I'm obviously going to be doing it less of it now that I'm no longer at the university [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], but just trying to continue making, making good music on a high level that's--that moves people, that people want to hear.
Story_ID: 160000
Speaker 1: Now you retired, what in 2012, just last year, right?  Does retirement, like, give you more opportunity to write and, and conduct--
Speaker 2: It should--
Speaker 1: --Otherwise--
Speaker 2: But, but I've been lazy for the--I just took a year off to just kinda get--gather myself, and starting now back--and starting now, I'm gonna start getting much more involved in writing.  And I did a few things professionally last year, but not a lot.  I did some, some travel.  I did something in France, something in South America.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bogota [Colombia]--
Speaker 2: Bogota, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Colombia, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I'm looking forward now to this year--in a limited way.  I don't wanna work every day, but I'm looking forward to trying to do more guest conducting and, and more composing this year, starting now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you were at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], did you--did you target conductors or composers to come to the United States to--I mean to perform at Northwestern?  Was that part of your--
Speaker 2: No, that was not a part of my--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Job.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: But I did bring composer--as I mentioned, Mr. [Richard] Blackford, I brought him in on two occasions because I did two premiers of his, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now you're still very much active at Trinity United Methodist Church, right in Wilmette [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, I've--I--no, I'm no longer at Trinity.  I left there six years ago, seven years ago.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm now at Winnetka Congregational Church [Winnetka, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  You did say that, yeah.  And so you--are the--does--is the congregation aware of what they have in terms of (laughter)--or--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think so.  I mean, they know--they know my background.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what I've done, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Someone says, gee, I didn't know that he--you know, I could--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I could imagine that, but they, they do for the most part--
Speaker 2: They all--most of them are aware of the fact that I was at Northwestern for many years and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 160001
Speaker 1: So do you have--if you had the resources to do--to, to compose or conduct, whatever you wanted to do, you know, I mean, like--and you pretty much do (laughter), so, I mean, what would it--what's the future look like--
Speaker 2: If I had the resources, what I would like to do would be able to form a professional choral ensemble of about twenty-four voices where you could make--which would be highly selective, and do the kind of music that I think I would like to do on, on the highest level possible that I could do it.  That would be my dream.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And to do music of various composers, but with, with dedicated people who could be compensated which would make them have a responsibility toward it and do it on the highest level we could.
Speaker 1: Are you--
Speaker 2: I'm dreaming about it.  I'm tryin' to think about how to go about that.
Story_ID: 160002
Speaker 1: Was it difficult to retire?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head no).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I never--I knew that, you know, it was just the right time.  I thought about it--I mean, I hadn't thought about doing it that precise time, then all of the sudden, you know, certain things fell in place and I just said, you know--the, the, the--I had--I would always--I had always hoped--Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] is in the process now of building a new music building and I had always wanted to be a part of that process, of being in that building, but when it's not gonna be finished until 2015 and I got to thinking about, okay, how old am I now, how old will I be then, if I got into the building, I wouldn't wanna leave it for three or four years, do I really wanna work every day that long?  Even though I am thoroughly enjoying what I'm doing and involved in--I mean, I'm--I, I had no qualms about it, no, no--I'm thoroughly--I was thoroughly enjoying what I was doing.  I just got to thinking, well, maybe this is a good time and--which will allow me to do some other things in life.  Because if I were to do that and stay, you know, it would--that would've added another five or six or seven years to my career at the university.  I wasn't sure I wanted to stay that long.
Speaker 1: Is it a possibility you may go back to the university at some point to--
Speaker 2: I would not mind--
Speaker 1: --Serve as--
Speaker 2: I would--I don't know.  If they--if I were invited to come back and teach a course or something, I would do that.  And I wouldn't mind doing some guest teaching.  For instance if, if--replacing people on a three, four week kind of thing or residencies or something along that line.  But I don't want another full-time job.
Story_ID: 160003
Speaker 1: Now at this juncture, when you look back at everything you did professionally over thirty-five years at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and before it, Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan] and then at, you know, Wayne [State University, Detroit, Michigan], what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: I would hope that it would be that my former students would say, "He was dedicated to it, he emphasized the importance of excellence, he emphasized the importance of integrity, and he approached music in that way," and that would--I would hope that would be my legacy, that, that I tried to do things at the highest level possible and attempted to get them to understand that mediocrity has no--has no way--there's, there's no, no, no purpose for it in our--in our field, that we have to always try to do the best we can and excel, and I would hope that would be the legacy.  Put that on my tombstone.
Story_ID: 160004
Speaker 1: Now if you look back again at everything you've done at this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I think--I think everything has fallen in place the way it was supposed to be.  I can't think of anything that I would do professionally when I would say I wish I had done this or I wish I had done that differently.  There might be some things I wish I had done, but nothing that I think I would've changed in a way that they all happened.
Story_ID: 160005
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Musically?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I would hope that--that's a big question.  I would hope that the community as a whole would understand the importance and significance of education.  I would hope that, that, that people would always understand the fact that hard work reaps rewards.  I would hope that people would understand the significance and, and the importance of a family unit in, in, in trying to instill within kids integrity and honesty and the importance of, of, of doing things on a high level.  I guess, just--I guess that would probably be it.
Story_ID: 160006
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  Now you have--now, you're still married and have--you've got children, right?
Speaker 2: I have a daughter who lives in, in--here [Chicago, Illinois] with two, two wonderful grandchildren.  I have a daughter who lives in Denver [Colorado] and another granddaughter who is a columnist for The [Chicago] Tribune, okay.  I have cousins and a brother who live in Detroit [Michigan].  And that's the extent of my family, basically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did your, your parents [Rusha Harris and Major Lee Harris] feel about your career?
Speaker 2: I think they were--I think they were--they felt good about it.  I thought--my mother died when I was quite young.  My mother died when I was twenty-six, and I was just embarking upon my first college teaching job, so she never had a chance to see me develop in that. My father did.  In fact, both my birth father [William Jenkins] and my father both saw--had a chance to see me do--go, go into that, and I think they were proud.
Story_ID: 160007
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't discussed that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think you've been very, very thorough.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you.  And thank you for being, you know, for tryin' to answer these questions (laughter).  The, the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little, it's a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a person who, again, strove for excellence in what I do.  I'd like to be known as, as a good person, a person who was a, a, a good--a good father, a good grandfather, a person who tried to make contributions to society that had meaning both musically and otherwise.
Story_ID: 160008
Speaker 1: Okay, on the left is my brother, Harold [Jenkins], and on the right, my brother, Maurice [Jenkins], and this was at my sixtieth birthday party.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?  The sixtieth--
Speaker 2: Oh, the sixtieth?
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: So it was in '98 [1998], I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a composer friend of mine by the name of Richard Blackford who lives in England, and I have had the opportunity of compose--of conducting two American premiers of his music.  The last was last year in Millennium Park [Chicago, Illinois].  The piece was called 'Not In Our Time' for soloist, chorus, and orchestra, and we had seventy British singers who joined us here at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] to perform that piece.
Speaker 2: Very good.  Next.
Speaker 1: That's me, but it needs to be up the other way.
Speaker 2: No, he's, he's shooting--
Speaker 1: Oh, he's shooting--Oh, I see.  Okay.  This is a conducting shot, performance, formal shot.
Speaker 2: He's tryin' to shoot for the maximum number of (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Next time you see it, it'll be correct (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, alright.
Speaker 2: That was in 1991 when I was the--an adjudicator for the--a South African music festival called [National] Eisteddfod [of South Africa], and that took place outside of Pretoria in South Africa, and the two people on each side were participants in that festival.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I had a chance--I was in South Africa again.  I've had a chance to go three different times as a teacher, and this was at the Cape of Good Hope where I had a chance to go down there and just as a--outside of Cape Town [South Africa].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, this is the same music festival with a gentleman from Algeria. I forgot his name, and on the right, a person who was very important in, in South African music by the name of Khabi Mngoma, who, who is now deceased, but he was a very important person in South African music.  This is in Sweden with a composer by the name--conductor by the name of Robert Sund, S-U-N-D, and that was in Stockholm [Sweden] I think, yes.  This is when I was teaching in Taipei [Taiwan]--
Speaker 1: Level it.  There we go.
Speaker 2: --In Taipei.  The person my--to my right is a man by the name of Ralph Allwood, who was the director of music at the school [Eton College, Eton, United Kingdom] where, where Charles, Prince Charles [Charles, Prince of Wales], had gone to school, and on the right was a--was a student, on the left was, was a man who was the head of the festival.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: That's a, a very fine arranger of spirituals and pianists, Moses Hogan, who is now deceased, and he and I were at a music festival together.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's in Australia, in Sydney [Australia], with a good friend of mine by the name of Gilbert Seeley, who was a conductor in Oregon, with the Oregon Repertory Singers.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's another person with whom I had a chance to work as a student.  I believe that was in Taipei as well.
Speaker 1: Hold on, please.  Hold, hold.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture, photograph of Heather Headley who was a student of mine at Northwestern who is now a very, very prominent singer in musical theater.
Speaker 1: Alright next.
Speaker 2: Again, that's instructing a student also in Taipei in conducting.  He was a conducting student of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's the very early--the only shot I have of me as a child with my mother [Rusha Harris] and my cousin, Patricia, who was the baby being held in her arms.  That was a baby shot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the same--my mother, myself, and my cousin, Patricia.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my daughter and her mom and I at her wedding.
Speaker 1: What's your daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Shari [Mikos].
Speaker 1: And your wife?
Speaker 2: Mary.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Again, Shari and her dad with the father-daughter dance at her wedding.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my good friend, [HM] Warrick Carter, who has just recently retired as president of Columbia College, Chicago [Illinois], and that was also at the wedding, my daughter's wedding.
Speaker 1: That's my brother Harold again, Harold Jenkins, and I also, again, at the wedding of my daughter, Shari.
Speaker 2: That's Shari's first piano lesson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's just a proud grandpa and his granddaughter when she was a mere infant.
Speaker 1: Hold on one second, Larry [Crowe].  Let me see that one again.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: On the left is my brother, Harold, his wife, Betty, me, Mary, and my--and my brother, Maurice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a very important in, in, in remembrance on this.  This is having a chance to conduct a performance of the 'Sacred Music' of Duke Ellington with Clark Terry as a specialist soloist and [HM] Oscar Brown, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my daughter, Sarah--granddaughter, pardon me, Sarah and me.
Speaker 1: Hold on one second, please.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a photograph of the former president of Northwestern, Henry Bienen, and me.
Speaker 1: Good, next.
Speaker 2: This was at the Eisteddfod music festival in South Africa in 1991 where I was on the adjudication panel, and this is us deliberating about what kind of score we're gonna give the group that has just finished performing.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a good friend in Argentina, Oscar and me at a--when I was guest conducting in Argentina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A picture of Wynton Marsalis and me when Wynton was here to receive his honorary doctorate degree from Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's just acknowledging a performance I believe at Northwestern, at the end of a performance, taking a bow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's an action shot of conducting a rehearsal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same thing again, rehearsal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a photograph of Jessye Norman and my--very--one of my very best friends, Brazeal Dennard, who is now deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and my dad [Major Lee Harris] in the late '60s [1960s] in Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Hold on please.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my college graduation picture.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of when I conducted the 'African Sanctus' at Carnegie Hall [New York City], and that was a photograph taken in the maestro's dressing room.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of, of a workshop I gave in La Plata, Argentina, and these were the participants in the workshop.
