Story_ID: 136882
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Charles James Holley.  H-O-L-L-E-Y.  For the most part, I'm known as Jim Holley as--in my ministry, but my full name and legal name is Charles James Holley.  H-O-L-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, 12--12/5/33--'43, December the 5th, 1943, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm the senior pastor at the historic Little Rock Baptist Church here in the City of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the twenty-fifth I think of--
Speaker 1: Twenty-fourth.
Speaker 2: Twenty-fourth of, of June, 19 and, and--four--19--2014.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at the, at the, at the church, the historic Little Rock Baptist Church, 9000 Woodward Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 136883
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up.  They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black or blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Nassau, Bahamas.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: I--basically, I've used one that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] used which is the measure of a man--you, you determine the measure of a man by how he handles his, his, vicissitudes, how he handles his life problems.  That's how you really measure a man.  I'm paraphrasing it, but that's what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 136884
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately and then we'll try to talk about how they got together--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Full name is Effie Mae King Holley.  Her maiden name was King.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's E-F-F-I-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: M-A-E?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  King?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I would--I don't know.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Suspect she was born in the '20s [1920s]?  Or?
Speaker 2: I'm sure--it should--at least--I'm, I'm sure that--the, the problem is, I didn't--was not raised by my mother, so I didn't have that--those experiences--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with my mother or father [Charles James Holley, Sr.] and so in terms of those, those birthdays, that was not part of my, my bringing up and my, my environment.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of what, you know, family lore, was your mother a young woman?  Or a middle-aged woman when she had you?
Speaker 2: I think she was a, a, a younger woman.  She had four of us.  I was the oldest of four and we were (unclear) were born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  My mother and father did meet as I understand it in West Virginia and--but, for the most part, she was a much younger woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so she, so she was born in, in Philadelphia herself?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know her birthdate or my father's place--birth place, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I apologize to you.
Speaker 1: No problem.
Speaker 2: So are there any stories about your mother's side of the family?  Do you know anything about them?
Speaker 1: Very--not much of anything.  I, I do remember my, my mother--my mother's father and mother were--my mother, grandmother was Caucasian and my father obviously--my grandfather was dark complexion.  They, they met in as I understand it some place in Kentucky and when they--for the most part because of--at that day and time in terms of, of racism, they had to flee from Kentucky to another destination which I don't know because she was white and he was black, but--and my grandfather as I understand it was a, a, a preacher.  And she had like--they had like four children.  And so that's the--as much as I know about my mother on her--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on her side.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So her, her parents were from Kentucky?
Speaker 1: Evidently, yes.
Speaker 2: And her father was a preacher?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you, do you, do you know if she had a chance to go to school or anything?
Speaker 1: She was, she was, she was an educator and, and, and she didn't finish, but she did go to school and then, and then she met my father and, and started having children and, therefore, had to come out of school.  I think she was going to Bluefield State [College] at that particular time there in Bluefield, West Virginia, but she didn't finish.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So is there anything else about her that you know that--
Speaker 1: I think that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --might be--
Speaker 1: --for the most part--that's what it is--is a beautiful woman and that's about as much as I remember her.  I'm sure if I had more time I could, but I think this, this is about as much I can say about her right now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, so did you know any of your mother's relatives growin' up?
Speaker 1: I knew, I knew her brother.  That's the only one I think I knew that I remember, was her brother.  Her name--His name was Jacob [ph.] King and the reason why I knew him I think a lot was because he was very active in the church.  He was a great singer, gospel singer, and, and from now--every now and then, he would be on, on television.  In those day and times, we didn't have but one station.  But, but he was a very, very dedicated father and husband, and, and was very good to his nieces and nephews.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So was he on television in, in Philadelphia or in--
Speaker 1: No, there in West Virginia.
Speaker 2: In West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 136885
Speaker 1: Okay, now we'll go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His first name is the same as mine, Charles James Holley, Sr.--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the same way.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't--I would not--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's--okay.
Speaker 2: --I wouldn't as well.  I--then of course, my--I, I was raised by my father's mother, so by my grandmother, which is on my father's side.  And so, again, I didn't have that experience with my father either in terms of birthdays and for the most part I don't even remember him having--spending a birthday with me, not only knowing what his birthday was.  But, but for the most part, I always felt like from hindsight but--that my life was, was orchestrated a little bit by God.  So for the most part, I think that I, I--what I really remember and, and sometimes really choose to remember is my experience with my grandmother because that's where I spent my childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I, I'm gonna ask about her.  I just wanted to--
Speaker 2: No, it's fine.
Speaker 1: --ask you this, though.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Is your--was your father about the same age as your mother [Effie Mae King Holley]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So they were both--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --young.
Speaker 2: Right.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Fairly young anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm not quite sure what my father was doing at that particular time that, that they met.  I know he ended up bein' selling cars, you know, as a car salesman as an--you know, from, from [West] Virginia all the way to California, that's where he ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were born in the middle of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Is that right?  I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Forty-three [1943]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --forty-three [1943], yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I'm thinkin' as far as you know, did he go to the [U.S.] Army at all?
Speaker 2: No, he did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  So let's see.  If--so they met in West Virginia, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what, what place in West Virginia did they meet?
Speaker 2: I'm--I could say that it was in, in West Virginia--Bluefield, West Virginia, but I'm sure that's not quite true.  I just don't know.  That's the point of, point of beginning and point of, of, of origin of, of the relationship.  But I really--in all fairness, I don't know exactly where they got married.
Speaker 1: Now, was your, was your father in college too?
Speaker 2: No, he was not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 136886
Speaker 1: So anyway, they got together and you, you were telling me before we started the interview that your parents [Effie Mae King Holley and Charles James Holley, Sr.] didn't stay together.
Speaker 2: Right.  Somehow, we got to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, they did, rather, and of course they began--they, they had four children as--I'm the oldest of the four and I was born there in Jefferson Hospital [Thomas Jefferson University Hospital] there in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on--in north Philly, and that's where we stayed.  There were times when my--they were separated and, therefore, I didn't experience nor did my sisters or brothers, brother, experience the, the family experience because we moved from--moved around quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So you were raised by, as you said, neither your mother nor your father.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They went their separate ways.  Did your mother take care of the other three children, or?
Speaker 1: For some reason or another, my father ended up taking care of all four of us for the best that he could.  There were, there were basically no real--do I ever remember a father--my mother and father in a--sitting around the same table.  I don't ever remember going to church together.  I don't remember going to a, going to a store together.  I don't remember any of that.  So evidently, even though they had four children, there was always turmoil or separation.  They were not together but they were together evidently because we--there was four of us.  And so I had twin sisters and, and a brother.  And so I think that for the--in, in terms of recollection from the rest of--recollection of all of this is, is that I was basically given to my grandmother to raise and, and I think my father was taking care of my sisters and brothers or brother, brother and sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 136887
Speaker 1: So can you give us your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, Mary--Marybelle [ph.], Marybelle Holley, yeah, and my other grandmother was Minnie [ph.]--on my mother's [Effie Mae King Holley] side was Minnie King.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Minnie King.  I didn't know my mother--my grandfather--neither one of my grandfathers.  They were--when I was born, they had already passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell us about Marybelle Holley.  Where was she from and--she was from West Virginia, I guess?
Speaker 2: She--I don't think she was from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She ended up there.  Obviously, West Virginia is a coal town and so had to do a lot of mining there, and so I think a lot of people, you know, migrated to that area to--for, for work.  But my grandmother was part Indian [Native American]; she was Cherokee, very tall, beautiful, Cherokee, African American Cherokee woman.  And so--and, and when--as I said before, when I got there, I was like a couple years old and stayed with her for--until I was about fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what did your grandmother do for a living?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  They bootlegged.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had a, she had a son that--they bootlegged, and so you either do mining or you, you bootlegged (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so the--so she and her son were involved in this business?
Speaker 2: Just she--he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Just she--
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was.  She didn't--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --do much of anything.  She just--very sweet lady and never left the house, never put foot on the ground.  She's just a different type of person and--but, at that day and time, we were very poor, so it didn't really, you know, didn't really--there was no thought of anything could be any different because we all were in the same boat.  We were in a small village and some people doin' better than others and some were not, but we're all basically what we call a, a holler and--which means you got several people in a location, about ten families in a location and all of you basically are supporting each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is that the--that's, that's a good definition of a holler?
Speaker 2: No, holler is basically--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: A physical place?
Speaker 2: --is, is more physical--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because there's one way in and one way out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, now--your grandmother, now, what is she--did she make the liquor herself?  Or did she--
Speaker 2: No, like--my, my uncle did.  He did all the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --all the business.  Every six months, he was going to jail.
Speaker 1: And so she basically helped sell it and distribute it?
Speaker 2: No, nothing.  She just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nothing.
Speaker 2: She just, she just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, she just lived off--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --of the--
Speaker 2: --off the proceeds--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the proceeds, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  No, I can really say she didn't--she may make some home brew or somethin' like that in, you know, in the house, but it was for, for her own consumption and not necessarily for selling.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she just lived on the proceeds.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And so did I (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a holdover I guess from the 1920s.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.
Speaker 1: Or maybe even before that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because, you know.
Speaker 2: Like I said, we were very poor, and if you didn't work, then obviously you had to be creative and, and this is the way my uncle decided to be creative.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you don't know if your grandparents came from Kentucky too?  Or did they--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  And it's, you know--I probably now that we havin' this kind of conversation, I probably should try to go to ancestry.com and try to (laughter), try to figure out all of this.  I guess, you know, my friend, we were so concerned about the future, it's difficult to, to work on the past until you get to a point maybe this--in your, in your life like now.  But you're so busy tryin' to, tryin' to live for the next day, tryin' to see what the next day is gonna bring, so you don't really move forward--go backwards.  You just take the things as they go, 'cause we--again, it was a point of survival in that day and time.  Remember, I'm seventy years old and this is when I was fourteen, and this is like, you know, in the, the, in the '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s].  And so when other people were havin' depression, we were havin' a real depression.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Especially when you know that West Virginia is a very, very poor state and poor in terms on the, on the priority of the country at that particular time.  And so we were basically just at that day black hillbillies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 136888
Speaker 1: Let's see.  So can you name your brothers and sisters for, for us?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My, my brother's name.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest, right?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: And then who comes next?
Speaker 2: And then my brother is--was, was Dennis, Dennis Carlisle [ph.].  And then my sisters were twins, Caroline [ph.] and Connie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they were basically raised by your father [Charles James Holley, Sr.], right?
Speaker 2: Right, for the most--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --part, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did Dennis do?
Speaker 2: Basically not much of anything.  He ended up dying of cirrhosis of the liver.  And one of my sisters is still living; the other one died as a result of a homicide.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the one that's living is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Based--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --which--
Speaker 2: She's here in, in, in Michigan with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 136889
Speaker 1: Now, do you have--well, when you think about what you know about your parents [Effie Mae King Holley and Charles James Holley, Sr.] anyway, their personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor or whatever talents they had, who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think mostly my mother.  I, I, I believe in education; my mother believed in it.  My mother was a hard worker; I believe in work, work ethic.  So I think in terms of my, my whole attitude about life--I do remember when I did stay with my mother, from time to time we, we--she would be working in a, in a store or on a--in a restaurant and she would have me standing right there by her, so to speak, and so I knew her--about her work ethic.  I think she's always impressed in my life about education.  You know, you can't sing, you, you can't play football, you can't dance, so you better educate your way outta here, and that's what I decided to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 136890
Speaker 1: Now, you're--do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I do.  I try to repress it as much as possible, try not to get emotional about it, but I'm very, I'm very grateful.  I'm a very spiritual and--I grew up--as I said, I, I, I went to, to West Virginia.  I remember one year, my, my father [Charles James Holley, Sr.] brought me back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I met one--spent one year at Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], for one year, and it might've been the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, that's in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: It--that was in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Philadelphia, okay.
Speaker 2: And then in my--after that year, my father sent me back to my, to my grandmother [Marybelle Holley (ph.)] and so I spent my seventh and eighth grade there with her, and, and so I never saw my father but once a year on--and that was normally at Christmas time maybe.  And my mother [Effie Mae King Holley] for the most part, I think she found another life, so to speak, and, and so I didn't necessarily have that experience with her.  So all of my experiences were really with my grandmother and--for those fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was asking--you were getting ready to tell me about your earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 2: Well, again, that--that's--well, you wanna--otherwise, I, I, I could go back probably to, to like the first grade or something like that, you know, five or six--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, I'm asking you, is there, is there something that you remember that's the earliest memory that you have of bein' alive?
Speaker 2: I think the earliest probably when I was six, six or seven years old, that my aunt was killed at a baseball stadium, and so I remember a lot of commotion about that while I was in, in bed and wakin'--to--they woke me up to let me know what had happened, and I think that that was sort of the, you know, like I said, the--that I remember at six, you know, six or seven years old.  And so--and then I do remember again in, in the childhood that, you know--it was just tough. It was just tough, you know.  But I didn't know it was tough, but it was tough.  We had to, you know--there were times we didn't have--we had a coal, coal stove.  We didn't have electrical; we had a coal stove.  And so we, when you didn't have any coal, you didn't have no heat, you know.  There's an outdoor toilet; you didn't have indoor toilet--indoor bathroom.  You had to go to the--to outside.  And the water--only water we had was a spigot in the house that was basically no hot water.  It was just a, a, a spigot with running water, cold water.  So those are the kind of things that I remember, you know, growin' up as a child, is those kind of--we lived on commodities.  We didn't--those days they--you didn't have food stamps, you had what you called government commodities.  The government would bring you powdered sugar, powdered sugar, powdered milk, and I don't, I don't drink nothin' powdered now because of that.  And so you take that box that the government would give you and it has to last you to another, for a whole month.  There were times we would--as a child, I would go and pick strawberries and we canned those.  I would pick blackberries, canned those.  So we used nature to feed us and get us through the winter, like canning and that kind of a thing so that we could make it through the winter.  So it was a kind of a, a, a cooperation between my grandmother and myself in terms of tryin' to survive, 'cause she didn't wanna go nowhere.  So basically, you know, I would sell wood to bring in--sell wood to neighbors for their fireplace for $0.25 cents a basket at eight years old, nine years old, tried to make it on, on, you know, that way.  It was all, you know, it was sort of very interesting but a, a child that, that--a childhood that for the most part I think has a lot to do with the man that I am today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hope that makes sense to you.
Speaker 1: It does.  It does.
Story_ID: 136891
Speaker 1: I've heard people describe growing up in West Virginia in a rural situation like yours and it always--they, they described a pretty tough--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --existence.  I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I have friends that grew up in Glen Rogers, West Virginia--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and another one in--I can't think of the other town, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but they're, you know--
Speaker 2: Because it was very--again, segregation was, was not something that was on the, the, the radar screen for anybody.  We--you had to do what you--because people did--they did what they wanted to do to you and it doesn't--and nobody really cared outside of the, of the, the community.  And so as a child, you basically--you stayed in your area.  It's interesting that when I was a child, I would always look to get to the black community, and now that I'm grown, I'm always lookin' to get to, to the other community now.  It seems like you're--that your community, you know, is having trouble, so to speak.  But, it was, it was very poor.  The whole state was poor for the most part.  And, and, when I went to school as a kid, I had to walk.  There was no bus system, you know, so I would walk about pretty much I think it came out to about eleven miles going one way to Bramwell [West Virginia]] and another, another eleven miles coming back.  So I would wash up at--in cold water 'cause there's no heat, and then you wash up and you basically go to school.  And you have to go early because you gotta walk, and then you gotta walk back.  And so it was, it was, it was difficult.  But, again, in those days, it was the way of life and you get used to the way of life, and there's no exposure to make you feel like it was anything different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 136892
Speaker 1: I, I know what I, I--what I intend to go back to the story about your aunt being killed.  Was she--what are the circumstances around your aunt being killed?
Speaker 2: Her--evidently, she and her boyfriend had a problem there and she was killed by him.
Speaker 1: A domestic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --issue.  And, and then in terms of the racism and--there and what people would do, I mean, what, what were the stories of?
Speaker 2: Well, you just stayed in your, your neighborhood, you know.  You understood that.  It was just this--ecologically, you understood that.  And so you, you go, you go--if you had to do any--go to town, like from my town to Pocahontas [West Virginia], you go there, but you basically, you just try to get back to the other side of the railroad track (laughter).  You get caught on the other side of the--the wrong side of the track, you could have trouble.
Speaker 1: Was there a deadline, like a time of day?
Speaker 2: Just, just, just--it could be any time.  It's just that you just got to be vigilant and just, just do what you got to do and get home (laughter).
Speaker 1: You wanna know why I ask it is 'cause some towns had sundown--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, it was just--it could be, you know--I, I got caught sometimes in the morning, sometime I got caught in the after dinner (laughter), sometime I got caught in the evening.  There was no--it looked like they were just lookin' for ya (laughter).
Story_ID: 136893
Speaker 1: You were just further just explaining about what the community was like.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just basically--it's just a--the thing of in terms of just tryin' to understand, you know, that you just wanna be safe, and you want to make sure that you get home.  And, and you understood that if, that day and time because of racism--we didn't understand it as, as being racism as much as it was just hate.  And so, and so--but we all was, we all was poor.  You know, you--you know, we all was poor, you know.  And many times, my grandmother would feed--I remember several white people that would come by and she would feed them.  And, and, and, you know, but, again, it's--there's always a few, you know, so you, you know, you just understood it, that's all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't, it wasn't all the whites, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, not--
Speaker 1: --but, but, a few that could--
Speaker 2: Right.  It's always--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and, and whatever they did, they could get away with.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Because there's no, there is no recourse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was there a name for the holler that you, you all lived in?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it was, but I don't remember.  I'm sorry.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm sure there was.
Story_ID: 136894
Speaker 1: And, was--did you have a church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  There was a church.  You always got a church, you know, and the church there was called Laurel Creek Baptist Church.  There was no creek there, but it was called Laurel Creek--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --if the community was named Laurel Creek--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The community--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --just the church.
Speaker 2: --was again, Wolfe [Bramwell], West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, the, the, name--it was on the back, on the Baptist church, so that's probably why I'm Baptist.  That was the only church in the town at that particular time and it was--happened to be Baptist.  And, and--that was--it was sort of like a--it was something to do, you know.  On Saturdays, you had entertainment night for makin' the ice cream and stuff like that, so you, you--there was no (laughter), there was no club or, or entertainment, you know, you--church was the entertainment, so to speak.  Then you had a lot of people that basically belonged to the, to the--not the union, but the, the, the masonics--
Speaker 1: Oh, the masons.
Speaker 2: --masons, you know, many of them, and they provided a lot for, for us in the community as well, especially the picnics they would have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are the black masons, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the church is a black church, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: The church, Laurel Creek Church--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Laurel Creek Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Baptist, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 136895
Speaker 1: So, did you have--did you have a radio growing up?
Speaker 2: Did I what now?
Speaker 1: A, a radio?
Speaker 2: In the, in the, in the, in my house?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You had a television and we had radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, we had that.  We had--you know--only thing--we had electricity, we just didn't have the water, the, the kind of a thing to eat and stuff like that.  But yes, we had, we had television, one station called channel six, and, and one station.  It was interesting because my--I remember watching Oral Roberts on Sundays and I began to sorta like, wanna be like him, you know, because in those days' times, you didn't have African Americans on television.  But, but I liked--then for all the people he was helpin', what it seemed the ministry and healing.  I always felt like--so I would never miss that.  I would never miss that.  And--but it's only one station and, and, and it, it was, it's--we, we, we would--we stayed around it all day long.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 136896
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question or you've, you've already explained some, some of it, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growin' up?
Speaker 2: I'm not quite sure of how to answer that.  I hear what--I know what you're sayin'.  I'm not quite sure, again, like I said--
Speaker 1: Were there any particular smells, for instance, from a, from the mines or the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, not really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) activity?
Speaker 2: I, I, I think, you know, what the--I don't wanna be so philosophical with you, but I think the, the, the smell of poverty.  I just--I hated it.  I hated it.  I hated it.  Even though I didn't understand it, I still hate--I--not knowin' how you're gonna make it the next day and my grandmother [Marybelle Holley], and, and, and just knowin' how I can free her from all of this pressure that she was always under.  But, I do understand what you're sayin'.  Obviously, there's what we call a, a hog killing time where--in the whole area, everybody killed the hogs at the same time.  And so the children did what they had to do and the grownups did what they had to do.  And so that smell (laughter), you know, of all the--those hogs and stuff like the, you know, the straughter [ph.]--I'm sorry, you know, when you kill the hogs, hogs.  So that's--that was a, was a interesting event (laughter) that took place where we all pitched in and obviously they would give, give us some, some, some sausage and things like that for, for helping.  So that was always a interesting smell, if you don't mind.  I, I would--the only thing, you know, I would, I would go nighttime because I wouldn't have any, any, any coal to--for the fuel, fuel for the fire and so I, I would hop freight trains and throw the, the, the coal off the freight trains and to go back the next day, next morning, and try to pick it up and bring it home because, again, we--many several of us had to do that because we were--didn't have the money, didn't have the money for fuel.
Speaker 1: I've--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --heard that story before--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Until the, until the state police used to protect the trains from going through the, through community now and then, so we had to be careful that we not gonna get killed by hoppin' the freight train and then bein' shot by the, the state trooper tryin' to get the coal off.  It was, you know--but it's amazing what you would do even as a kid to survive.
Story_ID: 136897
Speaker 1: Now, what about your school?  Was there a--what, what was the name of your first--and--what, what--you, you'd talked about Paul Laurence Dunbar [Elementary School] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were there for a year?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then, you came back to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You're, you're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: West Virginia.
Speaker 2: --gonna love this.  You're gonna love this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The school was Roseville. It was Roseville Elementary School.  We had one teacher.  Her name was Elizabeth Holley.  H-O-L-L-E-Y.  There were two Holleys and they were basically called--they were known as the, the old maids, so to speak.  One taught in college and one taught in elementary school.  We had one hour teaching a day.  Her--my name was Holley, her name was Holley, but she never believed that we were kin because her doctor--her father was a doctor.  She was a teacher.  Her sister was a teacher.  They were high class.  They were, they're in a different status.  So she never acknowledged the fact that we were kin at all, and maybe we weren't, but she always took a liking to me anyway.  And so I spent the first year--first five years taught by Mrs.--Ms. Holley, one hour a day, one hour a day of education.  The only musical instrument I used--had was a red flute and the flute teacher--the music teacher would come in once a month and teach us how to play the red, red and white flute.  That was the--that was what they gave--the State of, of, of West Virginia gave to African Americans at that particular time.
Speaker 1: So, is, is, is this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: --a one-room school?
Speaker 2: A one-room school with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: One room.
Speaker 2: --a big pot belly stove and, just watch this.  At, at, at twelve and thirteen, I made the fire.  She--they needed a janitor.  The janitor, he retired.  She worked it out where I would be the janitor for the school so I would go in the morning at five o'clock in the morning, fix the fire so we could be nice and warm in the wintertime, go back home, wash up, and come back for school, you know, and I got $10 dollars a month.  The state paid me ten dollars a month, which they didn't know I was, that I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I, I was a minor.  But that's how she was tryin' to help me.  I remember a time when we didn't have any money to buy--my grandmother didn't have money to give me.  That day and time, notebook paper was a, was a, was a, nickel, and we didn't have not a nickel in the house. So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Is that for a pack of it?
Speaker 2: --I got, I got a paper bag, a brown paper bag and wrote my home--wrote my homework on the brown paper bag.  I got that from [Abraham] Lincoln on a shovel, listened to Abraham Lincoln's story about he, he wrote his homework on a shovel.  I wrote my homework on a paper bag.  She was so impressed with that, that then she began to take a liking to me and felt like that I had some possibilities.  And so those four years, you know, four years--five years I was with her, this is my education experience.  Can you imagine kids today who have, have a teacher for one grade, you know, and all day long.  I had one hour of, of, of lessons.
Speaker 1: Now, why, why was it just one hour?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Because, she--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: --she had to get to second grade, the, the second row--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: --was the second grade--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So everybody was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The third grade was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the third grade.  The fourth row was the fourth grade.  The fifth row was the fifth grade.  The sixth row was the sixth grade.  You got to the door.  That means you goin'--you tryin' to get out (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to the next level.
Speaker 1: So, so she'd give you a lesson, then some work to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She was just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And, was, was it enough work to last the rest of the day?
Speaker 2: The--yeah, right.  You'd--in other words, after you did the first hour, she'd give you enough work to keep you goin' for the rest of the day.
Speaker 1: Well, I--if I know anything about children, their attention span is gonna drift in, they're gonna start doin' something else other than--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But, but you--again--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --homework.
Speaker 2: --remember, we're different--we're in a different generation.  You're much younger--you're younger than I am.  But if you go back to, to, to my age there, we were different.  You don't, you don't, you don't mess up in school.  You don't act up in school.  The teacher basically had control and if you did, if you did, then you'll, you'll--not only would she whoop you, but your mama--would probably get another whippin' before you got home, and then when you got home, another whippin'.  So it was, it was, it was--she had it under control and I would never forget her for all the--and then, of course, her sister taught Bluefield State College [Bluefield, West Virginia], and as I said, her father was a, was a famous doctor there in Bramwell, West Virginia.  But I never will forget her.
Story_ID: 136898
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you, you had pretty good grades in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --grade school [Roseville Elementary School in West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: --but I was all--because it's, it's all I could--it's all you could do, you know, one television, and it was all hillbilly, you know.  The substance were just, you know--programming was hillbilly and nothing that you were really interested in other than on Sundays when I would listen to Oral Roberts.  Then one time they bring a, a, a western on and Roy Rogers or Gene Autry or somebody like that that I would watch, but, but then there's nothing else on there that really--so, studyin' and gettin' your homework done and, and that.  But for the most part, I would have my homework done because we had all that time, so comin' home, you know, now and then I wouldn't have to do it.
Speaker 1: That's--now, were there, were there any opportunities for athletics?
Speaker 2: No.  Nothing like that.  No, no, no, nothing for that.
Speaker 1: That's what I figured.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had, we had, we had recess, you know, and, and swings, you know, that kind of thing, and, and had outdoor toilets, you know, for boys and for girls, nothing like that, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you were in Roseville--
Speaker 2: Roseville--
Speaker 1: --Elementary School for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for the first--
Speaker 2: Five years.
Speaker 1: --five years.  Okay.
Story_ID: 136899
Speaker 1: All right.  So by this time, you're in the sixth grade, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where, where, where did you go next?
Speaker 2: I went to--then I went to Paul Dun--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's when you went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School] in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in Philly.
Speaker 2: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: How was--I mean, was that--did, did you like that better?
Speaker 2: No, it's just that for whatever reason, my, my father [Charles James Holley, Sr.] and mother [Effie Mae King Holley], I think they were tryin' to get back together, wanted me there, you know.  And then I think also my father needed me to help him with my brother and sisters, so I was brought there and I kinda took care of them, dressed them, and, and got them off to school for, for a whole year.  And then I went back to West Virginia and spent the seventh grade and the twelfth grade--I mean, seventh and eighth grade there, in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Bramwell, Bramwell, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Bramwell, West Virginia--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, this is the high school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is middle--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Was it called high school?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --middle school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Middle school.
Speaker 2: It, it really--high school.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Middle and high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, middle and high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So was that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --spent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --was that also the high school you attended, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, that was--no, there was high school there, but I didn't spend, I didn't spend high school there.  I just did middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Brownwell [sic, Bramwell Middle School].  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so up to this point, up from first grade through middle school, Elizabeth Holley was like a mentor to you--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and, and anybody at Dunbar or Brownwell [sic, Bramwell]--
Speaker 1: Ms.--this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --or Bramwell, rather.
Speaker 1: --teacher that was there was very nice.  I don't remember her--I think a Ms. (unclear) was her name in Paul Laurence Dunbar, in the Dunbar school, and she was the sixth grade teacher, very nice.  I mean, I, I have always enjoyed education.  I never had a--you know, I, I--and always have a, have a relationship with my teachers even when I was growin' up in a--as a, as a child.  I've always felt that people will overlook your poverty if you're nice, if you're smart, they'll look over your, your circumstances.  And somehow I felt like I could make up the difference, you know, by bein'--tryin' to be nice and kind and where people really like you.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 136900
Speaker 1: So at Brown--you know, when you, when you finished Brownwell [sic, Bramwell Middle School, West Virginia], where, where did you go?
Speaker 2: What happened was, my, my uncle and aunt on my father's [Charles James Holley, Sr.] side, his brother, they came to visit my grandmother [Marybelle Holley (ph.)], just to visit as they, you know, normally do from a place called Mount Pleasant, Tennessee.  When they got there, my grandmother basically said to my uncle and aunt, "I'm at the age now where I can't do any more for Jimmy  and what I'd like for you to do is take Jimmy back to, to--with you to Tennessee because at this point, I can't do no more for him.  I'm older, I'm old, I'm--and he needs more."  And so they were what you call middle class at that particular--in that particular community and he worked at Mount (unclear) Plant and get--they had--to get money.  She did domestic work.  They had a son by the name of Steve [ph.], one son, and anyway, that, that, again which I feel like was orchestrated by God, moved me from West Virginia from a--from poverty and from a sense of where many of my friends were basically stuck and I was now going to--driving to--in a car going to Mount Pleasant, Tennessee, a place that I didn't know.  But, but, you know, I felt like it was a chance for me to start all over again 'cause nobody knew where I'd come from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I started there in my ninth--in the ninth grade and spent, spent high school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A place called Clarke High School in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Mount Pleasant, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Is that Clarke with a, with a K or just a K or K-E?
Speaker 2: It's K-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, Clarke High School.  Now, well, so were things pretty smooth between you and your aunt and your uncle?
Speaker 2: It was very nice.  I mean, it was a--they were very nice to me.  The son was very nice 'cause I was, I was kinda impinging, sort of like--am I, am I sayin' it right?  Impinging upon his, his--all that he would get, I'm now sharing with him.  So he, he took me as a, as a little brother and we still to this day still have a good relationship.  But his mother, his mother and his father, my uncle and their aunt--and my aunt, they basically took me in like a son and basically treated me like a son and, and, and God used them to get me to, to the next level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 136901
Speaker 1: Now, was church different in, in Mount Pleasant [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and not only was it just different, it was, it was, it's where I could participate in the choir, usher boy, you know, that kind of a thing, so they had young people there.  You know, the city was much--this Mount Pleasant, you know, maybe had a population of maybe 75,000 people.  Now, where I come from, there's twenty-five, seventy-five families (laughter) from--so that's a long way, you know what I mean?  So--that's--you have a high school, you know, you know, that's got two or 300 kids--people in the high school.  And so it was, it was very nice in terms of the church experience, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what, what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: The name of the church was Mount Nebo Baptist Church and it was pastored by A.W. Walker [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Reverend A.W. Walker.  Okay.  There are some other--that seems to be a popular name among black churches in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Mount Nebo--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --there's a lot of, lot of--Mount Nebo, yep (laughter).
Speaker 1: --like Zion, there's a lot, a lot of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Zions--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --(unclear), and, yeah Nebo.  So--now, did you take any--were you--you were, you were in the choir and the usher board.  Did you have any aspirations to be a minister at this juncture?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't have the aspirations but basically always have the, the inclination, you know.  It was always--I just liked church.  I like--it wasn't so much of tryin' to be--wanting to be a preacher.  The, the church was a place of, of, of status.  It was a place where people knew you and, and they knew--they--and you could kind of like not only just mingle but you basically had relationships, you know.  And, and you--it was, it was a place of, of family, extended family, so to speak.  And, and so I enjoyed it, I enjoyed it very much.  I think that the pastor there, he recognized there was something going on, but I didn't get really called until I got to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 136902
Speaker 1: Now, at Clarke High School [Mount Pleasant, Tennessee], did you take on any leadership role at Clarke High School?
Speaker 2: I, I came out--I think we were battling for valedictorian; I think I missed it by one point.  The other thing, I did play football one day, one play, one day.  I got, I got suited up and tried to play football because I was--the coach said I was very fast in track, he felt like I'd be fast on the football team.  And a guy named Sydney Griffin [ph.] hit me so hard.  I got up, when I was able to get up, it took me two or three, five or six minutes to get up, went to the, to the locker room, showered, never came back out again.  That was my experience with sports.  I did play basketball.  I tried to play musical instrument; it didn't work out too good.  But that was basically my extracurricular activity, was basically that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you work when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I worked at a, at a grocery store and puttin' up--stocking, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is this a, a white grocery store?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Used to pay--used to sell (unclear) newspapers out of a-and the Pittsburgh Courier.  So I would sell those as a way of--always, always worked.  Always had, always had that knack of tryin' to have some money in your pocket.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, were there any particular teachers who were like mentors or--
Speaker 2: Bunch of 'em.
Speaker 1: --at Clarke?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a bunch of 'em.  The principal was--can't think of--it'll come to me, but his family was just good to me.  His son was one of my best, one of my best friends.  My history teacher, Ms. Lucas [ph.], was just always there for me.  One teacher that basically was negative but her negativity made me feel--made me go just the opposite--she felt like I need to go to the, the, the army rather than to go to college, and she said because I, I would never make it.  And so I decided to do just the opposite of that.  Since you tell me I can't make it, then I'm gonna go to college.
Story_ID: 136903
Speaker 1: I went to college with for--$25 dollar--I saved up twenty-five dollars.  Those days--and it would take $300 dollars a semester in those days.  But, again, good--it was a good experience there.
Speaker 2: Well, can I ask you how you chose Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: I, I think Mrs.--the principal's sister-in-law worked there and so she--and I think that, that, that's how, you know--so it was by, by, by relationship, you know.  And, again, that's, that's how--Mr. Ferrell is his name.
Speaker 2: Mr. Ferrell.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: F-A--
Speaker 1: F-E--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: R--
Speaker 1: --R-R-E-L-L, Ferrell.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and his wife and his son and daughter--they were very--you know, so they were--you know--to, to go to their house and eat and, you know, and then we'd eat dinner with them and so forth.  You come to see how they lived, you know.  And then they always felt like education--they both were teachers, so you knew, you know, education--it was sort of like ingrained in you that this is how you get to where we are and we want you to go to school.  My grand--my auntie was always supportive, you know.  She gave me enough money to get to Tennessee State and, and, I, and I said but I wanna--it's nothin'--you don't give me enough to come back if it doesn't work out.  She said, well, I'm not givin' you nothin' and you goin' have to--it's goin' have to work out because you not goin' have anything come back on.  So I got on a Greyhound bus and, and, and it just worked out.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 136904
Speaker 1: So tell us about Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Now--
Speaker 2: It's one of the best--it's the best--
Speaker 1: It's a black state school, right?
Speaker 2: A black state school--
Speaker 1: Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: --a land-grant institution, some of the, the, the best years of my life. It was so transformational.  I belonged to like the--in those four years about four--thirteen different organizations.  I was president of nine--of twelve of 'em.  I was a good student and worked hard to be a good student.  I worked at the Baptist hospital part-time.  I worked at a fast food restaurant part-time to work my way through.  One time, I was homeless for about three days because we didn't have, didn't have enough money to get--pay tuition.  But, again, it was all transformational, if you understand.  And, and, and, again, because I didn't have--you--I didn't have momma, daddy, sister, brother, grandmother, anything like that.  I could always depend on my auntie to send me some, some what you call care package, you know.  But it was--it's the best, best days of, of my life is my college career at Tennessee State.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And for the record, you graduated, I guess, from Clarke [High School, Mount Pleasant, Tennessee] in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you started in the fall--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 136905
Speaker 1: Now, this is the time of the Freedom Rides.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: In Nashville--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --being orchestrated right there in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely.  With [HM] John Lewis.  Yeah, and the sit-ins, the sit-ins, right there.  There's a, there's a scar on the back of my hand where I was in a lunch counter and--in one of the sit-ins, and the guy put a--put his cigarette out on the back of my hand.  But, again, we, you know, we knew what was, what was, what we were up for.  We didn't--wasn't expectin' all that, but.  It, it's--again, it's all--was--it, it just--you have history.  You just have history.  And, and when I think about it, my friend, I, I realize that I've been so blessed by God because I not only benefit from the Civil Rights Movement but I also was in it.
