Story_ID: 594704
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: My name is Allegra Rene Haynes [HistoryMaker Allegra "Happy" Haynes], spelled, A-L-L-E-G-R-A, R-E-N-E, Haynes, H-A-Y-N-E-S, better known as Happy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is March 4th, 1953.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: In--my place of birth is Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a former Denver city councilwoman and currently an administrator with Denver Public Schools.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is at the very historic Blair-Caldwell African American Research Library [Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 6th--November 7th, 2008.
Story_ID: 594705
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, no I love lots of different food.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you go on vacation do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite destination is Mexico.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's hard. One of the best things about being here is all four seasons, but I guess summer is my, my favorite time of year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of right at the moment. I'm sure--I have many of them, but perhaps I can think of one a little later.
Story_ID: 594706
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family and your family history. Let's begin with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name, spell it for me please, and tell me where and when she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Anna Josephine Garcia Haynes [Anna Garcia Haynes].
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: And do you know what, what year?
Speaker 2: She was born in, in 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your mother. Did she share any stories about her growing up in Denver?
Speaker 2: Oh many stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother was from a family of five that lived very near this community [Five Points, Denver, Colorado], and a lot of rich stories about growing up, going to school at Mitchell Elementary [Maria Mitchell Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] and Cole Junior High [Cole Junior High School; Cole Middle School, Denver, Colorado] and Manual High School [Denver, Colorado], and we have pictures of all the different houses. And my mother grew up rather poor and like many poor families they moved around a lot, and a few years ago we drove through the neighborhood and took pictures of all the homes where she had lived as a child.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did your mother, what does she, or what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: In our early years, my mother was a homemaker, a stay at home mom, and then she became involved, really on our behalf, in early childhood education and so has been involved in that career for over thirty years. She's currently the executive director of Mile High Montessori [Mile High Early Learning Centers], which operates eight child, early childhood learning centers in Denver, serving low income children and families.
Speaker 1: And I notice that her last name before marrying was Garcia. Is she of Hispanic descent?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 594707
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your [maternal] grandparents. What were their names, her mother and father?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Lorraine Garcia [ph.], and my grandfather was Jacob Garcia.
Speaker 1: And where were they born?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was born in New Mexico, in northern New Mexico, and my grandfather was born in Colorado, was raised in Trinidad, Colorado.
Speaker 1: Okay, and any stories to share about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Oh, you know I was so close to them. My grandfather was quite a bit older. This family was a second family for him, and so my, my grandfather was almost sixty when my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] was, was born and so I was only able to be around him for a few short years, but you know he was a colorful figure in the Hispanic community in Colorado, historic figure, very involved in the early days of the labor and you know translating for many of the families in Colorado, and you know I adored him as a little girl. Unfortunately, I lost him when I was, I was still pretty young. And I, my grandmother was you know a domestic, and what I remember is you know she worked so hard, and when my mother was working when I was young, I really spent a lot of my early years with my grandmother. She was very strict and believed in hard work and you getting all your work done before you played, but she, she had a wonderful sense of humor and a sort of a streak of, you know, playfulness in her as well. One of my fondest memories is making tortillas with, with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: That's great. Did you learn to speak Spanish?
Speaker 2: You know, I spoke a little Spanish when I was very young. My great-grandmother, my grandmother's mother, Cleofas Lujan, was a Spanish speaker. She spoke only Spanish and so you know we all had to learn Spanish in order to communicate with my great-grandmother. And so I think I was a little bit more facile with the language as a youngster. And I, I took Spanish in school and you know I read it fairly well, but you know if you don't practice it, you know it's something that I resolve to do all the time particularly today when you know there's so many more Spanish speaking people in our community it's, it's a good skill to have.
Speaker 1: Well tell me a little more about your great-grandmother, any, can you remember any times, any memories of interacting with her, your relationship with her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, I was very fortunate to have time to spend with both of my grandmothers. My great-grandmother was, you know, was just a delightful woman. I, I remember you know so much about food and you know sharing you know favorite meals and her--you know she loved to cook and but my, my greatest memories of her as a kid was her sneaking candy to me, 'cause she had quite a sweet tooth herself and she had her favorite candy. You know those, those became some of my favorites as well.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name for me?
Speaker 2: Yes, Cleofas was, C-L-E-O-F-A-S. The last name is Lujan, L-U-J-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born also in northern New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Mexico.
Speaker 2: She was the fam- a family of sheep herders in the northern New Mexico area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know anything about your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: And my great-grandfather was Lorenzo. My grandmother was named for him, the, the female version, Lorenzo Lujan [ph.], and he was a sheep herder. And so my grandmother grew up in a very rural kind of setting. And in those days when girls were expected to be, you know, quite domestic, my grandmother, Lorraine, was quite an outdoors woman, loved to ride horses and very much enjoyed the outdoors and so you know I think she passed that along. My mother is very much like that and so am I.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you back--go back any further than your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, but there's a long history on that side of the family in the northern New Mexico area and I, I know that some of my aunts have done a little history on that side of the family, and traced our family on that side back to Spanish land grant days.
Story_ID: 594708
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father, and if you would tell me his name and spell it for me please.
Speaker 2: My father's name is LeRoy William Haynes [LeRoy Haynes], and it's, L-E-capital R-O-W [sic.], William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Haynes, H-A-Y-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born here in Co- in Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what year?
Speaker 2: It would be 1932. I believe.
Speaker 1: Now describe your, your father for me and tell me about your relationship with him.
Speaker 2: You know my, my father came from you know a very large family that, that were pioneers here as well in Colorado. Interestingly, his, some of his ancestors also came from Trinidad, Colorado, and moved to Denver, settled in the Cherry Creek area, where the Cherry Creek Shopping Center [Denver, Colorado] is now, is very much country and it was, there was a small enclave of African American families in the early days and sort of outside the center part of, of Denver that lived in the, in the, in that Cheery Creek area. My father, I think, was one of eight. He was the second from the youngest in his, in his family and you know a lot of history. I'm not as close with my father as I am with my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes], but he's, you know is, was always a math whiz and interested in electronics and he was a wrestler as was his brother and you know so there's a lot of history in his family with himself and his brothers in their, not only wrestling in high school, but also continuing to coach wrestling for many years. Many of the kids in our community know him and know my Uncle Cliff [Clifford Haynes] as wrestling coaches.
Speaker 1: And how much education did your father have?
Speaker 2: My dad had a couple of years of college education, and I--as did my mother.
Speaker 1: Now tell me about his mother and father, your grandparents on the Haynes side.
Speaker 2: I only know very little about my grandfather, my father's father. We know that you know he left the home when my father was very young. I think it had a profound effect on him because, you know he was so young at the time that his father left. So, we never got to know him. In fact didn't find, didn't even know he was alive most of our years growing up until, you know we were really adults when we found out he was still alive and had a second family in Oklahoma. But, my father's mother, Pauline, I had to think for a moment, Pauline Anderson because we all called her Mimi [ph.] and she, you know she was the real matriarch of the Haynes family, but the younger sister of the Anderson family had had so much history here in Colorado.
Speaker 1: Now the Anderson, that was her maiden name Pauline Anderson, Anderson.
Speaker 2: Anderson, Pauline Anderson Haynes and it's the Andersons who settled in that Cherry Creek area. My Uncle Gus Anderson [Charles Anderson, Sr.], her older brother [sic.], was the head of our extended Anderson, Haynes, Jeter [ph.], and a number of other names of all of that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what was your grandfather's name? Did you know what his name was? So you just knew that he was alive, but what was his name?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna try to remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll have to think about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was Elmer [Elmer Haynes, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Elmer.
Speaker 2: Elmer. It was my father's eldest brother [Elmer Haynes, Jr.] who was named for him.
Speaker 1: And did your father, he had just one brother?
Speaker 2: No, my father had, let's see, I think he had three brothers, four brothers and three sisters.
Story_ID: 594709
Speaker 1: Well, since you can explore a little more on the Anderson, Anderson family you wanna talk more about the accomplishments of what they had--what they brought to Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 2: Sure. Much of this is about my, my Uncle Gus [Haynes' paternal great uncle, Charles Anderson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, grew up and really staked a claim in the, in the area of Cherry Creek [Denver, Colorado], built a first you know a landscaping business and then was involved in the construction and demolition for many, many years. Became quite a successful businessman in Denver, owned a lot of the land that people now you know are amazed. I drive by the family house on 1st [Avenue] and Madison [Street] very, very close to the Cherry Creek Shopping Center [Denver, Colorado] area where our family owned most of the block and the different members of the family lived in different houses on the block and I remember going there often. The gathering place was Mimi's [Haynes' paternal grandmother, Pauline Anderson Haynes] house at 145 Madison. I remember wonderful meals, and my grandmother was a caterer. In those days they called, you know they said people were cooks, but she, she prepared fancy meals for many of the wealthy families in Denver and was quite the cook, so. When she cooked for her own family, very different, but we all enjoyed wonderful meals with the entire family. I remember the music, listening to the R and B music and doing things like watching the adults practice dances like the Madison in the basement of Mimi's house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And unfortunately I think, and when Mimi passed away, as the matriarch of the family, the family really drifted apart, very unfortunate. We were very close and had many holiday family gatherings while she was alive. When she passed away, you know the family kind of split up and you know didn't stay in touch, in touch as much as we had in the past.
Speaker 1: Two questions, do you know how they acquired the land?
Speaker 2: No, I don't. I'm sure my dad [LeRoy Haynes] has the stories and my dad's sister, Nadine [Nadine Haynes]. Aunt Nan is the family historian. I'm sure she has a lot of stories there. I'm not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know I don't know how they acquired the land.
Speaker 1: And during holidays was there any special tradition that your family had that might be different from other families?
Speaker 2: No, I think ours, you know our traditions were pretty, you know pretty typical. You know gathering together and lots of food and you know sharing memories. I don't, I can't, can't think of any special traditions.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's fine.
Speaker 2: On, on my other side of the family we had a tradition that was started when we were youngsters by my aunt of making edible Christmas trees. And so we would, you know, sort of the old fashioned string you know popcorn and candy and you know various edible things, and so when we got together you know for Christmas for many years, we would each year make an edible Christmas tree, which was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 594710
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] and father [LeRoy Haynes] met?
Speaker 2: Not a very interesting one (laughter). I'm trying to, I can't even remember where, you know where they met. They knew each other in school. My, my dad was at East High School [Denver, Colorado]. My mom was at Manual [Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], and you know they met through, you know knowing each other from school. In the early days of Denver [Colorado], even though people attended different schools, Denver seemed to be a small community and so folks knew each other you know in various different schools throughout Denver.
Story_ID: 594711
Speaker 1: When you think back, what do you think is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: When I was--I was born in Denver [Colorado], but I spent the first three years of my life on a farm in Wheat Ridge, Colorado, that is now very you know developed, but in those days it was--on, on a small farm with my grandmother and grandfather and I, I remember, I remember the pigs that my grandfather and grandmother raised. That's just my earliest memories and I guess you know baby piglets and somehow they, you know they, you know an ingrained memory from those early days.
Speaker 1: And this was which, which grandparents (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I was about three years old. My grandfather, Jacob Garcia, and my grandmother, Lorraine Garcia [ph.].
Speaker 1: Tell me more about the farm. Tell me what you remember, besides the piglets (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, I remember you know sitting on the steps. I don't even remember the house, but I, you know again I, I think it was because I was such an outdoor person. But, I remember you know my grandfather and my grandmother and my mom [Anna Garcia Haynes], you know sitting on the porch on the steps outside, you know just talking, you know after a hard day's work, but just you know talking and sharing stories and you know imparting wisdom, you know talking about what was you know important, the importance of hard work and the importance of family. And I remember taking walks, you know being able to--there were adjoining farms and there's a story in our family that I do remember vaguely where my cousin, who was five years old than me, Johnny Rivers [ph.], whom I adored, I thought the sun rose and set on him, and he would take me for these walks and we were walking through an adjoining field where there was a bull and where we shouldn't have been and I remember him grabbing my hand and us getting charged by this animal and having to fly to the fence and him just literally throwing me over the, the fence just in the nick of time. And of course he was in big trouble after that (laughter).
Speaker 1: What other animals or did they grow vegetables or--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, lots of vegetables, vegetable garden and it's a tradition, I mean you know I have kept up the tradition of vegetable gardening all of these years. In fact, I, I really can't remember a year when you know we haven't had a vegetable garden, all the years growing up, and I still maintain a vegetable garden every, every year.
Speaker 1: Now tell me where Wheat Ridge is in relationship to Denver?
Speaker 2: Wheat Ridge is just immediately west of Denver. We lived on West 38th [Street], somewhere around a little west of Wadsworth Avenue [sic. Wadsworth Boulevard]. So, it's a very immediate neighbor of Denver. You can't really tell when you leave Denver and you know start, you now enter Wheat Ridge.
Speaker 1: Okay and also Trinidad. Where is that located (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Trinidad, Colorado, is, is in southern, in fact one of the most southern cities in Colorado right, right in the center of the state but on the southern border between Colorado and New Mexico.
Story_ID: 594712
Speaker 1: As a young child were you given to tradition of Spanish tradition or both African American and, and Spanish or--?
Speaker 2: Mostly, mostly the, the Spanish tradition early on. My dad, LeRoy [LeRoy Haynes], adopted me when I was just a few years old, and so I spent my first few years with my mom [Anna Garcia Haynes] and my grand- my grandmother [Lorraine Garcia (ph.)] and grandfather [Jacob Garcia]. And so a lot of the, you know, Spanish traditions you know some of my to this day still, you know some of my favorite meals. You know how I judge good Mexican food based on you know whether there, you know the, the pinto beans and the tortillas you know are, are just right.
Story_ID: 594713
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of religion?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was raised in a Catholic family, and you know we went to early Mass. I mean some of my fondest memories of my [maternal] grandmother, Lorraine [Lorraine Garcia (ph.)], were going to six o'clock Mass. We went to six a.m. Mass at Loyola [St. Ignatius Loyola Catholic Church], which was the parish I grew up in, in northeast Denver [Colorado], near City Park. Every Sunday morning six a.m. Mass and we'd walk and it was tough for me because we had to fit- sit very still. My grandmother was very strict about being quiet and attentive during Mass. But, good behavior was always rewarded with a trip to the ice cream store down the street after, after Mass later in the morning so. For fond memories, I had my First Communion at Loyola and I didn't--many of my classmates attended school there, but I attended the public school instead, but fond memories growing up in Loyola parish.
Story_ID: 594714
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit, continuing to talk about your family, about your siblings. Tell me who they are. Let's do them in order and where you fit in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --and just tell me a little bit about each one of them.
Speaker 2: Sure. Well, I'm the eldest of my three sisters and one brother. My sister, Khadija, her given name is Katherine, Katherine Josephine [Katherine Haynes], so she's named for my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] and grandmother [Lorraine Garcia (ph.)]. And she is five years younger than me, born in May of 1958. And my brother, Michael Leroy [Michael Haynes], was born in 1960. And my sister, Mary, Mary Lorraine [Mary Haynes], named for my grandmother, was born in 1961. And my youngest sister, LeAnn [LeAnn Haynes White], whose name is a combination of my dad's name [LeRoy Haynes] and my mother's name, LeAnn Pauline, also named for my dad's mother [Pauline Anderson Haynes], is, was born in 1962, the baby of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and do you have a story or some stories to share about the interaction between the siblings as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, well you know my first memories are of you know of my sister, Khadija, you know being my, you know my first sibling after five years of being an only child. And I was so proud of her and so adored her. I--there's a wonderful picture of me and her and I, I couldn't look at the camera because I, I couldn't take my eyes off my baby sister and just you know wonderful times. And then when my other, you know, siblings came along we moved to the home that you know we all know now as the home that we grew up--that we grew up in and it was a very large, it was a very large yard. The home wasn't so large, but we grew up in the largest yard in the whole neighborhood. And we were all very much outdoors kids, I mean spent, you know, most of our times outdoors, and we were very close. We fought over the bathrooms, you know in a large family with only you know limited space and, but very close.
Story_ID: 594715
Speaker 1: We were talking about your family and your siblings, and you had moved back to Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was in 1956 'cause you lived with your, you said your aunt and uncle, when you were first born.
Speaker 2: When I was first born.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what part of town was that in?
Speaker 2: It was in Central West, Denver, Central West, Denver very near the Au- Auraria, what is now the Auraria Campus, but it was called Auraria, very historic part of Denver. And then we moved with my [maternal] grandparents [Lorraine Garcia (ph.) and Jacob Garcia]. In 1956 moved back to Denver in a home on--where we lived right next door to my first cousins, you know on, on my dad's [LeRoy Haynes] side and where my sister, Katherine [Katherine Haynes], was born and, and then two years later when my brother [Michael Haynes] was born we moved to a home just north of City Park [Denver, Colorado] where, you know, we all, we grew up, you know all of our growing up years were in that home.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the street?
Speaker 2: 2732 Cook Street. People in the neighborhood still remember the Haynes living on the Co- on Cook Street.
Story_ID: 594716
Speaker 1: So now, if I were to ask you if there's a sound, a sight, or a smell that would take you back to that time when you were about six or seven years old, the time that you're living on, on Cook Street [Denver, Colorado], what would you say?
Speaker 2: The, I mean I think the, the sight you know is, you know what was most prominent about our yard was a huge, we had a great big playground with a giant swing set and a basketball rim. You know it was like having the school in your backyard. And, and so trees that we climbed and built, you know, three houses in and so you know the, the visual that I have really is you know almost loving outdoors in, in that, in that very enormous yard. And, although I must say one of the sights to this day that is powerful for me and it's the reason why, you know on my way to work over the many years living downtown I've driven down 26th Avenue, which was just a you know a block and a half away from where I grew up along the edge of City Park Golf Course [Denver, Colorado], one of the most spectacular views of the Colorado mountains of the, of the front range and the skyline of downtown. And since I was a kid you know we'd walk over to the park and stand on the, on the tee box, which was high in you know that view. It's something that has greeted me almost every day since you know I was, you know seven or eight years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about a sound or a smell?
Speaker 2: The, the sounds, you know the sounds that come to mind are you know the, a mixture of music. We had a lot of--you know I was exposed because of my, you know, mixed heritage to a lot of different music. You know we played folk music and R and B music, and I'll share with you my, my favorite singer to this day is [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, and so a lot of, a lot of that music. I'm a, I love jazz. It's my favorite genre of music and you know my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] tells me it's because my uncle, who I lived with as a, as a baby, was a jazz musician, played saxophone, listened to a lot of the really, you know, classical jazz and so you know I remember all of the, the different kinds of music that permeated our household growing up.
Speaker 1: And the smell?
Speaker 2: What would be the smell? You know I think it's the smell of grass and you know trees, you know the smell of dirt, you know gardening and, you know that's, that's, that's what you know brings memories back. And every time I cut my lawn you know it's, it's, just reminds me of, you know, where we are in the place that, the special place we live in Colorado.
Story_ID: 594717
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your neighborhood [in Denver, Colorado]. Take me on a tour of say a square block and tell me about whether there were stores or shops and who lived in the community, who were your friends, maybe what their parents did for a living, if you know.
Speaker 2: You know, let me, let me start with the first house we lived in, which was on Jackson Street, the street that's now been changed to Richard Allen Court to honor one of the founders of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church because of the, the A.M.E. church was built there. It was a, it was an empty lot when I was growing up, which we lived right across the street and you know this was a time where I remember kids living in the street, where we played in the street, we played, you know we skipped rope, we had friends up and down and around the corner and my cousins who lived next door. Eventually the school, the elementary school [Barrett Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] that I attended was built across the street and so I have a lot of memories of you know playing hide and seek you know in the summer at night when we could stay up late you know with, you know with, you know--I remember so many kids, you know, in, in that neighborhood as we were growing up, lots of kids. And when we moved to Cook Street, again you know a neighborhood of you know lots of kids and you know on every block and of course they all congregated in our yard you know because of the playground and because it was such a big place. You know lots of friends and you know my sisters [Katherine Haynes, Mary Haynes and LeAnn Haynes White] and brother [Michael Haynes] and my own friends. You know my best buddy as I was growing up, Gary Rose [ph.], who lived in the 2600 block of Cook Street. And every night we'd go through this routine of, "Can Gary come over?" "Can Happy [HistoryMaker Allegra "Happy" Haynes] come over?" And you know half of the week I'm eating dinner at his house down the street and, or he'd be at my house, and you know or I'd be at my friend, Deborah Walker's [ph.], who lived around the corner. I was quite a tomboy when I was a little girl, so many of my closest buddies were the boys down the street.
Speaker 1: What other games did you play, because I know during that time we tend to make up our own games?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we made up a lot of games including some games that definitely got us in trouble. We lived along a bus route and this, this was with the boys, not the girls in the, in the neighborhood, but I'd hang out with my, my friends Gary and Daryl [ph.] and Poncho [ph.] and we'd grab apples and throw them at the buses as they were going down the street and then you know run like crazy. We loved collecting pop bottles, because you know you could get money for them and so we spent a lot of our time roaming up and down the street collecting pop bottles so that we could take them to the store. Just a half a block really down the alley and across the street from my home was a small retail area with a small market. It was owned by a Japanese family who lived right in the neighborhood with us, and we would take our bottles in and you know exchange them and then you know buy whatever candy we could you know from, from that, from those experiences. We spent a lot of time at the golf course [City Park Golf Course, Denver, Colorado] that was just a block from our--where we weren't supposed to be and none of us had any clue about golfing. I actually had some distain for it. It didn't seem like a sport to me, but it was a wide open area and you know for us it was like having a huge park, you know that was part of our, almost our backyard, almost in our backyard. And we spent a lot of time riding our bicycles around the neighborhood. We were always busy. You know we, we were on missions and you know we'd make up you know just you know racing around, you know games, riding our bikes. I remember a couple of times using our bicycles to rescue the stray dogs in the neighborhood from the dog catchers, some of our, you know some of our missions.
Speaker 1: And, and how would you do that?
Speaker 2: Well, we'd see the dogs, and you know in our family we had animals growing, growing up. My mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] was very tolerant. I didn't find out until years later that she really didn't actually like pets or dogs. She was a little frightened of them, but she wanted us to have experiences as youngsters, and so we had quite a menagerie of pets. But, so when we saw stray animals we often brought them home, but we'd see a dog in the neighborhood that was running around and you know we all knew when the dog catcher was around and we knew they were gonna catch this poor animal and so we'd race on our bikes around the neighborhood, you know chasing the dog or cutting them off you know from the dog catchers, and it was, it was quite the adventure.
Story_ID: 594718
Speaker 1: And you said that you were a little tomboyish, athletics though?
Speaker 2: Indeed, and in fact most of us in the neighborhood or many of us over the years my, my family and my cousin's family and another couple of families in that neighborhood [Skyland, Denver, Colorado] were the first families to integrate the local YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], which was about five blocks from where I lived. And for a number of years we were the only black families that, the first integrating that in the early '60s [1960s], the Sportland YMCA [Denver, Colorado]. And as time got, went on other families, other families in the neighborhood--because the neighborhood was changing. The neighborhood had once been, you know, a mostly white neighborhood and as black families were able to move further east you know it eventually became a predominantly black neighborhood as I was growing up. But, the YMCA was still a white YMCA serving you know families throughout east Denver [Colorado] and all of our families, my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] and my father [LeRoy Haynes] all grew up in the black YMCA, which was in the Five Points area [Denver, Colorado], the Glenarm Y [Glenarm YMCA; Glenarm Recreation Center, Denver, Colorado]. And so after a couple of years after we moved to Cook Street, I think the decision was made in the YMCA, you know in the Denver area that, that you know didn't make sense to have a black YMCA and a white YMCA, and particularly a white YMCA that was now located in what was becoming a predominately black neighborhood. And so we integrated that neighborhood. I learned how to swim at the age of seven. When, when you use the phrase, which by the way is a phrase I use oft- I use often, it's you know being thrown in the deep end I know what that means literally because, well I wasn't thrown in the deep end, I threw myself in the water the first time I went to the YMCA and had to get hauled out by the man who ended up teaching me how to swim and being my swimming, my swimming coach and you know lifelong friend, Glenn Hanley. So, we all learned how to swim and spent practically every waking hour of our summers. You know I literally grew up in and lived practically at the, at the YMCA as did my brother [Michael Haynes] and sisters [Katherine Haynes, Mary Haynes and LeAnn Haynes White]. We all learned how to swim. My youngest sister, LeAnn, learned how to swim almost before she could walk. She was in the pool, you know, you know when she was a year old or just a little less than a year old. So I, you know I swam competitively. I ran track. I was involved in, in gymnastics, you know any sport that there was. My mother was a basketball coach when, when, when I was a little girl, five, you know my mother worked in parks and recreation, Denver Parks and Recreation. And you know at the, you know at the age of nineteen and twenty, she was coaching you know boys basketball and girls basketball in Denver recreations. So, basketball has been a part of my life since as far as I can remember. So I played a lot of basketball in, in our own backyard because of having a basketball rim and at school practically every day that I could.
Story_ID: 594719
Speaker 1: Before we go on to talk about your elementary school, the neighborhood [City Park, Denver, Colorado], you said when you first moved there, there were still white neighbors?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. There were a handful of white neighbors.
Speaker 1: Okay, a handful. What was the, do you know about the occupations of the people that lived in the neighborhood, their parents?
Speaker 2: You know it was hard--I really don't, you know I know some of my friends had, at least the black families that I knew, had you know fathers who worked in the postal service and in you know in different federal agencies. It was, in Denver [Colorado], you know a way for blacks to be upwardly mobile. And Denver had, you know was, had a lot of federal agencies. It was often, Denver is often called the, you know, the sort of Washington of the West because there are more federal agencies located here than any other city besides Washington, D.C. And so in early days of Denver this was a way for black families to be upwardly mobile and to move into you know into the middle class. And so many of you know our families worked in, in the [U.S.] Air Force finance center [Air Force Accounting and Finance Center; Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Lowry Air Force Base, Colorado], which was not you know far from where we lived and the postal service and so on. The, a couple of the, I know one of the white families that I grew up with was you know whose father was, you know was a doctor. But, I'm not sure because I just remember--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as young kids we didn't--
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: --we didn't pay much attention to what adults did other than tell us what to do.
Speaker 1: But you would consider it a middle income neighborhood?
Speaker 2: You know I, I, I think we were probably lower, you know income, lower moderate. But you know was, it was a stable neighborhood, working families. I, I think it was a you know working class neighborhood and you know there were I think some, you know some of the, the families, particularly the white families, there that you know would probably have been considered middle class. But, most of the rest of us were, you know, you know working class moderate income. We struggled. You know my parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes], you know we didn't realize we were poor or the working poor as they, as we say today because they worked hard and you know they provided for us and we never, you know we never went hungry and we didn't have, you know, lots of clothes, but we always had, you know, sufficient clothes. We, we thought we were blessed and you know I didn't know until many years later that we, you know we were a struggling working poor family.
Speaker 1: When you talk about families and you mention fathers, do you remember whether most of your friends or people in the community lived in two-parent households?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know in my early years, you know most of, most of my neighborhood and most of the kids that I grew up with lived in two-parent households. There were some, I mean you, you could, you know you remember friends who, you know you only knew their mother, but I, I think there were a lot of two-parent families (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Families.
Story_ID: 594720
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your elementary school. What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--my first two years in school, kindergarten and first grade, were in what was a predominantly white elementary school, Park Hill [Park Hill Elementary School, Denver, Colorado]. We were bused there. It was outside of our neighborhood. And when I started, after first grade they built Barrett Elementary School [Denver, Colorado], you know right across the street from where I'd lived on Jackson Street and so, and, and that was in our black neighborhood and you know I, I think that you know some, there was speculation about the history you know why that occurred and you know that Park Hill was perhaps overcrowded, but I think there were some in our community who believed that, that school was built so that the black kids could go to this school, you know, and not to, you know, to Park Hill. You know who, you know who knows for sure what the, what the motivations were. But it was, you know it was a brand new school. I started there in second grade and went through sixth grade there. Very, you know fond memories. It was a predominantly black school. We had a handful of the white families that lived in our neighborhood, a couple of Japanese families and just down the street from the school was the Clayton College campus [Clayton College for Boys, Denver, Colorado], which was a home for boys and, and even until the '60s [1960s] when I was going there, a home for white boys, it was overturned in the courts years later, but so most of the white kids who were in our school and they were very in small minority were boys who lived at the, the Clayton College campus, who were boys who were from broken families or were orphans, and they attended school with us. But fond memories of you know the teachers. I remember many of the teachers in the school, particularly the black teachers in the school lived in our neighborhood. You know we, we knew them because they were in our community. They were part of our community. Evie Dennis [HistoryMaker Evie Garrett Dennis], Dr. Evie Dennis who became the superintendent of our Denver Public Schools was a teacher in our elementary school and lived close in the neighborhood. When, when I was older, I told a couple of stories about Dr. Dennis, and she was the superintendent, about wandering home from school one day, and this was a neighborhood where everybody took care of everybody, I mean you know. We played in the streets because it was safe for us to do so. We could wander anywhere we wanted to, and wherever we wandered there was somebody who knew us. It was tough to get in trouble because you know you had somebody's mother somewhere you know who was bound to correct you if you got out of line no matter where you happen to be in the neighborhood. One day walking home from school, walking the wrong way, not to my house but around near where Evie Dennis lived, and I got into a fight with some kids you know who had made disparaging remarks about my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes], something that I encountered from time to time growing up, because we grew up in a black neighborhood and because I came from a mixed family I, I, I you know took a little heat from some of, you know some of my, you know friends who you know who would make comments about my mother's heritage and so on, and so I got into a fight with somebody and made the mistake of doing that right outside of Dr. Dennis' house. And she caught us and ended it and by the time I walked in my house my mother knew the whole story about what had happened and you know I told that story a lot you know about you know that phrase, it takes a village. You know I lived in that village growing up in northeast Denver [Colorado] and in north City Park area [Denver, Colorado]. And all of those folks are teachers and are parents and you know we're a part of that, a part of that village.
Story_ID: 594721
Speaker 1: What other teachers do you remember that might have been inspiring or encouraging to you in elementary school [Barrett Elementary School, Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, I remember my third grade teacher, Ms. Mosley [ph.], really--she is the teacher who I think--you know I was a decent student, a good student. I read and you know my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] pushed us. You know she didn't, you know she, she expected you know good performance, but I, I think Ms. Mosley is the one who inspired a desire to learn and an understanding of learning, not, not just going to school, but you know, you know education but learning and, and it really had came about because of trouble. You know I was, I was having trouble in school. I, I, it turned out I had eyesight problems, which you know hurt attentiveness to my difficulties and hearing problems as well. And so when I couldn't see and I couldn't hear and you know I needed to be engaged and you know I, I had trouble all through life of you know talking too much and you know doing too many things in classes, common comments on all of my report cards, that she talks too much and she disrupts class 'cause she's always--but Ms. Mosley recognized those two things, brought them to my mother's attention, they got fixed. But more than that, she recognized that you know I had great potential for learning and I wasn't really engaged in what I was doing. I did work, but--so one day she picked me up on a weekend on a Saturday and took me to the museum, the natural history museum [Denver Museum of Nature and Science, Denver, Colorado], and we just walked through this museum and you know she just pointed out things. You know, it was a powerful moment in my life. I mean I could still remember walking through and her just you know pointing out things just to, you know just to kind of chilling out agenda and it completely changed our relationship, certainly changed my behavior in class. You know I understood that she cared for, you know for me and, and that she expected a lot of me and that I could, you know I could be good, be, be a good student and so I really began to apply myself as a student after that and so that, that was really one of the you know--so many teachers that had a profound effect on me.
Story_ID: 594722
Speaker 1: And at this time, you were still swimming at the Y [Sportland YMCA, Denver, Colorado], and are there any other extracurricular activities in school, because we know you're doing so much at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]? Excuse me.
Speaker 2: At the school, I played softball and of course basketball at, at school. I took music for, music lessons for a little while. I tried to take violin lessons, and we were, we ended up, the person came in to teach band ended up discouraging a number of us from playing violin and you know to this day there was a concern about you know bl- you know black kids play certain instruments and you know that, that you know somehow all of us who ended up starting you know on these instruments that weren't you know typical, what they considered you know the, the typical music. So, I didn't stick with that. I'm, I'm sure there was some relief from my mom [Anna Garcia Haynes], 'cause you know a screeching violin and practicing violin could be a horrible thing. But, I also took piano lessons for a few years from one of my classmates' mother who lived in the next block from me, and I didn't stick with it all through life, but my sister did and you know I regret it to this day because she enjoys so much playing music you know whenever she sees fit. She's really the musician and the creative person in our family, as a result of you know sticking to that. I was the outdoors, I was the sports person. That's you know it's kind of what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Did you have any dreams about what you would do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I dreamed you know I wanted to be an Olympic swimmer you know and I really, you know I stuck with swimming until I got to, until I got to high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado]. But I, you know, I had dreams of being an Olympic swimmer and you know while I ran track I, you know I wasn't the, the best. You know I wasn't the fastest, but I worked hard and you know and I was good, so I contributed a lot to, you know, our, you know track teams. And so I had a lot of sports dreams in my early years.
Story_ID: 594723
Speaker 1: So now when you finish elementary school what school do you go to next?
Speaker 2: I left Barrett [Barrett Elementary School, Denver, Colorado] and went to a school that we weren't anticipating going to. When, when we were growing up we all expected to leave Barrett and go to the school that everyone in the community had always gone to, Smiley [William H. Smiley Junior High School; McAuliffe International School, Denver, Colorado]. But in those early days, Denver [Colorado] was, you know, struggling with the segregation of our public schools. In, in some of the early attempts to try to desegregate or to integrate our schools, they did some early boundary changes and so I ended up going to Gove Junior High [Aaron Gove Junior High School, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Gove, G-O-V-E, which was a predominantly white junior high school. And you know, while I was very upset about going there initially, you know, it became a good experience. You know we learned to make things work. It, it was challenging. I think, you know, making the, the integration of a, you know, a school work it, you know I ended up being isolated for some different reasons from some of the kids I had grown up with and gone to school. You know because I was put in accelerated, advanced classes and some of my other classmates weren't and so I spent most of my junior high you know with just a handful of other black students and mostly white students in the school. You know and this, I mean this was a result of a lot of things, one I think an educational process that you know tracked kids in you know by you know performance or you know proficiency. And also it really I think underscored what later became a really big issue in Denver Public Schools, and that was the, the disparities in education between schools, you know for kids of color and the schools for white kids. And you know we had to work really hard you know to catch up you know and to, with our counterparts in, in Gove and you know I ended, I ended up doing all right and most of us did. We, you know, we made the adjustments and we realized that you know we had to, to you know step off and you know and do a lot better than we had and, and most of us rose to that, that challenge.
Speaker 1: Can you remember whether the teachers there were they, were they black and white or all white at Gove?
Speaker 2: They were almost all white. There, there were a handful of black teachers, and you know it was, it was great having them there because you know it was like family, I mean they knew us and you know I, I knew one, you know, Mr. Singleton [ph.]. And I never had Mr. Singleton in class, but, you know, he was my teacher 'cause and he looked out, you know, he looked out for us. And you know and he looked out for all the black kids in the school. And, and it was important to have that. It was important to have that.
Speaker 1: So you felt that you had some backup if, if anything were to happen that there was somebody there that you could go to.
Speaker 2: Absolutely and you know, and you know he really had, you know he provided those assurances to our parents too. I mean our parents knew him. You know they, you know my mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] particularly because she was very involved in, in school throughout my life. In, in fact you know we used to dread it because you know every time we looked around my mother was in the school. Years later I grew to appreciate that. I'm not sure I did in the early years. But it was good having someone there that, you know, that the parents knew and that they could rely on.
Story_ID: 594724
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that, that really helped you along that came to know you, any of the white teachers that came to know you and might have inspired or encouraged you at all?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, you know, a number of teachers. You know one of the administrators, assistant principal, Mr. Baker [ph.], and I'm, I'm afraid to say I got to know Mr. Baker because I probably ended up in his office a couple of times when I shouldn't have been.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) For what reason?
Speaker 2: For getting into some trouble and misbehaving or you know. I was a little on the mischievous side, and so I got into trouble every now and then in school [Aaron Gove Junior High School, Denver, Colorado]. And, but you know he, he really was, was a person who I looked up to. Mr. Gough, Donald Gough [ph.] who was my geography teacher. You know I was always interested in, you know, the world around, part of my family, you know, my, my mom [Anna Garcia Haynes] particularly and my uncles. You know my uncle, both of my mother's brothers had travelled during you know in the [U.S. military] service. You know I, I heard about that and when they came home you know I heard about their travels to other parts of the world. And then you know we were very much encouraged to have sort of a world view and an interest in other cultures and things, and so when I took geography from, you know from Mr. Gough, you know it just really opened that up in you know so many new ways about the, you know, the world around and you know my desire to you know to go to all these places and you know meet all these people and it's something that still you know is a passion of mine today, you know a great interest. So you know my interest in food for example is, you know is, is part of that desire to you know try new things and to do something new and to learn about somebody new and, and Mr. Gough had a lot, a lot to do with that. Also, my music teacher there. I was in a choir, and that was absolutely my favorite class, you know. Favorite thing in junior high was that, singing in that choir. It was Mr. Ken Staton and we got to perform all around you know doing Christmas programs and we performed in banks and we even, he even recorded a record with our, our group, which we were so proud of. My sister laughs at it always, although you know when I was growing up she, she played it lot 'cause she loved it, but it--that was a great time. I was also in a class of--my, part of our lunchtime was spent in spelling. You know we participated in spelling bees all around the, the state, and that, that was a particularly enjoyable experience.
Speaker 1: Did you win any of the spelling bees?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't get all the way to state, but I did well and some of our, you know public--in Denver Public Schools, spelling over the years.
Story_ID: 594725
Speaker 1: Now, during your junior high school years is the beginning of where civil rights is starting to heat up. Do you remember what the climate was like in, in Denver [Colorado], and were your parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes] involved in civil rights (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It actually had even started a little bit in elementary school [Barrett Elementary School, Denver, Colorado]. I remember, you know that Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy], you know being involved in the election, very much in the Kennedy/Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] election and you know, you know recog- not really understanding it completely but knowing, watching our parents and watching our, you know, the families in our neighborhood and how important that election was for our people, for our community. I mean it was, you know without--you know sort of listening and you know just realizing how significant that was and you know and, and you know having read, and then reading I think when I was in sixth grade, 'Profiles in Courage' [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and really being inspired by you know this, these stories and you know it was one of the things made me want to be, you know I wanna grow up and be a you know a U.S. senator or somebody to do these you know wonderful things for the country. But, it, you know it was, you know it was just the beginnings of you know again the integration of our schools, the, you know the worries about desegregation here in Denver. I grew up--my mother was active in civil rights. She was a member of the local corps here in Denver and had participated in, you know, quite a number of actions from you know some boycotts to some, and you know civil disobedience. You know it was something that I, because of my mother's act, you know and my uncles who were labor organizers and involved in the farm workers movement as I was growing up, so I was very involved, you know, from a political, grassroots political, you know, perspective. So, when I went to junior high [Aaron Gove Junior High School, Denver, Colorado], you know just that, you know the civil rights era and you know what was going on, you know I, I was very much aware. And I remember being in, in junior high when, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was, was assassinated and really, you know, tough, you know tough times you know for kids. You know I remember--and having to be backed up by my mom, and I remember being a leader in the school and in insisting that, the school take time to, you know, to enable us to acknowledge. You know they wanted to, you know, sort of ignore it and you know and people were very worried about unrest and you know and, and unrest was occurring in many you know different places. And so you know they wanted us to, you know, ignore it and not you know do anything about it and you know and you know as a student leader you know I was, I was very insistent and got a lot of support from my mom and other you know black parents in, in our school. And you know eventually the school, I think, agreed you know that we needed to have an opportunity to have, you know, ceremony and opportunity to come together and grieve as young people who didn't quite understand you know the full import you know of those events, but you know felt it deeply and you know those are some of the powerful moments.
Story_ID: 594726
Speaker 1: Even before King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You talked a little bit about the political election, but being a Catholic, is your family still at this time practicing Cath- you know Catholics going to church or?
Speaker 2: No, I'm, I'm probably the only one of my family and I, you know I went away from the church for many, many years and didn't come back to it actually until my [maternal] grandmother [Lorraine Garcia (ph.)] came, who had moved away from, lived in California for a long time and moved back to Colorado. And of course you know there wasn't going to be any not going to Mass on Sundays, so I actually started going back to church with her and then you know really did, you know became involved in my local parish again. The rest of my family is no longer practicing. But, it was, it was. You know the significance of, of Kennedy as president was more from the perspective of what you know we thought it bought to the civil rights, you know less about you know him being a Catholic president, but more about, you know him being our president. You know I remember the moment that we heard about his assassination because we were in school and it was my fifth grade teacher, Mrs. Polk [ph.], who you know couldn't you know just couldn't stop crying and you know and we all loved her and you know. And first she didn't want to burden us with what had happened but you know she eventually shared that, that the president had been assassinated. And again, you know, we were too young to really understand, but we, we had known how important, we knew he was an important person and that he was important to us and that it was a big loss. And you know so those, that--you know I'm, I'm glad that I was in that place and in a room with, you know a woman who cared deeply about us as you know students we were her, her children, you know and you know managing and going through that process of you know her guiding us made a big difference.
Story_ID: 594727
Speaker 1: So, you really made your way in junior high school [Aaron Gove Junior High School, Denver, Colorado] and became a part of the student government you said?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And what were some of the other things that student government accomplished while you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, true to my family's roots I was quite the rabble rouser and you know I was e- even in junior high you know I was in student government, and I was interested in more than the typical things that student government you know, you know planning social events and you know, you know posters for you know, or parties and you know that kind of stuff. I, you know I, I really wanted to, you know to be involved in you know serious issues and issues that you know affected our school and you know so, you know which was the reason why I you know was involved in saying you know we had to do something about honoring Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. We had some, I think some friction, you know as could be expected between black students and white students in our school. And you know again you know our, you know school people you know always wanted to try to you know reduce, you know reduce conflict and, and you know it, it wasn't helpful. You know as students we were trying to understand and we were trying to you know gain an understanding of what was going on and solve problems, and so you know I remember, and again you know I was always supported by my parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes], by my mom you know, you know and they'd call and say she's causing trouble, you know if she felt I was right in what I was you know saying or how I was speaking out, you know she supported me and that happened a number of times when I was in, in junior high school.
Story_ID: 594728
Speaker 1: You were getting ready to enter high school, and you said you attended East High School [Denver, Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about the transition from junior high school [Aaron Gove Junior High School, Denver, Colorado] to high school.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was just anxious you know to, to go to high school and very excited about going to East, I mean you know growing up in our neighborhood that was, you know that was a big dream. And you know it just had a great reputation, and of course all of the older students, you know kids who lived in the neighborhood had gone to East and so I was very excited about going there. And I knew there were a lot of active, you know, students at East and so I, you know I became very involved in you know student activism you know, you know as soon as I, as soon as I got there as a, as a sophomore. You know it was part of the times when student, student activists, activism and on camp- on college campuses and on high school campuses around the country, and East was no exception. East was, you know, an interesting school you know very integrated, and in fact had been for quite a number of years, one of the few you know naturally integrated schools in the country and really you know prided itself on the diversity of the student body. But, you know we were at the cusp of the, you know the, of the Black Student Movement in my first year at East High School. And so I got involved in a lot of things you know. I think my first couple of months in school I became involved with a bunch of seniors in an initiative to change our dress code, because girls had to wear you know dresses still to school and we wanted to be able to wear pants, and so, so we you know mounted a campaign and you know did petitions and you know went to the administration, to the principal [Robert Colwell]. We, we actually succeeded after a month or two of this campaign to get the dress code changed at, at East. You know, but my poor mother [Anna Garcia Haynes] she was just like you know here we are your first two months of school couldn't you just, you know, do your homework and do your work, do you have to you know cause trouble so soon. But, you know those were the times and I became also involved that very first semester in forming the Black Student Alliance with a number of other friends, turned out to be mostly seniors, but you know we were still dealing with the after effects of the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the fact that you know that the, the school was the community. You know the, you know the schools had really you know tried to suppress you know the feelings and the concerns and you know what, you know what was on students' minds. And I, I think that just stirred, you know, the activism all the more. I mean I think that's why, you know, people came to you know the reality of you know we're, we're gonna have to, you know these issues are gonna have to be raised more if, if, if there's a lesson here we've gotta pay more attention and more has to happen, you know, to acknowledge the, you know, the contributions of people in the, you know in the black community. And you know we began to think of you know how little, you know here we were in these schools and you know we weren't even, you know they didn't want us to talk about you know the one person hero that we really did know well. And we, you know began to realize you know we don't know much about the rest of these you know the other folks in our culture, in our history, and, and so you know we, we pushed for having Afro American history, which you know wasn't being taught in public schools in, in Denver [Colorado] at that time. And so we organized our Black Student Alliance and then we, you know we made some demands on the school on a number of things, but including you know the fact that we wanted Afro American history and you know we wanted--we had, we had some black teachers in the school, again playing a very similar role you know, you know looking out for all of us, not only looking out for us, but making sure that we were doing what we were supposed to be doing, you know we were there to get an education, that we would do well, and so there were and it was tumultuous times at East, while I, I was there in the midst of a lot of things.
Story_ID: 594729
Speaker 1: You know we wanted to bring speakers in. You know the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] came to the school [East High School, Denver, Colorado], you know interacted with some of us as students and of course the school was, you know very upset by that. We were very fortunate to have had a very compassionate, you know, thoughtful, and courageous principal at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was the principal?
Speaker 1: His name was Bob Colwell [Robert Colwell]. And I think from an educational standpoint, there's no person throughout my life has affected me more than he did, you know became, you know a wonderful friend. But, you know, it certainly started out with me on the other end of the table of a, you know, bunch of angry black students you know making demands. And you know rather than sort of being a reactionary and you know trying to clamp down and you know crush us, you know he respected us and he listened and he, he, he didn't give us everything we wanted, but he recognized that we had some legitimate issues and concerns and in, in the midst of a faculty who were, you know were very nervous about this and, and you know, and a school administration you know downtown that certainly was, you know, not you know supportive and nervous about these things. You know he, he blazed some real trails in terms of you know addressing you know the issues about, you know, racial concerns head on and not avoiding them and making changes where he thought they should be made and you know standing up to his own faculty sometimes. Although he had many supporters, there were some who, you know who, some of the old school, you know, th- that's, you know they do as we tell them and that's it and we, you know they learn what we teach them and that's it and you know what is this about, you know, black history or Afro history, you know all of this stuff and we certainly aren't gonna have these people, you know, these, you know who they considered you know criminals, you know Black Panthers and other you know activists you know coming in, into our schools. But, you know he allowed that. You know he set some parameters, but you know we had some assemblies and we were allowed to bring, you know some controversial speakers in. He, he changed the schedule and brought Afro American history. You know, you know he allowed our organization, Black Student Alliance, you know we had a first actually a white woman who was our sponsor, was one of our history teachers and then later a gentleman who became a dear friend of mine, Regis Groff, who was my Afro American history teacher and later became a state senator here in, in Colorado. We've remained very, very good friends, you know, since those days of him being our sponsor and trying to keep us under control as a, you know, crazy group of activists.
Story_ID: 594730
Speaker 1: Do you remember the--well if there is a time, up until this point that you felt discriminated against, I mean personally you just knew that an action of someone was discrimination towards you?
Speaker 2: You know, not in you know really, you know overt ways. It was, that was, and that was the thing about Denver [Colorado] generally that, that discrimination you know those--was very subtle and it made it all the more difficult to deal with here. And you know I knew about it because you know my parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes] being so active in civil rights. But, I guess part of, part of it is that you know I, we were mostly surrounded by people who you know who didn't discriminate. But, you know I remember things like you know going shopping and you know be fol- be you know being followed around the store, you know by white clerks you know because you know they were certain that we would, you know, you know we'd be stealing something. You know just, you know very subtle kinds of things you know like, like that.
Story_ID: 594731
Speaker 1: And during this time outside of school, what activities are you con- you know continuing to be part of, I know swimming you said? Are you involved in track or what sports in high school or outside of school are you still participating in?
Speaker 2: You know, I participated in sports right up to, you know, my, through, you know part of my first year in high school and then I, I didn't continue you know. I think women's athletics were still, you know, very second class. You know there was no Title I [sic. Title IX] back then. And I remember going to P.E. class [physical education] after having you know played basketball my entire life and going into the P.E. class and having you know some, somebody say I should, you know, dribble three steps and pass it or I couldn't cross some line or some very crazy you know girls' rules. And, and you know the swim team we didn't have a pool at East [East High School, Denver, Colorado], so to in order to swim, this is what ended up dashing my Olympic hopes, 'cause in order to keep, you know to swim, I'd have to get on a bus and go across town to somebody else's you know pool and swim after their team you know, and I decided I didn't want to do that and so you know I really left sports for you know most of my high school career.
Story_ID: 594732
Speaker 1: You left the sports un- alone, but there are some other things that are going on that young women of high school age are participating in, so tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I was very fortunate to be selected in my senior year as an Owl Club debutante [Owl Club of Denver Debutante Cotillion]. This was an annual tradition from an organization that was very respected in the community. This is our, you, you know in, in the black community these were all of our community leaders, you know our, you know doctors and lawyers, you know political figures and you know all of the, the community leaders you know were, you know participants in this club. And they selected young women who had outstanding academics to, you know, to be Owl Club debutantes. Now, and, and you know I'd mentioned earlier that I was very much a tomboy, you know, growing up all of my years I was a little--knowing boys as well as I did, it was amazing I was as shy as I was in high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado], and you know so I, I didn't have a, you know I didn't go to a lot of the dances and things like that. Another thing I was, I was such a serious, you know everything was about serious issues and, and so you know I didn't participate in a lot of the, you know the proms. I, I went to the parties afterwards, but I didn't you know participate in some of the traditional social events that you know, you know typical high student--high school students do. But the debutante ball was really you know special time and I shared it with two really, really close friends that you now it was, it was just a very special--you know Becky Graves [ph.] who was my, you know my best friends in high, in high school and Billy Turner [ph.]. You know we were, you know just the three of us were just, you know, pals. We were just you know together and going through this. I remember my senior year we were all involved in the program called senior seminar, which meant that we spent all of our, it was experiential. It was the first, you know, experiential education program where instead of classroom, you know learning and going to classes, you learned by being in the field. You learned by being out in the world. And so we spent our entire semester in, in amazing experiences. It you know had a real profound effect on me, but the first of those experiences was a Outward Bound trip. And of course I was an outdoor person anyway. Many of the others who were on our trip were not, being urban kids and especially the black kids who you know tended to be urban kids and with not much outdoor experience. But we all adopted as a result of those first few weeks of our senior seminar experience our new uniform of the day, which was you know bell bottom jeans, hiking boots, and you know the tee shirt. And I remember the woman who led the debutante balls in this town and who was also a leader in the community of cultural events and taught in parks and recreational, and you know produced a theater program called Show Wagon [ph.] over many, many years and taught tap dancing, taught charm. You know I, in fact I flunked out of her charm classes early in my life and didn't do much better in tap dance. And so when she got the three of us in this debutante, while we were practicing trying to learn how to waltz with our hiking boots on it was all she could do to manage us. And she was very distressed by the fact that we had these enormous Afros. I had you know practically the biggest Afro in the school, and all of us did have you know these big Afros. And you know she worked with us for weeks while we were going through the debutante process to you know put the fear of God in us if we, we could not have Afros you know as, for our debutante ball. And so of course we all vowed the three of us rebels you know this was our, you know we're you know black and proud and by god we were gonna have our Afros. And the night of the debutante ball came and the three of us had vowed plus a couple of the other girls--in their earlier pictures of us in practicing we all had these Afros. The night of the debutante ball comes and I'm the only one who shows up. I guess everyone else, she had gotten everyone else's parents and they finally prevailed and so there I am the lone, you know the lone debutante with a giant Afro. And people still comment when they go by the club and they see the various years of the, you know the debutante classes and you know I was that first one you know with this giant Afro.
Speaker 1: What was the instructor's name?
Speaker 2: Ernestine Smith, Ernestine Smith just, just you know an icon you know in our community, countless kids and children, girls who, you know learned dance and song and theater and deportment and you know was, won- won- a wonderful woman.
Story_ID: 594733
Speaker 1: What did you take away from the Outward Bound experience?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know out, Outward Bound you know was my favorite thing. In fact I, and I stayed involved in Outward Bound years later including helping to teach a couple of courses there. But the Outward Bound experience was really about taking us outside of our comfort zones and you know learning some lessons, learning about yourself, learning about the limits that you could, you know you could, that you didn't have some limits that you thought you might have, ex- exceeding your own limits and learning about working with others and teamwork and you know being able to trust people around you to get things accomplished. There was--Outward Bound always involves what they call you know a peak experience, which is you know is climbing and in Colorado it means you know summiting a fourteen thousand foot peak. We did our Outward Bound trip in, in, in Mexico, very grueling, grueling experiences as it turned out. And I don't think they quite expected it to be as tough as it was. I loved it, but it was a tough time. We had, you know we had a lot of kids, you know, injuries and you know, you know a very tough time and it included a three day solo where you, you didn't, you know have any food and you were by yourself for three days and it was sort of an idea to you know really commune with yourself and you know be focused internally very interesting experiences. We--
Speaker 1: You said you had no food?
Speaker 2: Just, just for three days during the trip. That was what, what was called a solo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it, you know it's a survival kind of a--
Speaker 1: Did you journal during that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You take your journal and, and so my story, I always have a story that differ from everybody else 'cause you know no matter what the rules are I always figure out there's something else. There's another way to do it and so of course the three of us wh- what had happened earlier in our trip is that we had run out of food anyway that, and, and wasn't on our solo and had taken, you know, a day or two for them to resupply us in this very remote canyon. You know breakdown and you know getting resupplied and so when we went to do our solo we decided we'd had enough of not having any food and we and we weren't gonna have a solo, we were gonna be rebels. So, four of us in the group broke solo after the first day and a half and got together and we were on a beach in Mexico, in the beautiful Baja, Mexico [Baja California, Mexico], and we got friendly with a Mexican family that lived on the beach in the most dire circumstances of poverty I had ever seen. You know they, their home was ramshackle, you know, you know corrugated steel and cardboard, whatever they could do to put it together and they were--here they were on a, on a virtual desert trying to grow vegetables, a man and his wife and two kids and his brother and their wife and what was amazing, I mean I'd never seen such pov- I'd had never seen such poverty and it was just incredible. He was a fisherman. He fished every day and you know they eked out an, an existence and they felt sorry for us. They, they couldn't believe that these Americans would leave these kids, you know, by themselves. Of course, they weren't far away and you know they, this was a very controlled experiment, but they didn't, they just didn't get it, and so they, they pitied us. Here we were these, you know these, you know kids, you know from the U.S. and they felt so sorry for us, so they, you know the lady made us this big batch of tortillas and the guy, you know, brought some fi- cooked some fish for us and they made you know dinner and you know and this was a family who couldn't afford to share a lot of food, I mean they barely made ends meet, and they shared with us and we spent a couple of the most, you know, interesting and, and rewarding days just you know with, with a cultural exchange. My Spanish was better in those days, and so we were able to communicate with them and we just had a great time learning about you know how they lived and who they were and they learned about us. And we ended up having the best experience out of the whole, you know out of the whole, the whole trip.
Story_ID: 594734
Speaker 1: So, who encouraged you or who gave you guidance as far as where you would go to college? I'm, I'm just assuming that this is a given that you knew that you would go to college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know although I had, I had a tough time in high school [East High School, Denver, Colorado]. You know after my sophomore year in high school I, I became bored with school. It was hard to see the relevance. I was a good student you know when I wasn't misbehaving, but I was, I was, when I wasn't skipping class, which I did with classes that were too easy. It was, and I didn't see the relevance and I wanted to change the world and you know what I mean. I wanted to do something meaningful and this, I, I just wasn't getting what you know going to all these classes did, you know, that was you know meaningful. And so I, I really wanted to you know to drop out and I had enough credits by the time I was finished with my sophomore year to--I, I could you know graduate except that they, they forced you to get a few more credits just in high school. And so I worked full-time my, you know, for a year and half until senior seminar at The Denver Post, you know. And as a result of that I you know, and because of a very dear friend of mine who was in the state legislature [Colorado General Assembly] lived around the corner from us who was, who had been a journalist, had been the first black editor for The Denver Post. And I had become you know really interested in journalism because of his influence on my life.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: George Brown [HistoryMaker George L. Brown]. He later became the first black lieutenant governor in the United States since Reconstruction. But you know I was close friends with him. I babysat, you know, all of his kids growing up and so I was around him a lot and he really inspired me. So first I wanted to be a journalist, you know because of the experiences he had and you know, you know the power of the media that, you know, that he taught me, you know, as, as we talked a lot about media and journalism. You know so I, you know I was one of you know changed every, you know every, you know, year what I wanted to do and you know what inspired me.
Story_ID: 594735
Speaker 1: And I, I later became very interested in wanting to be a teacher. It was a result of we had a teachers' strike in Denver [Colorado], I guess it was 1969. I was in high school, and then we, you know we helped out on the picket lines, but during the two and a half, almost three weeks of that strike, our people in our community said our kids can't afford you know to be out of school for two weeks. This isn't a good thing. This isn't good for the kids. And so we created what we called a Freedom School, what we called the Freedom School and we ran a school in the basement, in the upstairs of the Macedonia Baptist Church [Denver, Colorado] and you know tried to convince parents you know, at least of the black kids, that you need to come to this school. Being out of school, this isn't a holiday, you, you need to get your education. And so as a high school student, you know there weren't teachers you know and so I actually taught classes for some of the younger students that were there. Then it really inspired me to think about, you know, being you know an educator. And you know as I observed schools around me and I thought you know this could be better. You know I realized how disengaged I had been, and I said you know this, this could be different. I remember, you know the love of learning that I had gotten from my, you know, teacher all the way back in third grade and I said what's, what's missing here. There's something, there's gotta be a better way to do this and so I was really inspired then you know, you know to be a teacher and that's what really drove part of my decisions about college.
Story_ID: 594736
Speaker 1: The other thing was, even being a student activist, you know in our Black Student Alliance, you know it didn't escape me that you know, I mean I was clearly one of the leaders and the organizers of the group. I, I don't know whether it just came naturally or because you know watching my mom [Anna Garcia Haynes] and my uncles and you know just seeing organi- you know grassroots organizing all of my life it just, you know I just learned and so you know I, you know I was very much involved in helping guide our group. But, the leaders were always the guys. You know they always were the presidents, and they were, you know, and so you know you were asking earlier about you know recognizing disparities and you know I recognized both racial disparities, you know the discrimination and I particularly recognized discrimination you know, you know against women. You know, you know they always expected you know the guys were supposed to be the president and leaders and you know and so you know I became quite the feminist very, very young. And so when I started looking at schools, you know, I started looking at women's colleges 'cause I, you know I wanted to be where you know I could be, you know, have the opportunity to exercise leadership and you know not, you know stand behind you know somebody else even if I thought I was you know better qualified than that person. And also there was a student, the daughter of one or two really extraordinary leaders in our community, one was the, [HistoryMaker] Rachel Noel, Bassette Noel who became the first black women to serve on the Denver schools [Denver Board of Education] and is the women whose resolution led to the de- desegregation of our Denver schools here, and her husband [Edmond F. Noel] was a prominent physician and their daughter, Angie [Angela Noel], was my, you know, my hero. I mean she's the person, she was several years older than me, but all through you know growing up and you know watching her at East [East High School, Denver, Colorado], she was the head girl at East and she was smart and just you know, I mean she's who I wanted to be. Angie went to a women's college and talked to me about what it was like and encouraged me about what a great experience it was and an opportunity for, you know really growing as, as a leader and, and you know, you know fulfilling your potential. And so that's, you know that's what inspired me to you know to go after women's colleges. And so I, and of course I didn't want to stay home. I said earlier, you know, I had my sights on you know the horizons of the world and so my mom made me apply for you know school here at CU [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado] and I--a lot of my other friends, you know, were apply you know, applied and went to CU. And in fact, they went up for the summer program the year before, and I figured you know with all the partying and you know playing around that had occurred during the summer I thought man if I go up to this school with these folks, you know I'm not gonna get anything, you know, and I, you know I need, I need to be serious, and so I vowed to go out of state. So, I applied to women's colleges on the East Coast, most of the Seven Sister schools. And I applied to Mills College in, in California [Oakland, California]. And you know just a couple of years earlier when I was still thinking about track and field I wanted to go to, you know I wanted to go to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] or you know one of the schools that, you know that were prominent black schools [HBCUs] that were you know big in track, but you know once I fell out of the athletics and you know turned really towards you know more towards the academics and leadership then you know I, I turned my sights towards you know a different school. And I thought about Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause I, you know I knew some students had, you know gone to Spelman, a women's college.
Story_ID: 594737
Speaker 1: But I settled on Barnard and I, and I settled on one of the schools back east be- because of you know what I'd heard, I heard something that was discouraging to me about you know going to you know Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. When, when somebody said you know this is a school where you go so you can marry a doctor or lawyer, you know I, you know as a feminist you know I was sort of through with that idea. You know I, I wanted to go to school you know to be my own person and not you know to get found by somebody else. And so, so that made my decision about going to one of the other schools. I applied to Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Barnard, a college in New York [New York]. And by that time, I really was serious about wanting to be a teacher, and so I was really looking at schools that had good education programs. And I had the very big fortunate my senior year at the end of taking a trip to Europe, spending about three weeks there, and on my way I stopped in New York on the way. I had applied to Barnard College. I had spent a summer in New York my, the summer of my sophomore year for six weeks and so I really grew to love the city and was there for sort of a citizenship, leadership experience my, summer of my sophomore year. So, I love New York and when I applied to Barnard I went through on my way to Europe, had a chance to interview and told him you know I really want to go here. I had been accepted, I said but you haven't give me enough of a scholarship, and I'm gonna go to you know to Boston U because they're giving me a lot of money. And so I went off to Europe and when I came back they sent me a letter increasing my scholarship and so I decided, you know I made the decision, you know to go to Barnard. I really wanted to be in New York.
Story_ID: 594738
Speaker 1: And talk to me a little bit more about the Europe trip. How did you get to go to Europe?
Speaker 2: This was a part of my, my AP [advanced placement] European history class. We had a teacher at East [East High School, Denver, Colorado] who was an extraordinary teacher, Price Smith, who taught, I had taken both ancient history and European history. This was a man who brought, you know just brought history alive, and so we organized our European history class. You know what, what, what it would be like if we could visit all these places, you know the, the Louvre [Musee du Louvre, Paris, France] and see the Sistine Chapel [Apostolic Palace, Vatican City], and you know see all of these things that we had studied and, and so we, we organized this trip. He really, he really organized this trip. It was very sad that you know he didn't go along on the trip with us, but we organized this trip and almost everyone in the class went on this, you know, wonderful excursion of Europe, you know London [England] and Paris [France] and you know Rome [Italy] and Florence [Italy]. I fell in love with the City of Florence, and you know we spent almost, almost a month, a little over three weeks on a, on a study tour you know through all of those historical points. You know we became, you know quite close friends, I mean you know having been classmates and most of us were always in the same classes anyway, you know, throughout, you know throughout our school. But, you know traveling with somebody makes, you, you grow close to people when you traveling and I still have a great friend in Lon- who lives in London who was our guide throughout this entire trip and we've remained friends over the years. She's come to visit, visit me here and I've visited her a couple of times when, whenever I get back to, to London.
Speaker 1: How did you pay for the trip?
Speaker 2: Wow, you talk about, you know, bake sales. You know some of the kids in the class had means and you know their, their parents contributed more, but the school, we really did fundraisers. You know we all, you know we sold more candy and more, you know, baked goods and more, just anything we could find to sell we sold and you know raised, raised money to, to go on this trip.
Story_ID: 594739
Speaker 1: Right before we go on to college [Barnard College, New York, New York], I just wanna step back a little bit and talk about the Freedom School and after the strike. Did things change and you know what, what happened? What was the climate at high school after that?
Speaker 2: You know it, it was, unfortunately a few of the high school students [at East High School, Denver, Colorado] participated in this, you know, it, it was, it was, I, you know some of my buddies who were there and helped teach, you know. So, you know things were back to normal. You know most of the kids had taken you know, you know it was, the three weeks was a holiday, you know it was it was time off from school. But a number of the families who did participate in that you know stayed close over the years after that and really this, this was a nucleus that people who became engaged in issues around quality education and who were the people who supported, Mrs. Noel [HistoryMaker Rachel Noel] and Omar Blair [Omar D. Blair] who became another, you know, great leader on, on our Denver school board [Denver Board of Education] looking out after you know, you know ensuing that equal and quality education occurred. So many of the families whose kids, you know who recognized the importance and whose kids had been involved in that Freedom School were, you know were the people who continued over the years to be the leaders in the community and the folks who, you know, were, were vigilant about raising the issues about quality and equality you know in education in our city.
Story_ID: 594740
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1971 from East [East High School, Denver, Colorado], and now tell me about your transition to college [Barnard College, New York, New York]. Now is this, besides the Europe trip, this is really your first time living away from home is that right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell me--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well and other than the summer that I'd spent in New York, my sophomore year I spent six weeks at a camp in New York and you know being that far away from home and being sixteen is, was you know was quite the adventure. It stirred up, you know, every adventurous juice in my body and you know that's I think why I wanted to go so far away from home for college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about the transition to college.
Speaker 2: You know it, it, it was actually, despite the fact that I wanted so badly to be in New York [New York], it was hard. You know I'm very, very close to my family. It was hard being that far away from my sisters [Katherine Haynes, Mary Haynes and LeAnn Haynes White] and my brother [Michael Haynes], you know my parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes], and New York is a big city and I had no family there and so it took a bit of, you know, a bit of adjusting. But, you know I, you know I wanted to you know savor every moment, get everything out of it I could, and so you know I developed wonderful lifelong relationships, you know friends there. And I had people who, you know adopted me, you know as families. I was telling somebody this story the other night, we were talking about southern cooking, which you know I knew nothing about you know and you know here in Denver [Colorado] except, you know except for my father's mother [Pauline Anderson Haynes] a little bit, you know those few, you know family, you know holiday events outside of that I, I wasn't aware of the traditions of southern cooking. But I had a couple of friends who adopted me in, in college and I went home with them for holidays because I couldn't, we couldn't afford to have me, you know, come back and forth. And you know I experienced southern hospitality, you know, you know a friend's grandmother who, you know who just loved feeding hungry college students. But, you know I, I went to all the theater. You know I went to music concert. I was a big jazz enthusiast, you know. Even when I was in high school I was the only student who really liked jazz. Everybody else was in R and B, which I loved too, you know all of the popular music, but I loved jazz and, and if you're a jazz lover there is no place on earth to be other than New York City. And so you know I found my way to the Vanguard [Village Vanguard, New York, New York] and to all of these places.
Story_ID: 594741
Speaker 1: When you left to go to college [Barnard College, New York, New York], did you still have the idea that you wanted to go into education?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I went, I had a plan. I, I wanted to be an elementary school teacher. I wanted to teach third grade, go figure, and I, I had planned to go straight into Teachers College at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], you know, and get my master's [degree] immediately after. So, you know I had, I had my, you know, my plan all mapped out.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So what happened (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know in some ways it goes, I mean I think it think it, you may have to reverse a little bit. You know I lived a very political life, you know, parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes] who were very active in the Democratic Party. I've carried literature from you know the time I was, you know, knee high to a grasshopper and could you know distribute pamphlets. I'd been involved--my mother managed many campaigns when I was growing up for local politicians in our community and so you know I learned, you know firsthand. The, the man I mentioned earlier who had a great influence on me, George Brown [HistoryMaker George L. Brown], was you know in the legislature. I worked on my very first political campaign of my own for a guy, another guy who I, who I baby sat for who you know ran for the, the Colorado legislature [Colorado General Assembly] and so I was very influenced by these individuals who were political leaders in our community. And that senior seminar program that I mentioned to you, one of the components of the program we spent three weeks in a module follow- working in the Colorado legislature. We had to learn how to be lobbyist so to speak or you know get involved and interview legislatures and get involved in some issues. Colorado happened to be going through one of the most controversial issues ever, ever dealt with here and that was whether to host the Olympics in 1976, and we had a legislator at that time who later became our governor [Richard Lamm], who you know led this campaign against bringing the Olympics to Colorado, the Winter Olympics because of the environmental damage that it could, would do to our natural resources and so we got very involved as students on that side of the issue. I got a taste of you know what it was like you know firsthand you know in politics, and you know I didn't decide then, but you know as I thought back later you know the, the excitement of being able you know and actually winning you know and having been a part of you know an issue and a movement was pre- was pretty exciting to me, so. So, I went to college still determined to be a teacher, and I took all the courses to--but you know when you're, when you wor- working to become a teacher in most schools you don't major in edu- education. It isn't a major, you have to major in something else and so being the political animal that I was and a lot, a lot because of the times, you know in New York [New York], you know early '70s [1970s], I mean you know it was again student activism, a lot of you know politics, you know, Black Power movement was really at the, you know it's height.
Story_ID: 594742
Speaker 1: And so I became a political science major [at Barnard College, New York, New York] and you know I was doing that because I needed a major. I still intended to be a teacher. I did all of my, you know, teaching classes. I even student taught in the New York public school system [New York City Department of Education], but you know I just got totally wrapped up in this political science major and you know I, I had a wonderful instructor who was, who was a lawyer and probably one of the most prominent lawyers on the East Coast, Inez Reid [Inez Smith Reid], who was an adjunct faculty--although she wasn't, actually she was a full-time faculty member, although she, she held posts in other, in other places as well and continued to practice law. She was my advisor and taught classes, everything from African you know politics and, and history to you know what was going on in current issues and you know at the time, so what was going on at the time, an anti-war [Vietnam War] movement, you know unrest in, you know in Chile. And you know I spent a whole year sitting in court almost daily following the H. Rap Brown trial in New York [New York]. And so, you know it, it was a very political time and you know and you know a time to learn firsthand of you know the issues that you know were shaping America, and you know very much being a, you know a part of that. I mean one of the largest anti-war demonstrations you know in the history occurred on the Columbia campus [Columbia University, New York, New York], you know that I was a part of, and this was a time when college campuses, we joked about it later, but you know it was sort of every other month one group or the other took over the president's office, did a sit-in, and you know made demands about this thing or that thing. So, we had a Black Student Organization that did it, you know, and there was, you know, a Latino organization that also did. A Chinese organization had their turn. You know, you know it was every student activist group that you could think and so you know, so I ended up taking all these courses and being very you know influenced by Inez Reid. And I ended up coming out and you know sort of turning my sights on pre-law and wanting to be, you know, think about being a lawyer and got involved with a fortune society in New York that I had become familiar with the, the summer, my sophomore year that I had spent in New York on prison reform issues and kind of got reengaged with them and you know following H. Rap [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and you know just all of the, you know the issues about the justice system, you know the disparities made, made me want to you know to be a lawyer and you know def- you know defend the world. And so I ended up graduating with sort of my sights on you know becoming a lawyer instead.
Story_ID: 594743
Speaker 1: And you also mentioned the director of admissions was one of your mentors as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a woman by the name of Christine Royer [R. Christine Royer] had been the admissions director when I was there and you know was really the one instrumental in helping me get to Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York], and then you know she encouraged me to get involved and got me--Barnard was a school that involved students in governance, you know not just in advisory way or you know in, you know, you know come and surveying us every now and then, but we actually served on committees that made decisions about how the school was run, you know very forward thinking you know women's institution that encouraged the development of leadership. And so she encouraged me to get involved in the admissions committee, you know, where we talked about, you know what are the kinds of students, you know how do we attract students and you know what's, what's the right balance and, and so I served there and I served on a tripartite committee that involved the faculty, the students and the administration in you know making decisions and recommendations about issues around the campus. This, one of the most important decisions that that group made and was involved in during the time I was there, because Barnard was an all-women's school, even during the time that I was there, many of the women's colleges were changing because of economics, you know to, you know to coed institutions and we had lots of discussions and held lots of forums and decided as a group you know that wo- the women's education that we were receiving and the value of it was important enough to retain. And fortunately, Barnard had strong support, a good endowment, and had you know financially the ability to make a decision to stay as a separate institution, and that was one of the decisions that we were all involved in.
Story_ID: 594744
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in 1975.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what, what did you do after, after college, after, well after Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I came, came back, you know after having spent every summer while I was in college at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] this time teaching swimming. You know there's a whole generation, a couple of generations of kids in Denver [Colorado] that I taught how to swim and that I coached. But my final year, my senior year, I spent the summer campaigning, the summer of 1974, for George Brown [HistoryMaker George L. Brown], who was the candidate for lieutenant governor and then when, you know when he won that primary, campaigned through the summer for the Democratic ticket for George Brown and for Dick Lamm [Richard Lamm] who be- who were then elected in November new governor, the first black lieutenant governor since Reconstruction, and an hour before Merv Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] in California. And so I, when I graduated in '75 [1975] I came out a semester early. I was finished in January and so I left New York [New York], much as I loved it, I'm a western girl through and through, and so I, I got on the first thing smoking back to Denver and then I, you know, of course became desperate for a job within a, you know within a month. But, when they took office in January they were looking for staff and so then, so the new lieutenant governor hired me to, as a staff assistant and so I started out my career in state government as an assistant working in an office we created. It was, it was his vision of creating an ombudsman kind of an office to really stay in touch with people. He was very much a people person and you know we had crisscrossed the state the summer before, you know he really believed in you know staying in touch and reaching out to people and so, and having this sort of ombudsman, we called it the Citizens' Advocate Office, but you know having citizens, you know having a direct you know access to government. He had spent you know twenty some years in the legislature [Colorado General Assembly] as the only black state senator and you know in the legislature, so he had some ideas about how to make sure that people were able to connect on a personal level and on a direct level with government. And so I helped set up this office and I traveled the state. We set up satellite offices of the Citizens' Advocate Office in a number of, you know in Colorado Springs [Colorado] and other places, and we traveled frequently to the, the other cities and the states so that people could feel like they were a part of, of what was going, of government. So really, you know, really those were the experiences that honed my, you know, political skills and you know. Even then I still didn't have any personal aspirations to, you know, run for office and in fact you know working for politicians, which I did you know for a number of years after that, you know I knew how tough it was and I thought, hm, I don't know if I wanna do that. But, that, it was a good experience. I had an opportunity to do some lobbying in the legislature you know while I worked for him and I left state government when, when he left office, and then went to work for a city councilman, the city councilman who preceded me in office. And you know there again you know grassroots organizing, you know working with people, working with constituents, finding ways to solve problems.
Speaker 1: So you worked with George Brown from seventy--
Speaker 2: Fr- from '75 [1975] through '79 [1979] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 2: And a good part of that time I was also in law school, so I did, I did go to the University of Denver school of law [University of Denver College of Law; Sturm College of Law, Denver, Colorado], part-time 'cause you know I was so wrapped up and so engaged and I loved the work that I was doing. So, I, I was doing law school sort of on the side, which is in retrospect not a good way to do law school (laughter). It's, it's a tough way. And then I, when I went to work for Bill Roberts who is the councilman, represented the area you know I still live in.
Speaker 1: Is that District 11 [Denver, Colorado] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Northeast Denver, District 11. So I, you know I, I worked for you know Bill Roberts for five years and you know became you know quite familiar you know with, with the citizens in the community. You know my job was to help people, you know and get things done and navigate through the systems and solve problems and that really helped create you know what later became a very, very you know solid base of support for me as, as I you know ran for office myself.
Story_ID: 594745
Speaker 1: So, is it traditional that when you work as an aide for Denver City Council that this is kind of the path for you to?
Speaker 2: Well interestingly no, not up until, in fact when we started as aides they had really just begun hiring staff and having aides. And a couple of us who were all aides to var- the councilmen at the same time, you know later ran for office and, and what, what's interesting these were all the people of color, so the aides to both the black and the Latino councilmen. You know several of us ended up later running for office in our, you know, respective and taking over the seats of our predecessors. So, you know we sort of broke ground there. I think it started a tradition. It doesn't always happen, but you know it is, you know, it certainly is you know a good launching pad because you know you get to know the community you know as well, in most instances actually even better that the person in office, because you know you're there every day running the offices and city council in those days was not a full-time job. You know you, you did the meetings and so on and you did other things. You were engaged in you know other occupations, and so as council aides we were full time and you know we spent all of our time working in the communities.
Story_ID: 594746
Speaker 1: So how long did you, were, how long were you an aide for Bill Roberts?
Speaker 2: So, I worked for Bill Roberts for five years, and then I got involved in the ca- campaign for mayor for Federico Pena, who was an unknown, you know nobody you know, you know hardly knew who he was. I, I was familiar with him having working, had a chance to work with him in the legislature [Colorado General Assembly] as a young legislator during the time when I was working for George Brown [HistoryMaker George L. Brown], and greatly admired his abilities and his intellect and just his, you know, just I, I thought wow this, this is a guy who is going places. So, when he was persuaded to run for mayor, you know, against a mayor who had been in office for twelve years. You know in those days, you know, you know politics were still like machine like you know. Not, not quite at the same level of Chicago [Illinois] by any means, but clearly you know the, you know the mayor was in charge. He had a majority on council [Denver City Council], and you know that was, that was rock solid, and of course my councilman, Bill Roberts, and we, we were always on the opposite side of that. So, you know, you know I had to learn early on even as an aide to learn how to get things done in a city where you know if you weren't on the prevailing side it was hard, you know it was hard to get things. You know you, you got rewarded, you know, by being, you know, you know an ally of the mayor and going along with his program and, but I learned, you know, how to get things done by, you know, working with people and you know kind of putting aside partisanship. But, I worked for Federico Pena. He, he came out of nowhere to become, you know, elected as mayor of the city and--
Speaker 1: Who was the mayor prior to him?
Speaker 2: Bill, William McNichols [William H. McNichols, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and he had been in for twelve years.
Speaker 2: He had been in for, yeah a long, twelve years I think.
Speaker 1: Okay and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so after, a year after Mayor Pena was elected he convinced me to come you know join his staff and, and so I did. I was looking for something new, you know something a little different to do and you know being part of this new administration, you know, was exciting. You know he really--there was a feel in Denver [Colorado] about you know Mayor Pena almost like you know there isn't you know in this country now with, with you know with Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], the sense of you know now there's a real time for change and there's an opportunity for inclusiveness and for people to be a part you know and not to have a group of people who are in and a group of people who are out, but you know a way of, of, of government that included everybody and you know, and particularly for you know minority people, for people of color in Denver it meant a huge, you know both to you know black and Hispanic communities to have, you know, a mayor and leadership that believed in, you know, opening the doors and providing opportunity and letting everybody be a part of what was going on. And so you know that, that was really an important part of my, you know, early political you know guidance in learning and you know watching people and being a part of that process.
Story_ID: 594747
Speaker 1: And, so during that time that he was mayor, what was some of the contributions and accomplishments of that administration?
Speaker 2: Well, you know aside from, I mean he really literally opened up city government. You know boards and commissions that had for years and years had the same people and almost you know, I mean handfuls, you know of you know people of, of color you know opened up you know and, you know diverse people you know whether they were you know, you know black, Latino, Asian community, you know he reached out to the, the you know small but you know still the--the American Indian [Native American] community. He set up a community relations. There was already a community, community relations organization, but their, you know their outreach into the community you know of seniors, of you know establishing a youth commission. You know when you looked at his administration, you know, it was a rainbow of and he led, you know, the economics of the city where you know we were going through tough times. We had had the oil, you know, Denver [Colorado] was very much dependent on the, on oil as a, as a, you know, in, in the economy and we, you know, we went through a boom--a bust cycle where it was a pretty, pretty dramatic impact on jobs and other things. So, he helped lead us out of that economic times. He led the, you know he was the one who envisioned building a new airport and was able to get you know a vote in various counties, something that nobody thought could happen. So, he started us down the path of a new airport, of building a new convention center [Colorado Convention Center, Denver, Colorado], of revitalizing our downtown, in a city where our downtowns were like many others, the downtowns were dying and the suburbs were, you know were, you know growing up around us and, as many major cities did. He thoughtfully led a process and said we can't allow that to happen. If downtown dies, you know Denver suffers and so it was very visionary in you know getting people together and setting a plan in, in place to, you know, bring people back downtown and bring people living and, and revitalize it and it is an extraordinary place today because of that leadership that, that our later mayor, Mayor Webb, you know, continued. In fact, many of these were ideas that you know Mayor Pena [Federico Pena] started, but you know he left office, office after two years [sic. two terms] and so you know the job of getting, building a new airport was left to, to you know [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb to actually get accomplished.
Speaker 1: So, he led the effort to, to build the Denver International Airport [Denver, Colorado] is that right?
Speaker 2: Mayor Pena led the effort to, to approve and get the airport underway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Mayor Webb is the one who actually got it built.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you know getting it approved and getting, you know starting the, you know the financing and planning the airport under one mayor and the next mayor was the one who actually had to execute it.
Speaker 1: Had got it done.
Story_ID: 594748
Speaker 1: Now, you said he [Federico Pena] was only in office for two, two years?
Speaker 2: Two terms.
Speaker 1: Oh, two terms (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he left after eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: He was appointed to United States--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --secretary of transportation.
Speaker 2: After, afterwards he joined the Clinton administration [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], served both as secretary of energy for a while and then as transportation secretary [sic.].
Speaker 1: And so you stayed the whole eight years with him.
Speaker 2: No, I left--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --the last eighteen months of his administration. He convinced my former boss, Bill Roberts, to leave the city council [Denver City Council] and to come to be on his cabinet as the manager of public works [Denver Department of Public Works]. And you know Bill had, had you know had his own construction firm and brought, you know, you know some real understanding and skills and so he convinced him in the last eighteen months of his administration, this was before we all knew that he was gonna leave office, he had convinced Bill Roberts to come and work for him, and so when Bill vacated that council seat I was persuaded by the people in the community to run for that office. And I have to tell you it wasn't something I wanted to do. I, I was loving what I was doing in the mayor's office. I'd had an opportunity to do a lot of different things while I was there, everything from managing our, you know our, the mayor's appointments, boards and to--boards and commissions to being on special assignment and working on special projects in public works to help grow some of our small business areas and, I loved what I was doing and so. But, the citizens in the community said, you know, you know this community better than anyway one else and you know we're building a new airport [Denver International Airport, Denver, Colorado], we're looking for new opportunities for, you know, businesses in our community, we need somebody who, you know, who really knows this community and, and can you know be an effective leader. And so I was persuaded to run.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: In, in 1990, in a field of eleven, there were eleven of us running, an open seat you know tends to draw everyone, you know, and so it was, it was an interesting race. I was the, I was sort of considered the front runner and so therefore it was me against ten other people, or ten other people running against me. But, I succeeded and I filled the rest of that term and then was reelected a year and a half later to my first full term.
Story_ID: 594749
Speaker 1: How was it being on the other side of, of a campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, it was very different, you know, and as I had said before you know I had worked you know for lieutenant governor [HistoryMaker George L. Brown], I'd worked for a councilman [Bill Roberts], I worked for a mayor [Federico Pena]. You know I knew what it was like, you know, from, you know from staffing an elected official; I knew how tough it was how you know you don't have your own time, you're on you know, you know it seems like 24/7, very demanding and I was, and it was tough. Not, not to mention, which you know it was still sort of a part-time job and you know I took a huge cut in pay to you know to take, you know to run for office. But, you know I'll tell you being on, you know as close as I was to all those people and you know those decisions and you know until you're there, until you're sitting in the hot seat, it's a very different place when you're the one who has to make the decisions, you know not preparing them or not trying to convince them of what decisions to make, but in fact you're the one who has to make them and you're the, you know the buck stops with you. It was very different, took a little adjustment, but I loved it. You know city council [Denver City Council]--and I love, you know as a result, I mean I like politics and you know I studied it. You know all the way around I, you know I studied the [U.S.] Congress when I was in college [Barnard College, New York, New York]. I spent several weeks studying the Congressional Black Cau- Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus]. I really understood the political system from the national to the local level. But, I love local politics, I mean it's where you get things done, it's where you really connected with the people that you serve, where you can see that what you do, how it affects people, you know how it matters, and, and, and the variety of issues that you face because you know this is where people live. This is really what it's, you know, and, and you know, you know I just loved it 'cause you know on any given day I, you know you'd touch on a range of topics.
Story_ID: 594750
Speaker 1: Talk to me about the fact that there was a Hispanic mayor, first time, before an African American mayor in the city.
Speaker 2: You know I, I think that was just a, you know, question of timing and who was, you know, in the right place and the right time. You know Denver's [Denver, Colorado] population at that time, and I think it has grown since, you know it was probably 20 to 25 percent Hispanic. Denver's black population had for a number of years been pretty steady, you know 12 percent, and, and I think still remains somewhere in that area, you know very sort of stable population. The Hispanic population has grown to, you know to over 30 percent today. But, I think it's, it think it's significant both for the elections of Mayor- Mayor Pena [Federico Pena] and for Mayor Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb], that in a city where the, the black and Latino communities wh- when Mayor Pena was elected together presented only, you know, 30 percent of the population, to be elected as mayor. You know he had to garner you know a sizable majority of the rest of the population, and the same is true of Mayor Webb, you know, the first African American mayor. You know in order to become the mayor of this city you know a large majority of the white population had to believe that, you know, he was the right person and that happened in both instances. You know, you know so I think a pretty extraordinary you know story about you know our politics and you know the, you know in, in Denver, in, in our community. And something you know it's sort of a western tradition. And there's always been a feeling, you know, there's no question that there's been discrimination here that you know we, we deal with it still you know the vestiges of it, but somehow the notion that you know, you, you know in the west it's this feeling that you know if your good, you know, and you can you know, you know people, you know you can go places and you can accomplish things. There's a very sort of independent spirit about so- some of our, you know, our early businesspeople, early politicians you know. And we--our black politicians in Denver over, were overrepresented to some degree you know over the years and that was because you know they were strong and focused and you know and you know were, you know, valued throughout, you know, for their contribution throughout the community.
Story_ID: 594751
Speaker 1: Talk about what--in--well, all of your decisions, of course on the city council [Denver City Council] were important, (cough) excuse me, but talk to me about what you think were some of the most significant accomplishments during your tenure which was from 1990 to 2003, is that right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know when I, when I was first elected the, the, you know the, the thing that you know, con- you know really engaged or consumed our city was the new airport [Denver International Airport, Denver, Colorado]. And we were, had just planned it, we were in the stages of you know trying to get it built to get it financed. It was, you know, the first major airport in the United States had been built in over twenty-five years, just you know lots of challenges and it was the area that I represented. And so I became the chair of the, the airport committee and really was instrumental in leading you know from our end of it because of all of the contracts. You know every decision that got made about how to build that airport had to be approved by our city council, and so you know I really worked in partnership with the administration, with the mayor in, you know, getting that, that airport developed and I think one of my proudest accomplishments, and I know it's one of Mayor Webb's [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb] proudest accomplishments, during that time was you know working together. We were able to get the involvement of businesses both in terms of contractors who had opportunities to be a part of building the airport and designing the airport and once the airport was open, of running the businesses and concessions there and we were very proud to say that at the, you know our airport you know had a you know, you know a better percentage even in the Atlantic Report [sic. Atlantic Reporter] you know when it came to providing opportunities for women and minority businesses and local businesses, and it was a very deliberate you know effort on our part to provide those opportunities. It wasn't without controversy. You know we had some battles, but you know I think we prevailed and I, I think it made our airport, you know, especially in those early years, the envy you know around the country and around the world.
Speaker 1: And what other projects were some of your accomplishments (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the sort of flipside of building a new airport is, you know, is tearing down an old one and both, both again in my district [District 11, Denver, Colorado]. I lived just a few blocks, you know five minutes from the old Stapleton Airport [Stapleton International Airport, Denver, Colorado] and so I was very much engaged for you know period and still am in you know redeveloping that old airport site and it, it has become--you know it was the largest infield redevelopment in, in the country. You know 4,700 acres, seven square miles, you know, of an infield development in the middle of a city had been unheard of and you know as the councilmember leading that, you know, representing that area was very involved in you know helping you know to plan for and move towards the redevelopment of that site. And I'm very proud of that because it, you know there was, you know it was really, it was, it was meant to be. You know here's our opportunity to, to design a community you know the way it should be, everything from you know the opportunities on a social and economic level to the, you know building a sustainable community and making sure, and you know building a community that was diverse and, so I'm, you know, I'm very proud of my efforts there.
Story_ID: 594752
Speaker 1: I think on the, and there were three other initiatives and I was involved in many of them over the years [on the Denver City Council], but there are three that stand out that I was involved in that really--. One was my early efforts, which were at least initially unsuccessful, but eventually some years later we succeeded and that was in, in passing a tax to support children's programs. I had looked around the country and you know what, what, what should we be doing in a city to make this the best place to, you know, for a child to, to raise children and to support and to make this a good place for children to succeed and to grow and to thrive. And you know we looked around the country, you know, in cities where, in a few cities people had invested in programs for children to make sure that kids have the right start and the right opportunities. And we had a lot of kids in need, you know, and a lot of kids who didn't have the opportunities and you know we lived in a community in Colorado, you know with the highest degree of, and this is still true today, you know one of the highest percentages, the highest percentage in the country of college graduates. But, you know many of those are people who come from other places. You know our own, you know, internal graduation rate isn't what it should be and so you know I pushed for, on two different occasions, you know the passage of a, of a tax that would support children's programming, early childhood education, a way to keep kids off the street and you know, out, you know prevention, you know preventing you know kids from getting involved in gangs and drugs and all of that stuff. Those two, and those two efforts failed the first time, but eventually you know, you know Mayor Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb] and others, you know, and other people in the community was sort of the lone ranger the first time around. But everybody said it's a great idea, but we don't want to go ask citizens for a tax increase. But, eventually we got one, one passed and many more citizens were involved in that, so you know I, I felt good about you know that, that, you know having been at least you know paving the way for that.
Speaker 2: Were, were taxes the way that it was paid for the second time when it was successful?
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it wasn't a different plan?
Speaker 1: And Denver's [Denver, Colorado], yeah and Denver community really had, you know, both in terms of our bond issues and schools has, you know has a real tradition of investing, you know, in the community so, so the citizens eventually came around.
Story_ID: 594753
Speaker 1: You were also involved in welfare to work programs?
Speaker 2: Yes, I served on our first welfare reform board looking at, you know, the many changes in you know coming down from the federal level on through and you know the, the, the changes in human services, and you know became very involved in, in that process of making sure that, you know in our zeal to make sure that people were working, that they actually had opportunities and that the kid, their kids were supported in that. You know moms and dads, you know especially single moms couldn't very well go to work if they didn't have, you know, you know, choices, and good choices for their, you know for their children. And so you know so I was involved several years in, in you know helping shape that and being a part of that welfare reform board and making sure that, you know, the notions of reform, which were happening at the federal level, which was you know get these people off you know the dole and you know make them go work as though they didn't want to be self-sufficient. That, that you know we didn't you know cut people off and make things worse you know with, with the, with these changes and so you know it was, it was, it was tough time. It was a tough time for people in the state.
Story_ID: 594754
Speaker 1: Was that the second, 'cause you said three initiatives, and I'm sorry I just asked you, but was that one of them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were a couple, you know I also sponsored a, an initiative to introduce a living wage. A living wage ordinance was something that was occurring across this country, and the idea of having, you know, a minimum wage in our, our city that was different than you know other places in the state it was, you know it was, you know considered an anti-business you know sort of move. You know I had a very good relationship with the business community and you know worked very collaboratively with them on the airport [Denver International Airport, Denver, Colorado] and you know, you know economic development over the years. But, I felt strongly that, you know, just, just because you know we would be the only city and you know it would put us at a disadvantage to, to suggest that you know we shouldn't do what was right, what we thought was right in providing a wage that people could actually, you know, raise a family and pay their rent and put food on the table was, you know, something I believed strongly in and so you know that was sort of another, one of the against the odds initiatives that I was in- involved in and you know I didn't succeed early on, but you know as I said later on, you know, we were able, you know it became a broader issue, more people in the community became engaged and you know I, I think as more people, you know, realized the significance of it you know. So, sometimes your first time around you don't succeed, but you know--
Speaker 1: Or you plant the seed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you pave, you plant the seed and again the same thing is true of the smoking ban. I, you know sponsored the legislation to create a smoking ban, very controversial and you know couldn't get the su- you know support of the, you know the--it was tough, you know, having, the mayor [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb] eventually did, you know, support it, but you know people, you know it was considered again an anti-business, the sky will fall, and you know everybody will leave Denver [Colorado] and you know, you know, but you know I, I thought it was important as a pub, you know that public health you know should trump all of those things and that you know there was, you know citizens shouldn't be forced to trade off you know the health and that the, you know the evidence was clearly there about the effects of secondhand smoke and, you know we had to be guided by what data, you know with the, with the facts you know had told us. And, and so again you know that was, it failed at the local level, but it, it, I succeeded in getting the support of all the local people who said we agree with you on the health issues and we will, if we can do it statewide where it won't have an economic disadvantage for Denver we would and so they, true to their word, they did support you know a statewide initiative and we eventually now have a statewide smoking ban. I like to think that it was the result of my early Quixote [Don Quixote] like efforts.
Story_ID: 594755
Speaker 1: And what about international trade?
Speaker 2: International trade was efforts I was involved in you know largely because of my involvement in our new airport. We wanted to put the international in the Denver International Airport [Denver, Colorado], and you know a lot of what had propelled us to build this airport was to build, you know, our economy and to provide opportunities for our businesses in, in what we saw as a growing global economy and so I was a part, you know, with Mayor Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb], you know with a number of the missions and you know the efforts to get international air service. So, amazingly as a local official I did an extraordinary amount of traveling around the world, which was, which was a wonderful opportunity for me while I was on council [Denver City Council] as a result of our efforts to try to being international trade to our city. You know I traveled through Europe several times and you know to London [England] and France and Germany and Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and traveled even to the, to the Middle East, being involved in airport conferences. And everybody in the world, of course, wanted to know how we did it, how you know we had pulled off this amazing new airport and so you know we were in demand all, you know all around the world. I traveled to Japan. I traveled to China. We traveled to Africa. You know all, you know in, in an effort you know to put Denver [Colorado] in the middle of the country and you'd like to say you know we're here. You know, you know if you draw lines from where we are at all of these places around the globe, you know, this is the perfect center spot and you need to come to Denver.
Story_ID: 594756
Speaker 1: So you talked about going to law school [University of Denver College of Law; Sturm College of Law, Denver, Colorado], but you actually got your M.A. in public affairs from the University of Colorado [University of Colorado Denver, Denver, Colorado], that was in 2002?
Speaker 2: Yes, I eventually decided, you know I was almost finished, you know I had you know just a little less than a year, you know a little over a couple of quarters to complete in law school, but when I decided I don't want to do this, you know I love what I'm doing, I'm in local government, you know it's, I, you know I didn't see myself practicing law anymore and it was tough. You know I was working a job, you know, because I, you know I just, I, I invest myself in jobs you know and I, I, I don't work a forty hour week, I work a fifty or sixty hour week in doing what I do and you know trying to do that and go to law school was pretty tough. And when I realized that, that was no longer my ambition to you know become a lawyer to practice I decided to quit and you know every, well everybody was so upset, you know you gotta, you gotta finish, you gotta and be a lawyer and it was hard for me because my, my [maternal] grandfather [Jacob Garcia] wanted so badly for somebody, one of his sons, somebody to be a lawyer, you know it was and it was part of my motivation in going to law school initially. And I thought long and hard about it, but I knew you know what I wanted to do and it wasn't, you know, it, it didn't involve practicing law. And so I, so I quit law school and I decided public policy is what I really wanted, you know what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 594757
Speaker 1: So, in 2003, (cough), were you term limited to stay on the council [Denver City Council]? Or were you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so what were your thoughts about what you would do after city council?
Speaker 2: You know I wasn't sure. I mean it was the first time, you know, in my, you know working life that you know I had a chance you know time to think about it and to figure out where I was gonna go. In all of those other instances that you know I had, you know been you know in the right place at the right time and I'd sort of taken an opportunity right as it presented itself to me, no, you know, no thinking, no planning, and just you know it's there you know do it. You know each, each of those moves from, you know, state government to city council, and then to the mayor's office and you know running for city council you know they had all happened like that and you know they were decisions I had to make you know, you know instantaneously. So, I was actually looking forward to you know taking some time off and really thinking about, you know what do you wanna do next, where, you know what--you know I knew I wanted to be involved probably in some, you know, policy arena, public policy, but you know what I wasn't sure. But, then even before my term ended, the new mayor, another come from behind--we have a history of you know come from behind with no chance of success of winning, you know three mayors in a row to, you know, a mayor that had less than 1 percent of the, you know, support in the polls to, you know, winning, that's Mayor John Hickenlooper, and the same had been true of Pena [Federico Pena] and the same had been true of Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb], and so when Mayor Hickenlooper was elected he came to me and because of a strange quirk in our laws thirteen, out of the thirteen council members, ten of us were leaving because of term limits. And so you know there was gonna be virtually a brand new city council and a brand new mayor and a brand new auditor and so you know almost everybody in high offices in the city were gonna be changing. And so the mayor wanted to have somebody in his administration who had some experience and so he asked me to stay on his administration and to be his liaison to the new city council. Very strange kind of turnaround and role for me of leaving office and then actually working as liaison between the mayor and the new city council, so I, I committed that you know for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: And after a couple of years, you just retired from city council altogether (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes and again you know these, you know so I didn't get the break that I, I mean I literally started working for him almost before our, our term ended in, in July of 2003. And then a couple of years later his chief of staff, Michael Bennett, was named the superintendent of Denver Public Schools, and he asked me to come in and join him there. So, you know, once again I, another job that I started before I left the other (laughter), and you know I went back to what ended up being my original passion, education, and I, I said you know this is like coming home for me. I, you know I started out wanting to be a teacher want--you know being passionate about education and this is my, you know this is my chance to come back and fulfill that passion.
Story_ID: 594758
Speaker 1: You're still an administrative assistant for Community Partnerships is that what (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're still in that position now today?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the things that, that Community Partnership does?
Speaker 2: Well I'm, we have a plan for Denver Public Schools that involves, you know, focusing on you know, you know the best quality teaching and instruction, the best quality leadership and developing principals and leaders, and a third piece of, you know which is engaging the community and helping get the work done knowing that you know we can't have a successful school system if we don't have, you know if the community isn't engaged in helping to support us. And so you know my responsibility is managing that part of our strategic plan, getting businesses involved, getting parents more engaged, engaging the nonprofit community in you know helping to support us, you know building mentoring programs, providing and increasing the number of enrichment programs and afterschool programs that we offer for our, our young people, you know just partnering in many other ways. You know we have a--significant issues with you know dropouts in our, in our community, and we know that, you know, those young people were out, you know, and disengaged for many reasons, which schools can't fix entirely and so my, you know part of my role is to, is to bring the players to the table, you know who are the folks that serve young people, where are the services and where are the supports for them to help you know get them back into the system or help those who are struggling to be able to succeed. And you know kids who have to work and kids who you know, you know we a district that is, you know, 70 percent free and reduced lunch, you know high poverty rate, and they have lots of challenges and we know that its, you know it takes you know other resources in the community to help create an environment so those children can be successful; so that's my, my role.
Story_ID: 594759
Speaker 1: Then there was an appointment in September by the governor.
Speaker 2: Yes, actually it's a second. I was appointed a year ago to the state, the board of state parks and outdoor recreation [Colorado Parks and Wildlife], and it, it required--as it turns out over the year a lot of traveling around the state and, and there was a time that I wasn't able to, to devote to it and so the governor wouldn't, you know, still wanted me to be involved in some way and so he just recently appointed me to the Colorado Commission on Higher Education, which governs our colleges in our second, you know postsecondary institutions around the state.
Speaker 1: But that requires a state confirmation.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so as soon as the, I'm already serving on the board pending Senate [Colorado Senate] confirmation and I had to go through Senate confirmation last year for the state parks board so I'm, I, I'm familiar with the process now.
Speaker 1: Was it hard the first time?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. You know they, you know I knew, I did my homework and I knew what, you know, we were, what, you know, they expected. They asked some good questions, and I, you know it may be challenging this time. There are some good challenges in higher education in, in this state, and you know they're gonna wanna know that, you know what, you know what my perspective is and you know how prepared I am to, you know what, what I'll be able to bring you know to the, you know to the conversation about where we should be heading, but I'm, I know I'll be prepared to do that.
Story_ID: 594760
Speaker 1: Now this year also you're a first time delegate to the Democratic National Convention [2008 Democratic National Convention, Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me how exciting that was.
Speaker 2: Oh that was, you know being a, you know, a national delegate you know is amazing and you know I mean I, you know I'd been involved in you know every campaign and you know and every, even every presidential race, helping to run you know the local turnout, you know get out the vote efforts in the local campaigns. And you know I'd gone to almost every county convention and I'd been, you know, I've been a precinct committeewoman for many years following in the footstep of, you know my mom and my parents [Anna Garcia Haynes and LeRoy Haynes]. And I'd never really wanted to go to the national conventions, mostly because you know generally, you know, you know it's already, it's already been decided you know and it's, you know there's a lot of social events and you know it, it just, you know I mean you really weren't making any decisions. And so I didn't really have a desire to go to the national conventions and wave flags and you know.
Speaker 1: So why this time? Why did you get involved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But this time I you know, you know the historic nature of, of you know of this campaign, you know, you know the opportunity to, to elect either the first woman or the first African American president the fact that it was hosted here in Denver [Colorado], you know in my own backyard, but you know just my enthusiasm for and you know the support for you know Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and just the, the hope and the promise of, of being able to, you know, to be there, be a part of. And I'll tell you I mean as we all know, you know, nobody knew for certain, and certainly when we were going through the election process for, as delegates, nobody knew for certain whether it was going to be a deciding. You know there haven't been many national conventions that got decided on the floor of the convention, but there have been a few and, and I think there was, you know, there was a real feeling that that might happen this time and you know I was most determined to, you know to be there and to be a part of it and to play my role in electing the, the first African American president.
Story_ID: 594761
Speaker 1: Two thousand and eight [2008] and Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know as the president elect, what is the most important issue on this campaign and how do you want to see it solved?
Speaker 2: For me the issue is about changing the way we do business, changing the way politics works in our country, changing the--you know people are so cynical about politics and about government and you know their level of trust and in, and you know I think that's what you know I'm looking for and that is the promise of things have gotta be different and we've gotta do things differently. We've gotta, you know, be more, we've gotta be inclusive. We've got to, in the world community we need you know we need to be finding solutions to problems and you know not throwing down the gauntlet for you know everything, you know every crisis that occurs. You know we need to display real leadership.
Speaker 1: Is energy a concern?
Speaker 2: It, I think energy is a huge concern you know and, and part of that is about changing how we think about things. It's, you know, it's about you know the common good. It's about you know growing our economy and you know, you know using our system for, but in a way that all people can you know thrive and can, can prosper. And you know the energy economy it's about, you know, respecting our resources. You know just as we need to respect each other and respect people, you know we've got to respect the, you know, the planet that we live on and you know and be smart about how to use our resources and be able to prosper. And what I love about Obama, you know, now president elect Obama, I love saying that, is you know he doesn't, he doesn't accept that there has to be a tradeoff between you know preserving our environment and being able to sustain our economy. And so I'm, I'm excited about the idea of actually combining those two, using our efforts to create a sustainable environment to also create a sustainable economy.
Speaker 1: And what about, what are your thoughts on the war [Iraq War]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think it's one of the things I'm most proud of him, you know, of taking the stand that he did early on of opposing this war and you know I think, you know trying to get us out of Iraq as quickly as possible, and you know he has extraordinary understanding I think of, of you know the world stage and, and he's done his homework. In fact, reading his views in his, his book, and in 'The Audacity of Hope' ['The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream,' Barack Obama], is what really convinced me, you know, against all of the pundits who said he, he didn't have any experience. You know when I read his book and realized how, you know the research that he had done and how, you know, thoughtful he was about the issues, you know I was convinced this is, this is a man that you know can lead this country on some very tough issues, including you know we're already in his war, now how do we get out of it and how do we do it in a way you know that's, that's the right way to do it. And it's gonna be tough for him, but you know I have, I have great confidence in, in his values, in his pragmatism, and, and you know in looking and being creative. I'm looking for solutions. And he doesn't think that he's got the answers. He knows that he's gotta rely on other people and you know a lot of, you know a lot of smart people around him and around this world you know to get the job done.
Story_ID: 594762
Speaker 1: Is there something in your life, when you look back that you wanna do that you haven't done?
Speaker 2: Hm, well there's probably about a million books that I need to read (laughter). 'Cause I always tell everybody, you know, when I retire I'm gonna you know work in a bookstore or you know, and then sometimes I think it's a hardware store 'cause I like, you know, doing things with my hands and you know fixing things and making things if, if I had that opportunity. I still have a goal of, you know, climbing all of our fourteeners here in Colorado. I, and I still want to get to there, you know dozen places around (background noise)--there are a, a, you know a dozen places around this world, or maybe more, that I would like to visit. You know there are still many places in the world that I would like to see. I, you know I, I was worried that I wouldn't have a chance to you know to get to Africa and I did. It was the most, you know, powerful experience I think I've you know, I've ever had. In fact the only thing that came close to it was the other night you know when, you know when, when you know Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was, you know, elected you know as president. But, other than that, I think one of the most, you know, powerful moments was you know visiting Africa for the first time.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would change or do differently in your life if you had to go back and think about it?
Speaker 2: It's, it's hard to say. You know I know, I'll, I'll, one I think I mentioned early on, I would definitely, as much as I enjoy music I, I would definitely have wanted to be more involved and to you know to have the skills to be able to ex- express myself creatively more, you know more than I, than I have been able to. You know I'm, I'm not an artist. I was, you know I always joke that I'm, you know I can't draw a straight line and so, but I have a lot of interest and a lot of love for the arts, and so I would like to have had you know some, you know another avenue I think through, you know perhaps through music to, you know, to be a little bit more creative and you I, you know I got involved in work and you know really you know sort of, I, I guess I, I could say that I'm a workaholic and you know involved in, you know in my career and you know I, I might have slowed down a little bit and maybe you know thought more about you know having a family and, and you know doing those things, but you know it's hard to look back and say, you know on the other hand I look at everything I've done and how wonderful it's been and what a, you know, great experience all of these things have been and how much I've loved it and it's hard to say that I would do, you know, I would do it differently.
Story_ID: 594763
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: No, I think we've, you know, I mean the things that you know that I'm passionate about, you know the, the outdoors, the environment, you know I mentioned that before. I love my jazz. I--
Speaker 1: Who are some of your fav- fav- favorite jazz musicians?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know I'm, I, I like you know the, you know the classical, you know, you know artists from the bebop area, era, you know Coltrane [John Coltrane]. I like, you know, Miles Davis. I was just looking at some pictures the other night of the one cruise I took was a jazz cruise and you know having an opportunity to, you know to see Benny Carter play in person and you know Tommy Flanagan, and listen to Maxine Sullivan you know, you know just priceless. And we're very fortunate here in Denver [Colorado] to have a very thriving jazz scene, a well kept secret, and I think although you know harkens back to the days of the, you know early, early part of Denver where you know, you know almost outside of New York [New York] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] there was more music here than you know any place else in the country, pretty, a pretty swinging place, but good music here. You know we've, you know [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves, we're so you know proud of her efforts, and her club is here in Denver you can go to seven nights a week and hear, you know, good local, local jazz.
Story_ID: 594764
Speaker 1: And what about some of your board affiliations or organizations that you work with or even founded.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm very involved out- outside of my job as, as though I had enough time. But you know I just, you know I like getting involved in things and I'm a person who likes to, I like being on the ground level. I like starting things and you know, you know getting a new idea and you know creating it. So, I've had the good fortune of being, you know, a founding member of several organizations. I was a founding member of Colorado Black Women for Political Action [CBWPA], you know a group of women that focus around you know the political issues that you know involve our community. I was a founding member of the Colorado Women of Color, which was a, a group of women from you know black, Latino, American Indian [Native American], and Asian communities you know promoting you know our history and our culture and the contributions of women you know in, in our community here. I was a founder of an organization that's now called Mile High Youth Corps [Denver, Colorado], creating opportunities around service learning for, for young people in our community that still operates today. And I was one of the founding board members of our Stapleton redevelopment corporation [Stapleton Development Corporation], guiding the redevelopment of the old Stapleton airport [Stapleton International Airport, Denver, Colorado] and so I, you know those are, the Sand Creek Regional Greenway [Sand Creek Regional Greenway Partnership, Denver, Colorado] I, you know I always try to keep at least one or two outdoors or natural resources or envir- environmental organizations and children's issues. You know I'm a member of the Colorado Children's Campaign. I, I'm the vice president of that board, and you know both because of my interest in education and because of my mother's [Anna Garcia Haynes] influ- you know she's probably one of the most, the foremost experts in early childhood in, in this state. And so you can't grow up in our household and, and not be you know very involved and engaged in issues around children. And so I, you know I serve on that board, which is an advocacy organization for you know children's education, children's health. You know the, the kind of environment as a community we should have to make certain that our children can be successful.
Story_ID: 594765
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Hm. You know my, my legacy I think revolves around you know those areas of you know of, of passion for me and that is that we live in an extraordinarily beautiful place and that you know while we're living here it needs to be that kind of place for everyone. It, you know, so it's not, so the natural beauty is one part of it, but that, that a co, a community needs to be, you know, a place of beauty and comfort and opportunity for everybody living in it and so I'm very, I'm very passionate about people having a say in being, being engaged and, and working and striving constantly to, to make living together, you know the larger family that we are in, you know, in our cities and in our state and beyond, you know continuously focusing on what can make us better, what can we do better and how can we do that you know together. And so I, I'd like to, you know, to think that where I've engaged and where I've contributed has, has helped to do that and hopefully has, has inspired. You know I was inspired by people as a youngster, encouraged, and so another thing I hope, you know, is to encourage other young people you know to go even further and faster and, and to, you know to explore the, the, you know, beyond the limits of, you know where they think they can go.
Story_ID: 594766
Speaker 1: Now this question is a little si- it sounds similar, but it is different. How do you want to be remembered? How do you want people to remember you personally, not necessarily your, your legacy and the works, but how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I, I want to be remembered as you know a person who was you know friendly and open to people. You know I, you know that people believe that I lived up to my name and that I, that I was a helpful person, that I, you know that I, you know I looked for ways to you know find what was great and good in them and you know, you know helped to celebrate that and to nurture it and so I hope that those are two things that people will say about me.
Story_ID: 594767
Speaker 1: As you said that there were others who inspired and encouraged you, because this tape is gonna be available for many future generations, if you had to send a message to inspire or encourage the future generations what would you say?
Speaker 2: You know I, I think the best inspiration comes, comes from watching people, learning by example. I'd say ask questions. You know be curious. Be in control of your own life. You know, you know have a strong desire to go places, and, and I don't mean just you know physically I mean you know, you know learn how, you know, be self-motivated and then use the world around you to, you know, get your experiences, learn from watching the people, and, and ask, you know ask for help. You know latch onto the people that you admire or find a way to, you know, to reach them or to, and, and don't overlook the people that are right under your noses. I mean I, you know one of the most inspiring people to me ever was my [maternal] grandmother [Lorraine Garcia (ph.)], you know who only had an eighth grade education who worked hard, you know, cleaning other people's houses her whole life, but who had a dream and whose values and whose message to me that I could accomplish anything, you know, that and that you know was really powerful and so you know it doesn't always have to be you know the, you know the most important people or you know and, and often the most inspiring people for you are the people right next to you. I'm inspired by my younger siblings you know who are so talented in many ways that I am not and who looked up to me and that made me better. And so you know it's, it's using everything around you to, you know to lift yourself up and to lift people around you.
Story_ID: 594768
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my college graduation [from Barnard College, New York, New York] in May of 1975. I'm standing there with my good college buddy and partner in crime, Deborah Thornhill and her brother, Louie [ph.].
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my sister, Khadija [Katherine Haynes], on the right with her arm around my cousin and her goddaughter, Danielle [ph.]. And next to her, my cousin, my first cousin, Debra Jean [ph.], Danielle is her daughter. And I'm not sure who that is on the other end, some long distance cousin.
Speaker 1: This, this is a reunion of the Anderson-Haynes family. It's my, me with my second cousin, Russell, and cousins, Chuck and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Can you go left to right so--
Speaker 1: Chuck Byrd [ph.] is on the left, then myself, then Russell Anderson [ph.], and Laura Byrd [ph.].
Speaker 2: These were a number of the cousins of the Anderson family, a start family in Den- Denver [Colorado]. On the lower right side is my Uncle Gus [Charles Anderson, Sr.], who is the patriarch of the family. And in the foreground is his wife, my Aunt Della Anderson [ph.] and assorted cousins.
Speaker 1: This is, this is another photo of a number of the Anderson-Haynes men. In the for- left for- front row is my, my father, LeRoy Haynes, and next to him, his brother, Eddie [Edward Haynes], and next to Eddie his sister, Nan [Nadine Haynes]. In the back row, our cousin, Gus Anderson, Jr. [Charles Anderson, Jr.], my uncle, Cliff Haynes [Clifford Haynes], my Uncle Bud or Elmer Haynes [Elmer Haynes, Jr.], and Elmer Haynes, Jr. [sic. Elmer Haynes III]
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me and on the left side with my best friend, Franita Ware, who lives in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me on the right-hand side along with Mayor Wellington Webb [HistoryMaker Wellington Webb] next to me. We're accepting an award to, for the redevelopment of Stapleton [Stapleton International Airport, Denver, Colorado] from representatives from CH2M HILL [CH2M HILL, Inc.] including a very close friend of mine, Benita [ph.], who is on the left side.
Speaker 2: I'll have to remember what year this is. Let me think about that for a second. This is a photo of me probably eighth grade, perhaps ninth.
Speaker 1: This, this is a photo of my dad, LeRoy Haynes. No gray hair, it's probably in the late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: This was a photo of me taking my bow at my, Owl- Owl debu- debutante ball [Owl Club of Denver Debutante Cotillion].
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me standing in front of my very first community office after having been elected to city council.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me when I didn't forget my earrings (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What was this taken for?
Speaker 2: This was my official photo that was taken probably in 1999 when I, my last, when I ran for my last term in office.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me along with a couple of mayors, women mayors from the United States and a number of women mayors and leaders in Akropong, Ghana, and that took place in 1999.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me with [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni upon a visit to the Denver Public Library [Denver, Colorado]. I'm gonna say that was in probably 1993 or 1994.
Speaker 1: This is a family photo taken probably in 1990, 1991. Seated from left to right are my youngest sister, LeAnn [LeAnn Haynes White], my [maternal] grandmother, Lorraine [Lorraine Garcia (ph.)], in the foreground my mother Anna Jo [Anna Garcia Haynes], my brother, Michael [Michael Haynes]. And standing from left to right, my sister, Mary [Mary Haynes], her husband, former husband now, Robert [ph.], myself holding the first grandchild in our family, my nephew, Chris [ph.], my dad, LeRoy, and my sister, Khadija.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my grandfather, Jacob Garcia, as a child with his mother.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my great-grandmother, maternal, on my mother's side, Cleofas Lujan.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of my grandfather on my mother's side, Jacob Garcia.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me making probably my final remarks as I was leaving city council in July of 2003.
Speaker 2: This is a studio shot of me when I was probably five years old.
Speaker 1: This is a shot of my mother taken at the same time when I was about four or five, probably in 1958, '57 [1957] something like that.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of the ceremony when I was first elected president of the Denver City Council. I'm surrounded by a number of other elected women, Gail Schoettler on the left, served as lieutenant governor of the state; Edna Mosely who was a councilwoman in Aurora [Colorado]; Gloria Holiday was a member of the RTD board [Regional Transportation District]; and [HistoryMaker] Rachel Noel who was the, the matriarch of our political life, state- state board of regents [University of Colorado Board of Regents] and the first black woman on the school board [Denver Board of Education]; Arie Taylor [Arie Parks Taylor], state representative; myself, and state senator, Gloria Tanner [HistoryMaker Gloria Travis Tanner].
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my fourth grade class, I believe, at Barrett Elementary School [Denver, Colorado].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And where are you?
Speaker 1: And I am in, let's see facing the tables in the second row. I can point? Yep, that's me right there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was a visit to the mayor's office by the person who was my very favorite singer, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay when?
Speaker 1: That photo was taken probably in early, maybe 2001--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: --two thousand [2000], something like that.
