Story_ID: 196709
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. This interview is taking place at 2819 Hillsdale Road, in Baltimore, Maryland and today's date is (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) June 2nd.
Speaker 1: Wednesday, June 2, 2004, and Ms. [Vera] Hall if you would please just for the record, please tell us your complete, full name and the spell it?
Speaker 2: Okay, my complete name that was given by my parents was Vera Pearlene Webb, and that's V-E-R-A, and then P-E-A-R-L-E-N-E, and then W-E-B-B.
Speaker 1: And Hall.
Speaker 2: And Hall yeah, I got that one later (laughter).
Speaker 1: And if you could please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born at home in Bolton, North Carolina, February 17, 1937.  My mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] and father [Wiley Haynes Webb] had a running discussion of all of their life about whether I was born the 17th or the 18th and she used to shut him up by saying, "You had gone hunting."  So I always take the 17th (laughter) she should know.
Speaker 1: And could you please tell us your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well now I am retired, and I am doing some teaching and volunteering.  But before--during my work history I was an educator first and then following that I was an education administrator, and then I was an administrator in various levels of government so far--
Story_ID: 196710
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to kinda help us get familiar with the process and that kinda thing.  So could you please tell us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Gee, I never even thought about what my favorite food is, I think it would be chicken.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think I would have to choose, I think I'd, I'd better be--I'd answer the question better if it's my favorite place in the world.  I've been, and I think it would have to be Greece.
Speaker 1: And then your favorite phrase or saying do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is no wizard.
Story_ID: 196711
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother starting with her name, where she was born and how she grew up.
Speaker 2: My mother was born Kara Elizabeth Blanks in a place called East Arcadia, North Carolina and her parents were Andrew James Blanks and Ada Augusta Blanks.  My mother was a tall--woman of tall stature.  Matter of fact she was a little bit taller than I am.  And very stern vision, you know, when, when people would when you would see my mother you would come to attention.  She, you know, she brooked no nonsense, which is a perfect counter to my father [Wiley Haynes Webb] who never thought his kids did anything wrong (laughter).  So she kept us straight and she, I think, got that from her mother, Ada Blanks.  Who was strict very religious and I always tell people, I think we were the only kids who were made to go to prayer meeting.  On, on Thursday evening with my grandmother, because during the winter we stayed at her house and went to school.  There was a better school there then it was in our community where my father's family lived.  But my mother was a homemaker and an excellent cook, and she did things that women of that age did.  They lived--we didn't have a farm ourselves but she made us work on the farm, and there was always work that needed to be done.  We were in a rural community she was born in a rural community.  Her father had been a carpenter and a--blacksmith.  And I remember the old shop that set on the corner of their property where he'd shoot horses and, and did all of that and, and they farmed.  I, I just remember they--my grandmother's garden I don't remember the actual farm.  I remember it's location and all of that but she married my dad at age twenty-one I think he was twenty-one or twenty-two.  And he says, daddy says, that he met her working in the field.  And she was--he was eight years older than she was which would've made him sort of like eighteen when she was eight years old.  And he said that he told her, "One day you're gonna grow up and be my wife" (laughter).  And he did later marry my mom, and I remember my mother in addition to being the sort of decision-maker in the household, you know, she, she was cooperative.  But, you know, when she said no it meant no but when daddy said no it meant maybe (laughter).  So she disciplined us, and I'm grateful for that because one of the traditions of the Webb family was they were not very good disciplinarians (laughter).  My dad's folks--so those who married women who were not very strong their children kinda did not get the background that they needed to succeed in life.  So I'm grateful that she was the kind of woman that she was.  She enjoyed needle arts and I--my daughter has some embroidery pieces that she did and that she's put into a crazy quilt.  And she did all those starched and ironed pillowcases and sheets, and I remember her ironing for days and cooking and what have you.  And she would, she was very active in the church.  She was the a steward, and she, and the lady that we call cousin Lizzie [ph.] were responsible for getting church set up on Sunday morning to serve the communion and so forth.  So they would have all of these starch and iron white drapes, and they put around the front of the church, you know, for people to go.  And kids were not allowed to take sacrament at that time.  They said you weren't old enough so, you know, they'd dismissed church, and then people came back who were "righteous" and took the sacrament.  But she was responsible for that, so she was a steward in the church.
Story_ID: 196712
Speaker 1: And very active [Hall's mother, Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] but always a little intimidated, I think, by my grandmother [Ada A. Graham].  Who--the strict moral codes and values, you know, and she didn't think we should wear shorts.  And I remember once my grandmother came unexpectedly to visit, and we were all working.  We were helping to do some barn tobacco, which they went out into the fields and got the tobacco.  And you pure, cured it put in the barn you curate it and so the kids and, and women often did that kind of work.  And my grandmother came over we had gone to work in shorts. My mother came and brought some pants for us to put on.  Because my grandmother would've had a fit that we were out in public is shorts (laughter).  So, so that's, that's kind of she--my mother love to hunt and fish.  So she was ahead of her time because she-and, and my dad [Wiley Haynes Webb] really was too because they both believed in distributing the chores.  So my dad was just as good a cook as she was as a matter of fact he taught me how to cook.  And their favorite sport I think was fishing and daddy was a hunter and trained hunting dogs and that kind of thing.  And she was fine with that long as he didn't bring them near her house.  And he also did a lot of bird hunting and she, she actually had her own gun and--that she could use (laughter).  And would go bird hunting with him and, and I remember following them going bird hunting and going fishing.  And we'd go fishing and after while we'd want to go home and, and they wanted to fish.  And we'd make noises by throwing pebbles in the creek.  And all that, so I had a very wonderful set of parents who loved each other and loved us, so I'm grateful for that.
Story_ID: 196713
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your father starting with his name and where he was born and where he grew up.
Speaker 2: Well my dad's name was Wiley Haynes Webb he had both his father's name and his grandfather's name. He was born in Bolton, North Carolina.  And grew up there and dad was a person who loved people.  And he used to say to us that a man's--the worth of a man was not measured by the size of his pocketbook, but rather by the number of his friends.  And he had large numbers of friends, and he was active.  He was the one man left over in World War II [WWII] 'cause he had a family.  So he--and there was a shipyard in Wilmington [North Carolina], which was near where we--a lot of the guys worked there.  Some of them, unfortunately--died working either at the shipyard or into the war whatever.  So dad became the local father of all the boys in the little community which would've been less than two thousand people I guess.  But everybody knew my dad; he was the chauffeur, he was the get out and vote effort (laughter).  He was the person who was--the civic-minded person this--he was as dedicated to civics as my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] was at the civilians' community as my mother was to church and community.  So he would always encouraged people to be involved and what have you.  His favorite pastime in church I think was taking a nap (laughter).  I remember once the minister saying, "Well I'm gonna reward brother Haynes he stayed awake during my whole sermon."  And my cousin says my daddy's rejoinder was that's because I got a lot to do to get here so I'm waiting for you to finish (laughter).  Anyway he lived a Christian life he did not--he was not want one to go out and proselytize or do any of that kind of thing.  But you could always count on him for a favor.  You could count on him being there anybody sick.  Matter of fact, I remember my husband's [Lawrence Hall] father from a time that my dad went to their house to take grocery.  Because he had collected in the barbershop money to go and buy things for the sick 'cause there was no welfare at, at that time.  We're talking in the late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s], and if people didn't take care of each other.  You didn't get in taking care of, so my father was a social services agency; he collected money.  He had a jar, a Mason jar that he kept behind his stand in his barbershop. And he would say, you know, so-and-so is sick and, and they have those children, and they need some help.  And he'd collect that money and he would take--we would go with him of course, my sisters, and I followed him everywhere he went.  So we (laughter) would go shopping, and then he would go and take the food and what have you to people in the neighborhood who were sick.
Story_ID: 196714
Speaker 1: So your father [Wiley Haynes Webb] was a barber?
Speaker 2: My father was a barber, and he told the story about how his oldest brother had been drafted into the war [World War II, WWII].  His father [Freeman Webb] died when he was eleven and a half.  And he then took his father's [Wiley Webb] tools who his father was also a barber and started to earn living for his mother [Beth Ellie Webb] and sisters and brothers who were left at home.  And he cut hair for the rest of his life and had his own barbershop, and during the days of segregation he actually operated three barbershops black, Indian, and white (laughter).  And in the town where the black shop was, there was a black--we had a black female physician during those times.  Dr. [Miriam Naomi] Muldrow and that's unheard of because first you didn't have women in medicine, and she was she wasn't allowed to practice in the hospital, so she built a clinic.  She established a pharmacy and as a part of that there was a barbershop--daddy ran the barbershop.  So we would often my sister and I go with him to work on Saturday at that barbershop.  And we would be taken care of by Dr. Easley [ph.] and Dr. Muldrow and their associates.  And if we need shoes or whatever they'd sometimes would go shopping with us and, and so forth.  So it was a community I mean a real, real strong community.  And I think that all my life I've tried to re-create that community, because it was just such a wonderful thing to see everybody taking care of each other.  And it didn't matter if you were the--well we didn't have a trash collector, but if you were a ditch digger or the physician you got the same treatment.  And anybody who thought to set themselves above the rest of community was ostracized, and--you know, not accepted.  So I grew up without the strata and the, you know, the segregation of people according to their profession or whatever.
Story_ID: 196715
Speaker 1: And everybody ate at our table--I don't care if it was Downey [ph.] who was the sort of mentally retarded white guy who kinda roamed around the neighborhood or the minister.  There was--daddy's [Wiley Haynes Webb] philosophy about food was if everything got eaten somebody went away hungry.  So we never cooked enough just for us.  It was--today let's say we're having pork chops, and so we just cooked pork chops, you know, and--whoever came by just ate.  And so it wasn't portion control, you know, that was something was totally foreign to me when I moved to Baltimore [Maryland].  And I was used to people dropping by--there was no telephone so you couldn't call but even if there had been one I doubt if they would've called.  And they would come by, and the church was located not too far from, from where we lived.  And so people would leave church and they'd stop by different people homes on the way home, and they'd have dessert (laughter), that kind of thing, on the way home.  So, you know, it was always that kind of open door, come in, sit down, you know, and--visit for a spell and so forth.  And I used to love to hide out and listen to the stories that they would tell.  You know, about events in the community and what have you.  So I, I liked Sunday school, I did not like church.  So I said, "When I grow up I'm never going back to church."  And they thought that was just awful, you know, that I said I was not going to go back to church.  But, I would go to Sunday school and because I was an avid reader, and we didn't have books you see there were no paperbacks at that time.  The only books were like comic books and in our household there was the catechism there was a collection of Shakespeare's plays, and there was a Bible in every home.  So I loved reading, so I'd read anything that I found.  And there was a weekly paper called The Grit.  So we would, my sister and I would read from anything that we got our hands on so before I knew that Shakespeare was a very important literary figure.  I was reading his works, you know, and didn't understand some of the old English.  And I would read the Bible and try to compare what I'm reading to what I'm hearing in church.  And it would always get me into trouble because I--my questions were always, well, why did so-and-so say, so-and-so that's not what I read, you know.  And this guy says I was always the little conscience there, you know, say that's not what the Bible really said.  And as a consequence of that I was teaching Sunday school when I was sixteen to the adult class.  And, you know, I had read much of the Bible, and we'd practice our reading lessons by reading Proverbs.  My grand, at my grandmother's insistence.  So just trying to give you a sense of the kind of household that I grew up--and the time and what things were like.
Story_ID: 196716
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?  Do you know if they were free or if they were slaves, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: My son [Reginald Hall] has traced them back, I think, let's see my great-great-grandfather and on my dad's [Wiley Haynes Webb] side.  We don't know as much about my mother's [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] forebears as we do about my father's forebears.  But just in looking, listening to the oral history and looking at the photographs and those that I remember.  You know, knowing they, they had to have a lot of, of Indian blood, and that's kind of borne out.  When my husband [Lawrence Hall] went, we actually went to Salt Lake City [Utah] last summer as a part of our vacation we stopped through there to look at some of the archives.  But he's been researching the census and all of that and found that my dad's father [Wiley Webb] which supports the lower was an old Indian, who was following the logging industry coming through.  And they say he was probably a Cherokee and on their way when the migration happened, and all the Indians were uprooted and what have you.  He met and that some people say it was a Canadian white woman.  But he married a woman whose name was Webb and that he took her name because he had no surname and that, that's the origin of the Webbs.  Now that was supposed to be my father's grandfather, I think.  And then there was the next generation, the father married an Irish woman whose name was Betty Skipper [ph.].  And my take on that is that Betty Skipper was a white woman who had been probably ostracized because she had had a child.  And so, you know, they got together and married and produced my father's father.  And so there, there is a lot of red hair in the family there--hazel eyes my mother was brown eyed and my father was brown eyed.  They had three hazel eyed children.  Because one grandmother [Ada Graham], my mother's mother was about your complexion had those keen features like you do Racine [Tucker Hamilton].  I guess people can't see what we're talking about but anyway and she had straight black hair that she wore in two braids and green eyes she was a striking woman that was my mom's mother.  My father--my grandfather from pictures I--he died when I was very young though I don't remember him at all, but he had red hair, but with red very curly hair.  So my, my thinking is and it's kinda borne out by the census tracts and so forth that there was a lot of Indian, and black, and white marriages.  So it's heavy on the Indian side, light on the white side, and on the black side because you got all of this mixture.  My father's mother [Beth Ellie Freeman] who was about my complexion who was also a very tall woman had blue eyes, and she has great-grandchildren who have blue eyes.  And so we just have a mixed gene pool back there, and we cannot find any slavery in our family; we can't find anyone who was a slave so far.
Story_ID: 196717
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Vera] Hall tell me a little bit about--excuse me, your earliest memory. What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I think my earliest memory is playing with my sister [Barbara Webb Mott] when we visited my [maternal] grandmother's [Ada Graham] house.  And the old house and I, I can kind of remember the smells of the house and the rhythm of the house and that kind of thing and this is Mama Ada [Ada Graham] we called her.  Grandma Ada, mama's [Kara Elizabeth Blanks] mother and I remember shortly after that she ended up leaving that house.  And remember playing in the mud and all of that, you know, with, with my sister and I remember following my dad [Wiley Haynes Webb] everywhere he went.  And I remember that it didn't matter where he was going we could always follow.  And going, you know, there was a kind of ritual where my mother took us to my grand--my father's mother's [Beth Ellie Freeman] house in the afternoons on Saturday.  And we would--everybody would come and visit.  So my grandmother had fallen, this is Grandma Ellie, had fallen and broken her leg, so we said that her daughters loved her to death because they never allowed her to do anything after that.  So the leg, you know, doing that day, you know, had kind of gotten useless.  So she's sitting in the chair, so I remember her sitting in the chair like this.  And my mother went and, and called out and my grandmother looked up and said, "Come in Kara come in where congregation never breaks up.  And Sabbath has no end" (laughter) because my Aunt Cora [ph.] my dad's sister where she lived at the old place.  There was constant company, you know, and that I guess my grandmother couldn't get away from it, so her way of dealing was to just to kinda sit there.  And I guess and meditate, but that was her take on all of the folks coming and going.  So I guess time she gets all of the grandchildren and all the neighbors and everybody else coming to visit her all the time (laughter).  She couldn't get away, so she was sitting there in that chair.  And I don't remember her being mobile I just remember her being helped into this rocking chair where she was, she would sit and hold court.
Story_ID: 196718
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Vera] Hall would you please give your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay, my oldest sister is only eighteen months older than I am, and she thinks that she is much older than that because she thinks that she should always dictate things and that.  Her name is Barbara Elizabeth Webb, and she married a Mott [ph.].  And Barbara had--Barbara had daddy's [Wiley Haynes Webb] looks she looked just like daddy and had his straight hair, but she had my grandmother's green eyes and was a very pretty little girl.  And I remember wishing that I had her hair and because it, it, you know, she could wear it in a bob and everything.  And my dad--my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] I think she might have been ill from one of the children or something.  Daddy was going to do our hair.  And he thought to brush mine til it got straight (laughter) he couldn't do, it didn't work.  So he decided he was gone cut it into a bob, so I had the first bush that I think ever there were ever was.  So, but Barbara had the I'd say the wash and wear kind of hair and got all of the best features I think from both parents.  I look much more like my mother, and I was born second child.  And as a little kid, you know, I remember people coming up and just gushing over Barbara, and I'd be standing there looking at 'em, so I didn't feel particularly attractive.  I thought my sister was the pretty one, but I was determined that she would not beat me in scholarship, and other activities in that kind of thing.  And so, but I loved her dearly, and so Barbara could do no wrong.  So I followed whatever her lead was, and she would often play teacher and we had to be her students and so forth so.  We grew up she got married very early and had a family and moved to Baltimore [Maryland].
Story_ID: 196719
Speaker 1: There's Ellie [Webb], who's named after my grandmother [Beth] Ellie [Freeman].  And Ellie is three and a half years younger than I am.  And so she's sixty--how old she's sixty-three now sixty-four, sixty-four 'cause I, I'm now sixty-seven.  And growing up she had a nickname "Fireball" and my dad [Wiley Haynes Webb] gave her that name because Ellie had a trigger temper.  And she was born, you know, running right at the world and, and stamp out and just as--she's still a little bit that way.  So she was the next girl, so there was three girls, first Barbara, me, and then Ellie.  And because of our relationship with our father I think we were allowed to do things that a girl probably would not have been done if the birth order had been reversed.  So it was let's see Ellie was I think three when my older brother was born.  So we had had maybes seven years to really stake out the territory.  So when he came into our territory, there was, war between Ellie and Harry [Webb].  That this is my oldest brother and of course, it was daddy's first boy.  So again, Harry could do no wrong.  And so daddy had him hunting and had his own gun and all these other boys things when he was very young, and when he was a sharpshooter all of those things.  And he kind of moved us aside and moved us into a little bit more girly things, but he became the apple of daddy's eye.  And, and my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] would say to daddy, "Now look you're spoiling that boy.  You're going to make himself selfish, and you need to, you need to spank him when he does wrong you don't need to uphold him in things that he does."  So she would constantly stay on him about doing that.  And so then they had one more little boy I think three years after Harry and this child was born with a defective heart, and he died at infancy--the his name was Haynes Vernon [Webb].  From the time that Haynes Vernon died, daddy did not want children named after him because he thought it was bad luck; because he'd lost that son.  And and then there's, there's, one more and that is the youngest one who Alfred L. Webb.  We named him Alfred Laverne.  And so he was born when I was like twelve and a half I guess.  And we just worshiped this little boy, you know, this little baby he was a mild-mannered baby.  He was a big baby, and I used to haul him around.  And folks would tell my mother, "You better stop that girl from carrying that boy around like that she's gonna grow crooked" (laughter).
Story_ID: 196720
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Vera] Hall, if you would, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well one of the sights that reminds me of growing up are folks dressed in their Sunday best getting ready to go to church.  And looking at the designs in their clothes and that kind of thing.  Now most little children I guess it wouldn't be interested in that but from my earliest memory I loved textiles.  Give me a scrap of cloth, and I would be entertained for a day.  When my brother was born, my responsibility was, stay home and keep him while the rest of the family worked during the day.  And my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] would often come home, and, and dinner might be late, but he'd have on the new outfit (laughter).  I would take his old clothes and, and, you know, make something for him.  And the reason I wanted dolls was I wanted to make 'em clothes.  I didn't care about playing with them particularly, but--so designs and I always could see a pattern.  I don't remember not being able to see a pattern whether we're talking about a carpet or a walkway or cover for the manhole.  Or a design in a garment or whatever, I've always been just intrigued with designs.  And so different shapes sort of remind me of my childhood and--
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of a particular sound that would remind me of, of childhood, and I guess it would be the sounds of nature.  And listening to the different bird calls and animals and if you notice now my idea of relaxation is to take some handwork, applique in particular.  And go out and sit in the back and listen to the wind chimes and look at the birds.  And you might've noticed that I had glasses in there where I look to identify the kinds of birds and that kind of thing.  And I remember doing that as a child.
Speaker 1: And what smells?
Speaker 2: I think the smells of lemon and cinnamon and my grandmother--the musty smell of an old house.  You know, where you have quilts, and all that kinda thing.  I'm, I'm reminded of that whenever I walk into a house, and there is a--or walk into old fabric stash or whatever.  And you kind of smell that smell--it has a distinct smell about it.
Story_ID: 196721
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend and were there any teachers there who influenced you, and if so do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, I went to elementary school started first grade in East Arcadia [Elementary School, Riegelwood, North Carolina], which was about seven miles away from where my father's [Wiley Haynes Webb] family lived.  And the reason that we went there were two--a twofold reason.  My [maternal] grandmother [Ada A. Graham] did not want to give up housekeeping, as she called. And she didn't want to come stay with anybody.  So my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] had the most kids of anybody she had five.  And my grandmother convinced her that, you know, my oldest sister [Barbara Webb Mott] who was the apple of her eye would be better served if she went to that school.  So, of course, wherever Barbara went I follow.  And my dad agreed that we should go stay during the weekdays with my grandmother and go to school.  And then we took turns coming home on weekends one of us would stay with my grandmother and the other week come home.  So my early years were into household really.  My grandmother's household and my parents' home.  But of course, we liked our parents house the best because my grandmother (laughter) like I said was a very strict autocratic kind of person.  And, and, you know, we were always trying to figure ways to circumvent her rules (laughter).  She didn't like dancing she didn't like parties, she didn't like any of that.  So my, my oldest cousin Arlene [ph.] who was my mother's brother's daughter and my oldest sister Barbara were like best friends.  And I told them I'd never learned to be a good dancer because I had to be the person watching out for my grandmother while they danced in the groove.  They came up with a like a fifteen-minute music show and they Arlene and Barbara would dance away.  And I had to stay I had to watch out on the front porch to see when my grandmother was coming back so (laughter).
Story_ID: 196722
Speaker 1: So we went to school at East Arcadia Elementary School [Riegelwood, North Carolina] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you spell that, please?
Speaker 1: East, it's like East.  Arca, A-R-C-A-D-I-A.  And it was in East Arcadia [sic.]--they name the schools back during those times after the location.  So it was East Arcadia Elementary School, and my first-grade teacher was a Mrs. Howell [ph.].  And I remember Mrs. Howell was a little woman who wore a hat the first time I saw her.  And I remember her cracking my fingers because I didn't know some number facts and remember not liking her after that.  And the second grade teacher, and they had a combination second and third, was Mrs. Shepard [ph.].  And Mrs. Shepard was a grandmotherly kind of woman wore the, the frameless glasses kind of broad face brown skinned woman quiet voice very good teacher I know now.  And so she I remember learning reading and, you know, all of those things under her.  And my sister was in the third grade, so we were in the same room so Mrs. Shepard was second and third grade teacher, so she was teaching both of us.  And so often was, you know, Barbara [Webb Mott] did this, so I had to do it, too, and, you know, that kind of thing.  And the thing I remember about my fourth grade teacher was a Mrs. Davis [ph.] was--she had the softest hands.  And she was the principal's wife, and I remember learning arithmetic from her and trying to get out of learning the tables.  And I've never had a D in my life, and she gave me my first D because I wouldn't learn my nine times tables (laughter).  But she too was a soft-spoken teacher and then I went to fifth grade and six was a combination.  And my teacher was Jennings Bryant no William Bryant Jennings [ph.].  His last names was just Mr. Jennings and Mr. Jennings was a former [U.S.] military man.  So he took us out on the playground, and we had to march and drill I mean he (laughter).  But he was the best storyteller that you had ever heard he would have us spellbound telling stories that were old English tales then that kind of thing.  And I could see him today with his foot one foot resting on the chair and standing on the other foot and telling these stories.  And he was just a wonderful teacher I had excellent elementary school teachers--
Story_ID: 196723
Speaker 1: Then in the seventh grade my brother [Alfred L. Webb] was born.  And I absolutely did not want to stay at my [maternal] grandmother's [Ada A. Graham] I wanted to go home I want to help take care of the baby and that, you know.  So they let me come back to go to school at the local school in the seventh grade where I had a Mr. Corbet [ph.], who was the teacher, and he was not a particularly great teacher.  And I had gotten so far ahead of the kid in the school.  'Til he would often leave me teaching the class while he went off and did other things 'cause he was also the principal of the elementary school.  And right next that room was the library.  So every time I had a chance I would go in that library.  And that library smelled like old cloth I would go in there and just read the books.  You couldn't take him home, you know, I would sometimes be allowed to take one home but anyway when the school closed the library closed.  You didn't have any libraries in the country so you, you know, you just didn't have that access.  And so I think about that time I started reading the romance novels and that kind of thing they were in paperback and so forth.  So I kinda breezed through the seventh grade and my father [Wiley Haynes Webb] said, "This'll never do, you're going back to your grandmother for the eighth grade," and so (laughter).  I did--I went back and this time Dr. [Miriam Naomi] Muldrow's brother Leonard Muldrow [ph.] was the principal of the elementary school [East Arcadia Elementary School, Riegelwood, North Carolina], but he was also living in Whiteville [North Carolina] where my father worked.  So he would then come back and forth he would pick us up on Monday morning and take us to my grandmother's to school.  And then on Friday evening daddy would come and pick us up so we rode to school on Mondays with one of the teachers and then came back on Friday.
Story_ID: 196724
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school [East Arcadia Elementary School, Riegelwood, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I would say that I was average to above average in elementary school I was always in the top percent of my class--
Speaker 1: And that at this time of your life did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Oh I wanted to be a designer.  I thought that when I grew up I would be a designer, and I was just going to make fancy dresses--
Speaker 1: And let's talk (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If, if it wasn't that I was going to be a nurse in the pediatric ward 'cause I wanted to take care of babies.  And my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] would say I just know that you're crazy because who wants to listen to screaming babies.  And but that's what I said I wanted to do, was be a nurse.  So I grew out of that and decided I wanted to be a designer.
Story_ID: 196725
Speaker 1: Now let's talk a little bit about junior high school or high school 'cause it was through elementary [East Arcadia Elementary School, Riegelwood, North Carolina] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was, yeah eight-twelve organization.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Sure, okay.
Speaker 2: During my eighth grade year or at the end of my eighth-grade year my [maternal] grandmother [Ada A. Graham] was no longer able to live alone.  So her daughters decided my Aunt Edna [ph.] was, you know, the to the only two daughters that I remembered is my mother and her sister.  I remember all of my mother's brothers but she had lost two women two of her daughters during their twenties; one was married and the other one had never married.  But during that--time when I was in eighth grade or right after I was in eighth grade she--my grandmother got so she could not live alone anymore.  And then she came to live at our house sometimes, and she was at my aunt house at others.  And I went then back home, and the school that we went to was Armour High School [Riegelwood, North Carolina] and I started ninth grade at Armour High School.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-R-M-O-U-R.
Speaker 1: And what was high school like for you?
Speaker 2: High school was an interesting challenge.  Like I told you I never really considered myself particularly attractive, you know, I always thought my sister [Barbara Webb Mott] was the pretty one.  And so I was bookish matter fact my yearbook my--in high school they said that I was probably going to be--I was voted the most intellectual.  And--I--thought that was terrible.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be most beautiful or something I didn't want to be smart (laughter).  So you talking about kids now wanting to identify with people are not that serious.  But anyway I was always looked upon as the one who was the cool intellect.  And not the party girl not I said not interesting. You know, just kind of there and--but I excelled in language arts.
Story_ID: 196726
Speaker 1: And I got along with math [at Armour High School, Riegelwood, North Carolina] only because I had to--I never cared for it, you know, so (laughter).  But I knew I had to do it, so the thing about kids in school--when you, when you excel in one thing they usually put those attributes on you whether you deserve them or not in other things (laughter).  So I, I did very well I graduated.  Well, the--one of the teachers Mr. Robinson [ph.] who was our science math teacher always argued that I should've been the valedictorian.  But what they did was they put in my classmates' typing grades, and I had not taken typing.  You had to pay fifteen dollars to take typing, and you also had to pay a rental fee for your books.  And all of that, so I figured that's too much to ask--that's Sarah [ph.] in the kitchen isn't it.  That's too much to ask, you know, my father [Wiley Haynes Webb] had to pay for five kids, and so I should ask for that and, you know, I'll learn it later.  And I didn't take typing so whenever they were computing grade point averages they put her scores in the there which made her have a couple of points ahead of me.  And her name was Doris Greene [ph.] we called her Mickey [ph.].  And some of the other academic teachers were very upset at that, and I remember Mr. Robinson [ph.] writing in my book.  That you are going to go much farther because you have what it takes you'll be a precious pearl to those who know you.  So that was interesting that even though you might get cheated out of something that you may or may not deserve that life has a way of rewarding you anyway.
Story_ID: 196727
Speaker 1: Do you feel like you've been rewarded?
Speaker 2: Anyway I feel that I have had a very rewarding life.  I was lucky I met Lawrence [Hall] in high school [Armour High School, Riegelwood, North Carolina], and I said I was dumb and lucky because he's been a wonderful husband over what, forty-nine years.  So this is our forty-ninth year together, and so I don't know--I have not seen my, my good friend Mickey [ph.] since 1955 when we graduated.  But I don't know, you know, what her successes in life have been. Sa very bright, young woman, very attractive girl and tended to be a little bit flirty, you know, that kind.  And so I don't know how she made out in life because she seemed to be, you know, interested in guys that were interested in somebody else, just for the heck of it, you know, that kind of person.  And I was--during the last year that I went to high school I was the bus driver. I drove two routes every day.  And you bought the bus home with you and then in the morning about seven o'clock in the morning you started out you picked up the kids who lived out your way.  And then you went let them off at, at the elementary school and pick the kids up who lived on the other route and then came back and then you went on to high school.  So my brother-in-law  Lawrence's brother Clarence [Hall, (ph.)], who was in my class, was the bus driver--was the regular bus driver. And I was the substitute, so Clarence, who is mechanical minded still is--he ended up marrying my sister Ellie [Ruth Webb].  But he and I were good friends in high school. So Clarence would drive ninety miles an hour anywhere he was going.  He was always fooling around with something mechanical and so forth, so he decided that he wanted the bus to go faster.  So he took the governors loose on it--that control the speed of the bus.  And then he was backing into the parking lot and broke the axle on the bus, so they fired him.  They had to have another driver so (laughter) I became the driver for, for that bus.  And later on he got back on and drove the other bus.  The number of my bus was 135 I'll never forget that, and I could park that thing perfectly aligned with, you know.  So I weighed about a hundred--a 108 something like that, and I was five, 5'6" so I was a very thin tall girl no shape just straight lines (laughter).  Except I was blessed with what all black women are blessed with, hippy.  But anyway whenever they came to check on the safety of the buses and what have you they were patrol--the highway patrolman who came to check.  And so they would announced on the PA all the bus drivers come, so I went, and I said no I don't need the substitutes I need drivers (laughter).  I said I'm the driver; you drive that bus yes sir (laughter).  So he, he actually had me get on the bus even though I passed all the tests and everything.  I was seventeen years old I think and here I am driving kids a full load of kids I mean everywhere.
Speaker 1: We're talking about a regular school bus?
Speaker 2: I'm talking about a regular, like you see the yellow school buses on the road that's the kind of bus I drove.
Story_ID: 196728
Speaker 1: When you look back at just, you know, some of your--when I look back at some of your photographs from [Armour] High School [Riegelwood, North Carolina]and that--it's amazing to me that you didn't think you were pretty because you were a fairly striking young woman.  And when you look back sometimes you think what was I thinking?
Speaker 2: I realize that, that I looked okay I've never thought I was beautiful, or what have you.  I tried always dress appropriately for whatever job it was or whatever.  But I never I just even till this day, you know, I see all of the, the unattractive features.  And I guess I don't see a lot of the what other people know.  You very rarely give yourself a pass on anything.  And I guess I've been that way about--but I think along about eleventh grade or something like that the first prom or whatever I felt kind of like the ugly duckling had come out.  And finally, you know, 'cause my hair was long and, you know, they could style it and there was no longer the fuzzy mess of, of childhood and, and so forth.  And I still didn't like the color 'cause I was blonde as you can see from my early pictures (laughter).  And I wanted to have dark hair so the first time I had a chance to color my hair guess what--I colored it dark (laughter).  And the kids at schools said, "Ms. [HistoryMaker Vera] Hall what did you do," (laughter).  These are second graders--I walked in the door, and I never will forget this little boy Kevin [ph.].  And I'm standing at the door 'cause I kept telling the colorist put more color in and so she finally got it too dark.  And so Kevin came in, and he looked up at me and he turned all the way around and he said, "Your face is too white for your hair," (laughter).  So out of the mouth of babes, any way I never attempted after that to get it darker, you know.  So I, I've finally I guess around in the forties,  thirty, you know.  In my forty years or so recognize that your hair color goes along with the rest of you. And you can't make to dramatic of a departure from that or you don't look right (laughter).
Speaker 1: As Kevin said.
Speaker 2: As Kevin said (laughter).  So I just gave up and tried to make it I said well then I'll settle for getting it one color because it was blonde on the top and darker as you went back.  So I said I'm going to get it one color so what did I do about a year or two ago I got it frosted made it two colors (laughter).
Story_ID: 196729
Speaker 1: Going back to [Armour] High School [Riegelwood, North Carolina]--at this time were you thinking about going to college and what were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what I think my goal was I wanted a beautiful house, and I wanted children, and I wanted to be a good mother.  And find a way--it was a typical Cinderella kind of dream, and I wanted to be a designer.  So I knew I had to go to school to do those things but other people had aspirations for me I didn't have for my self--including the principal of the high school and teachers.  And all the rest of them they said, you've gotta go to college.  And I'm thinking well, you know, my dad [Wiley Haynes Webb] wanted me to go to Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], which was the Methodist college for girls back in that time.  And he'd always believe that--he believed in Ford Foundation, and he believed in Bennett College (laughter).  And he believed in the Methodists would see a way to help folks get educated.  So he was the one who really wanted me to go onto school.  Well, I met Lawrence [Hall] in the twelfth grade I mean he didn't--no I met him in the eleventh grade, and he went on off to school.  And what--he was a very tall handsome guy and, you know, I just fell in love with Lawrence, and I decided that I rather marry Lawrence.  And daddy said, no you gotta go to school. And so he made Lawrence promised that if we did get married that he would let me go on to school.  So we got married in September, the 7th, after graduating in May, and I went on to school for a designer okay.  There wasn't any place in North Carolina that-- really taught designing except this one little school in Raleigh [North Carolina].  So my teachers got together and made sure that, you know, that I was aware of that school got admitted and all of that and so I started I went to school in September (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: What year is this [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Vera] Hall?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].  In October, I already had garments on display, and I'm teaching the rest of the class.  And I'm thinking, you know, this makes no sense I'm not really learning anything.  So then they wanted me to go to Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] for home economics.  Lawrence wanted me to go I said, "I don't want to teach designing.  I want to do it I want," and then there was a school they said well you stay here for two years then you go to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology] in New York [New York].  Well, you know, that was like way out in the future somewhere no, not gonna do that I'll stay here.    So I came home I think after Christmas and refused to go back--would not go back to school. I'm gonna make a living sewing (laughter).
Story_ID: 196730
Speaker 1: Anyway, the next year I think we [Hall and her husband, Lawrence Hall] had Reggie [Reginald Hall], and we moved to Baltimore [Maryland] when he was eight months old.  And moved next door to a teacher and she used to see me with the kids and she said, "They need teachers so badly.  Why won't you go back to school?" "I don't want to teach."  So I'm still being stubborn about it no I don't want to teach.  I think you'd make a excellent teacher.  Well, Lawrence came home one day and heard her telling me this her name was Agnes Robinson [ph.].  And so he stopped by Coppin [State Teachers College, later, Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and picked up the application (laughter).  So you fill this application, so I filled out the application never occurred to me to say no I'm not gonna do that, you know.  Because wives kinda did what their husbands wanted them to do at that point.  And so I sent the application, you know, you had to get recommendations from your former principals and, and teachers and stuff.  So Mr. Corbet [ph.] wrote on there, "At last," (laughter).  And they sent them back, and I started to Coppin with Reggie as, as a he was a baby.  My sister kept him Barbara [Webb Mott] kept Reggie while I went to school.   So I had to do it the hard way I guess, so the first year that I went I, I got by, by just whatever I caught in class.  I didn't do much studying, and I still made out just fine.  But I wasn't--so I finally met a Lawrence Reddick, who if he's not in your file and if he's still alive should be.  But he made history live for us for the first time, and he would write on my papers--I might have a B or something this is not the best that you can do.  And he was the kind of teacher who would come in the class with index cards.  He would've given you assigned readings because black history was not portrayed as, you know, in any kind of their way. He had made it a purpose in life to find those readings that would make us aware of black history and our contribution to the contrary 'cause it just wasn't in the books.  Chances are, you know, I had all black teachers, but they knew what was in the book.  Dr. Reddick was the first one who'd gone beyond the textbook and made us read,Carter Grant [sic. Godwin] Woodson, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, and those kind and made us read the civil rights things and what was going on there.  And that, that would be part of his lessons so he'd come in, and he'd had these index cards and he'd have our names on the index card and he'd ask the question.  And if you answered it right you went in one stack and if you didn't answer you went in another stack.  And he would teach the lesson you were afraid to go to class without studying.  And so I started studying (laughter) and got on the honor roll again.  And kind of say now the club that I belong in college was the hobby club.  I would go and, and I couldn't sing, but I get credit for being in the glee club (laughter), and I made things for the glee club and that kind of thing.  So anyway I went through the four years at Coppin--
Story_ID: 196731
Speaker 1: What was it like attending school [Coppin State Teachers College, later, Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] as a married woman with a small child?
Speaker 2: It was difficult because a lot of the social activities that, that went on.  I wasn't a part of but then I hadn't never been a lot a social, you know, a real social being.  I'd been much more of a civic person than social.  So I wasn't bothered by--sororities I didn't have any time for it, you know, didn't care for being in the sorority. And I was not gonna go through the hazing and that kind of stuff so--but I was blessed in a way that they needed teachers in Maryland at that time.  So they were paying your tuition to go back to school, and a lot of people who had gone to other schools and had a degree but didn't--weren't qualified to teach came back.  So there were a lot of older people in my particular class.  So that kind of saves the day because they had the same things that I had children and some of them was divorced and, you know that kind of thing.  And I was also getting used to a different lifestyle in the city than I had been used to in the country where everybody knew everybody and, and you were much more likely to be segregated.  And so I spent more time in family groupings and less time with social groups during those years.
Story_ID: 196732
Speaker 1: Ms. [HistoryMaker Vera] Hall tell me a little bit--so we're kind of around late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s]. You were wrapping up college [Coppin State Teachers College, later, Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And were you becoming a little bit more interested in teaching?  Now were you developing somewhat of a love for it?
Speaker 2: Well I always loved kids, you know, that, that has been a common thread.  So I guess I was willing to, to do some of the other things if it meant that I would be working with kids.  So I went through, you know, student teaching and all--I did all of the things that I needed to do to get the degree and, and I liked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you did that with two children?
Speaker 2: With two children with--I--Kim [F. Hall] was born December 25, 1961, and it was the year that I was--would have been doing student teaching in the fall.  And as life would have it, it was a very difficult pregnancy, and I was hospitalized, couple of times during that time, but I kept on going.  And she finally was born on the 25th and then I was--I started student teaching.  And let's see--I started teaching when she was like three months old or something like that but any rate.  Had a lot of support again from my sisters, my husband [Lawrence Hall], and my sister-in-law who died a couple years ago, Burnell [ph.].  She--when she left home she, she came to Baltimore [Maryland] and went to school for secretary.  So she lived with us while she was going to school and became--she came over to take care of Reggie [Reginald Hall] and do all those things while I was sick before Kim was born.  So here we were, you know, all in school I said, "Burnell you gotta get, you know, get your certificates and all."  So she went to school for secretary and finished that during that time.  And I went on and finished up my degree so she, she was like another sister, you know.  We've--my husband's brothers and sisters are like my brothers and sisters.  And matter of fact people who know us say,  "Oh it's those Halls we don't know one from another--they don't know Webbs from Halls" (laughter).
Story_ID: 196733
Speaker 1: One thing we didn't talk about was how you and your husband [Lawrence Hall] came from North Carolina to Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that happen in the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Lawrence went to barber school and became a barber, and he went in 1953.  And we got married two years later, and he was working in a barbershop in Wilmington [North Carolina], his uncle's barbershop.  His mother was not in favor of him going to work for this uncle in the first place, but Lawrence thought, well it's a job.  So he was doing pretty will we had built a house in North Carolina and everything and we were pretty much set to stay there.  And then Reggie [Reginald Hall] was born--Lawrence's father, who was also Lawrence, was a carpenter.  And so we, we lived across the road from them when his father died suddenly of a heart attack.  And here Lawrence again was the oldest child and, you know, he felt an obligation to try to help his mother with the younger children and so forth.  And Sarah [ph.] was just up a minute ago had just graduated from high school, and the father--she was scheduled to go off to school and then the father died so that dream was not possible.  She went off to New York [New York] and went to work, and Lawrence and I stayed in Bolton [North Carolina].  And he continued to work in Wilmington, which was like thirty-two miles away.  And he never was happy with staying in Bolton. To me that life suited me just fine.  I was happy and what have you, but he always wanted to have more, and he knew there was another world out there.  And so he decided that, I'm gonna change jobs we came in October to visit my sister [Barbara Webb Mott] here in, Baltimore.  And he decided at that point that he was gonna move to Baltimore.  So, we came back in--and I never will forget I, I said you really did take risks back then 'cause he quit his job on the--Christmas Eve.  Told his uncle he wasn't coming back, because his uncle had done something that impacted on his earning ability and, and was just very cavalier about it.  And he--I guess his uncle figured, well, he's, he's here now and, you know, he's got the baby.  And he's got the wife and the house, and he's not going to leave.  So Lawrence has proven to him that, you know, I'm leaving.  So he came to Baltimore and so I said well you go on and, and get settled.  And, and then I'll think about it. So he came--he moved here in January of 1958.  And I came--he came back home to visit--his mother had, had surgery, and I was taking care of her.  So I didn't want to come back with him because he didn't have an apartment or anything.  And he said, "Oh we'll, stay at your sister's house."  And Reggie did not know him he was just what six months old or something like that and so he said well I'm taking Reggie.  So you gonna have to go (laughter).  So anyway my mother-in-law said, "Honey, I think you need to go I'll be okay I think you need to go wherever your husband wants to live.  And you'll be okay, and I'll be okay," so she said, "just go ahead," you know, "I'll be fine."  So that's when I came to Baltimore in March of 1958, and it was that summer after coming in March that I met Agnes [ph.].  We, we found a place and moved into a house.  And that's where I met Agnes, who said, "Why don't you go on back to school," and started school [Coppin State Teachers College, later, Coppin State University, Baltimore, Maryland], like, the next year--
Story_ID: 196734
Speaker 1: So you were an educator?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: For over ten years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your teaching experiences in the '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I started out--schools were totally segregated as they were when I was in high school [Armour High School, Riegelwood, North Carolina].  The Supreme Court decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down when I was in high school.  But it may not one bit of difference in our life--the only thing I remember particularly about it was that it was headlines in the paper.  But for those of us who were going to segregated schools, it-- didn't mean a lot 'cause you went back to the same school next day.  And it was you still got the white kids books with their names on the plate.  And you never got a new book in school, and you had to pay rent on those books and that persisted for the rest of my school career.  And so, you know, the Civil Rights Movement started happening when I was a young adult, and we were not particularly marching in the, in the movement or whatever.  But, you know, everybody knew about it and we kind of supported other people who were there.  But we just didn't--I did not have the right temperament for people to pour things on my head and take it--I would've been fighting.  And so we kind of went through--and we cheered on [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and, and all we watched all of that action and we were just coming into Baltimore [Maryland].  And they had just decided that they were going to integrate the schools.  And I had, I'd gone to work at a school in South Baltimore [Maryland], down in the industrial area.  Where they--it was a school that had been built to keep black school--kids from going into a new white school across the across the highway.  And so I was assigned to that school, and--so I went to work down there in the winter of '62 [1962] and met a woman who--I, I took the place of a woman who was going on maternity leave and started, you know, teaching.  So about every week I looked in the want ads to see if there was another job.  Because (laughter) it's so much paperwork, and people weren't sure what they wanted to do, you know.  You thought you learned a lot in college, but you get out and start application.  And I'm saying, "But these kids should be reading better than this why can't they read," you know (laughter).  And so I was assigned to a school to a classroom--second grade--and they were heterogeneous.  So I had kids from--those who couldn't write their name to who were reading off the books.  And, and it was very difficult to get all of that together and at that time they would assign a visiting teacher who would come and help you learn the ropes and so forth.  So I decided, I gotta make these kids learn how to read.  So I got interested in how do kids learn to read very early.  And here I'm into designs and patterns again and thinking, there's gotta be a way to decipher this language, so they learn to read.
Story_ID: 196735
Speaker 1: And so I was a maverick from day one, so I said, "I'm going back to school.  And I'm going to learn how to teach reading, 'cause I really don't know."  And nobody else knows either but they won't admit it. So, you know, you're doing the done thing.  You know, this is the way you do it, but you're not getting any results.  Why we're gonna do this is?  I can't be interested in mother hanging out to wash.  There must be another way to teach these kids how to read.  So I went to Morgan [State College, later, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and took some courses in developmental reading.  In the meantime, we lost population in that school, and they decided that they were gonna send me to integrated school over in East Baltimore [Maryland], well--
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: This was it had to be '63 [1963] '64 [1964] around that time.  So they came at the, the superintendent for that region came in, you know.  They would come around look at teachers, and so he went and asked Mrs. Bright [ph.] who was my principal, "Who is that teacher?"  And Mrs. Bright told him who I was.  And he said, "I mean, but where'd she come from?"  So she didn't know my history or anything and she said, "Well she's just a regular Baltimore City [Maryland] teacher," you know.  So he went on, but what he was thinking was that I would be a good candidate to send to a school to integrate the school.  Because the superintendent had decreed that he was going to integrate teachers since they had not been successful at integrating the kids.  So he was not gonna send one lone teacher, he was gonna to send at least three whenever he moved teachers to schools.  So she come--she announces to me that I'm being sent to the school No. 2 [David E. Weglein Elementary School] in East Baltimore.  So I said to Lawrence [Hall], you know, they want to transfer me to this school, and I want to go over and take a look at it.  So he drove me--we drove over during the weekend.  Well, it was in the middle of bars, it was white neighborhood and very depressed, foreign speaking, you know, all of the--it would be like Davie County [North Carolina] was, years later.  And I went over there, and I said, "They're crazy I'm not coming over here I'm not going to work over there."  So I came back I told the principal I said, "I'm not going to that school."  She said, "But you have to, the superintendent says you gotta go."  I said, "Well you tell him I'm not going" (laughter).  So the superintendent set up an appointment to meet with me during that summer because he had said--he knew some things about the school.  And, you know, he'd be--couldn't say he wasn't at liberty to say, then he said--so I went to meet with him.  And I said, "I went over, and I looked at that area it's a lot of white people over there.  Who really would not want us over there and I'm not going."  So (laughter) he told me he was sending this principal [Samuel] "Mickey" Sharrow; Jewish principal.  And that he really needed me to go because they needed some good teachers and that they needed to have the school turned around.  Because they had a lot of unqualified--there were thirty teachers and out of the thirty teachers, five of them were qualified.  There would be five qualified teachers in the school when I went.  So he sent Angela Dobson Hawkins [ph.], who was in school with me, and we had not seen each other for a few years and I had ran into her again.  And Cheryline Hill [ph.] was already there.  So we were the three black mavericks who went to that school.
Story_ID: 196736
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like there [No. 2, David E. Weglein Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Oh God, that's a whole story in itself.  First of all, Mr. [Samuel "Mickey"] Sharrow tried to break down some of the old ways, and the kids were many of them Polish, many Italians, some blacks.  I think we had every kind of kid in that school except Jewish kids there were no Jewish kids that I'm aware of that were in that school.  But you had this whole mix of people in Little Italy [Baltimore, Maryland] we were right on the edge of Little Italy.  And anybody--heard of Baltimore [Maryland] knows Little Italy.  So Mickey Sharrow decided that he was gonna use these few teachers who were certified, qualified to do things as a way to turn the school around.  So he went out into the community--and really beat the bushes to get parents to come into the school.  And they tell me that before we came that they would have PTA [parent teacher association] meetings, and the teachers and the principal would have a sing-along.  And the principal was the--one of the judge's wives who was not qualified to do the job she was doing, you know, but politically she got the job.  So she ended up hiring a lot of unqualified white teachers, and they were going to have to turn this around.  And so I ended up with kids who--if I thought those at the other school were not in good shape these were in terrible shape.  And I said, and they were in--you know, a mixture of kids.  And you might go on the playground and have them calling each other names and all of that.  And they--the staff kind of took a look at me and decided, you know, we can deal with her because she's not gonna be radical, she's not one of those radical blacks.  So they put me on every committee you could think of, and I remember being on the social committee.  So the teacher next door to me, his daughter just come out of school, and she was getting a job there.  She was getting ready to get married to just illustrate to you the--how things were.  And she--her mother wanted to give her a bridal shower.  Well, we found out that they had had a previous bridal shower where they invited some of our white colleagues but they didn't invite any of us.  So of course they all came to tell me I said, "okay."  The next--so Barbara [ph.] came up and started talking about this shower, and I said, "Oh, so you giving her a shower, Betty"--her mother's name is Betty daughter's name is Barbara.  Say, "Yeah, and we and we want you all to come."  I said, "Well, you need to tell us what we need to bring because I understand that she's had a shower, and we don't need to duplicate what she's already had.  So--what kind of gifts did she"--and then she got all flustered.  'Cause they thought we'd never know that they'd had this shower.  And I said, "Tell you what--I've heard some rumblings, I've heard that her future mother-in-law says if any black people shows up at the wedding she's not gonna--she's gonna walk out."  I said, "So I don't think we really should be bringing gifts when we're not welcome, so we're not coming."  And, "Oh, [HistoryMaker ] Vera [Hall], I don't," you know, "I'm doing the best I can," she said, you know, "it's hard for old attitudes."  I said, "Yeah I know that, but somebody's gotta break 'em, I'm not coming and the rest of the black teachers aren't coming."  So that really, you know, and Mr. Sharrow had been working diligently to try to break down those racial barriers.  And try to get, to get teachers to come out of their rooms and eat in the teacher's room, and all this kind of thing, and--
Story_ID: 196737
Speaker 1: --I was learning, you know, to do a good job at teaching.  And I was doing some demonstrations for other teachers and all of that.  And I was always a disciplinarian, and I guess I get that from my mother [Kara Elizabeth Blanks Webb] and [maternal] grandmother [Ada A. Graham], 'cause I remember telling my niece about her grandmother that she doesn't remember.  So when I got through telling her the kind of person she was, she said, "Oh, Aunt Pearly [ph.],"--they all call me Aunt Pearly--"That sounds like you."  So I guess I'm a disciplinarian.  And so the kids who had been previously allowed to carry on so badly 'til they would be sent home half a day I ended up with. so I would have like thirty-some kids, then ten of 'em might be real severe discipline problems because of--the teachers weren't controlling them.  So Paul Potter was the counselor in that school, so he would come and, you know get me to do techniques and that kind of thing--new teachers.  And so one of these days one day I walked down the hall to let my class out, and there was this little boy and he was beating Ms. Green [ph.], Ms. Green was one of the white teachers.  He was fighting and carrying on then I looked and said, "Paul, did I just see him hit her?"  He said, "Oh [HistoryMaker] Vera [Hall], she doesn't know what to do with him, and I said, "Oh, well I'm glad he's not my class."  So I went on about my business, you know. Couple of days later and we, we had the kind of doors in the classroom that had three panels, you know.  So you would often look up and see people peering through that middle panel.  So here's Paul. He said, "Vera  we gotta save this kid 'cause he's dying in, in that room said he and Ms. Green are at odds all the time."  His name is--the boy's name is Harold [ph.].  He said, "So I want you to take him".  I said, "Paul get out of my room I'm not taking any more bad children" (laughter).  But he said, "Please Vera , you gotta try, it's--" he said, "I believe the--he'll do okay with you."  I said,  "You know what's gonna happen if he ever hits me," he said, "he won't hit you" (laughter).  So I got Harold, and I already had Edward [ph.], who was had been suspended half day every day the year before.  So I got Harold and Harold--I talked to him when he came in and to find out what is going on.  And I talked to Mrs. Green and what had happened was Mrs. Green had made a decision that whatever he wanted to do he wasn't gonna do until he behaved himself.  And he had made the decision that she wasn't always make him do everything that she wanted him to do.  So I said, "I know what I'm gonna do, I'm gonna find something for him to do that will be his job."  So that's how I did that and, and I got Harold in and, you know, he kind of melded in with the other kids.  Well, lo and behold the next year Mr. [Samuel "Mickey"] Sharrow said, "Vera , I've got some kids that you gotta take I'm a give you all the support system.  I'm going to help you, and we're going to get these kids together," and I said, "how many of 'em."  He said, "About twelve or thirteen"--these were kids who had struck out totally.  It was the first time I had ever seen kids who actually wrote somebody else's name and didn't know it, but it was a challenge.  So finally I said, "Oh well," you know, "the kids need the help.  So I'll take 'em," and I went to take the reading courses the developmental reading and that kind of thing.  And I just--I said, you know, "The way we're teaching reading is not making sense to these kids nor me, so I'm finding new ways."  So I went out looking for a new way to teach reading, and I ended up saying, "We're wasting their time teaching them situation-based stories. Boys like humor and," you know, "other kinds of stories, action-based and that kind of thing.  I think I will look at teaching content reading I'm going to find a way to write this stuff in a way that'll be interesting to them."  So I would take them on walks around the harbor to see the fire boat, to see the scrapyard, and see how those magnets work.  And then I'd do a unit in science on that and then their reading would come from that, so it was a language arts approach.  And then I met Jim Lindner [ph.] at Morgan [State College, later, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].  And I was in school questioning all the time, well I've been through all of this, and I'm now coming back to find out how to make these kids read.  So you gotta--so he said, "Vera , would you like to try a method that I started working on when I get my doctorate and see how it would work?"  I said, "Well, let me see it," so we developed a reading program, he and I. It was--called it systematic sonic--phonics and sight vocabulary building, and we took away all(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What year is this, Ms. Hall?
Speaker 1: It must have been about, let's see, it must've been about '65 [1965].  Because I remember Kim [F. Hall] was about three years old when I had those kids.
Story_ID: 196738
Speaker 1: And I would spend so much time at home making up work that they could do.  Until she [Hall's daughter, Kim F. Hall] would come and, you know, and stick her head under my arm and look at the words on the table.  And to get rid of her I would say, "Kim, find the one that doesn't belong."  And I'd give her a series of words and she'd go, and she'd organize some words and so forth.  And I have to tell you a story about her.  So anyway I went on then to began to look at how do we teach the words the kids need to know using another vehicle other than these situation-based stories with white momma, daddy and everybody else.  And momma's playing see spot run and, you know.  And it just made no sense to me how--what boy would be interested in that. But they were interested in those magnets.  And how they worked and old cars and all of that, so I would be walking the kids by girly shops.  And all this, you know, down in the (laughter) district and so forth.  And my rule was you had to hold on to me somewhere if you couldn't touch me you had to touch a kid who was touching me (laughter).  And I, I never lost the kid but we would go and we would look at things and come back we'd write stories, and we'd take those stories and make it--the reading.  And when they got enough vocabulary I would then switch them over to reading old folk tales and things like that.  So they never had to go through that see Spot run and run Sally run and ride Sally ride and all that kind of stuff.  I just, you know, we had to get permission from the superintendent to try it and so I started, started it with that class that Mr. [Samuel "Mickey"] Sharrow put together for me.  Then guess what, he gets promoted and he leaves the school [David E. Weglein Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland].  And we got a Mr. [Sidney] Tepper , who was not ready for this situation.  So at the at the first day he had all the teachers and he said, "Now I'm telling you do not put your hands on these children."  So I let him go ahead and talk I said, "Mr. Tepper the day I can't put my hands on a child the day I won't teach him.  Because it's human to put your hands on the child," I said, "I'm not gonna put my hands on, but I'm gone treat them the way that I would treat my own.  Or the way I want somebody else to treat--."  That's my philosophy, and I'd always tell my parents they come in on in September for parent teacher day.  And I say look I have your child in my class I'm going to teach em teach them to the best of my ability.  I'm going to treat them the way I treat my own children.  If you have a problem with that you need to see me after school.  Tell me what you want me to do if they get out of hand.  I only hit one parent [sic. child] in all the years that I taught, stayed behind, and this little boy's name was Jacob VanRyan [ph.].  He was a little Dutch boy, and Jacob's mother stayed behind and she told me some family stuff that, you know, he really was just adjusting to the country and everything else.  And she said I just like you to call me if he gets out of line.  Well, Jacob was scared of his--shadow he wasn't about to get out of line for anything.  And so I never had a parent challenge that during all those years.
Story_ID: 196739
Speaker 1: So after teaching for almost fifteen years, you started to become involved in politics.  Now tell us a little bit about the story about how you became involved in politics while still teaching?
Speaker 2: Well it was my search to make sure that we were doing what we were supposed to do as teachers for kids.  I went on to develop that reading program that I talked to you about at the next--Kim [F. Hall] got to be kindergarten age, and I decided I wasn't going to travel across town [Baltimore, Maryland] to school.  I was going to come back to a school that was in the neighborhood.  So I got transferred to the--to a new school Hilton Elementary [School, Baltimore, Maryland].  And with a woman principal by the name of Enna Payne that everybody said, "[HistoryMaker ] Vera [Hall], don't go you not gonna survive that (laughter) school, don't go.  Ms. Payne is a dragon lady," I said, "well I'm going to do my job, and she's gonna do hers, and we'll all be fine."  I can't tell you how many people, friends of mine, that said don't go 'cause, you know, but I went.  And with Mrs. Payne and some of the teachers we developed that reading program.  I had children in second grade who could read the dictionary.  It really worked so, you know, that that was how I get noticed by the [Maryland] State  Department of Education and that kind of thing.  In the meantime, this is by then the early '70s [1970s] I had gone back to school [Towson State College, later, Towson University, Towson, Maryland] and gotten my master's degree.  Still searching for a way to teach kids how to read.  So I come back with master's degree, Mrs. Payne wanted me to take the job as senior teacher.  I said, "No I want to teach reading," so I wouldn't take it, so they brought in somebody else and so she came to me.  And she said, "Look, Vera, I'm never going to offer you a chance to get out of that classroom again if you don't take it this time".  So I took the job as senior teacher, which is where I a stayed until I actually--until unaccountability started sweeping the country.  And I got to talk about accountability and through Senator [Clarence W.] Blount, who was my political mentor.  We--he was also an educator, and we would talk for hours about education and politics and that kind of thing.  And he would drop by the house and my husband [Lawrence Hall] was actually the member of his political club.  He brought me the bill that he had passed in Indianapolis [Indiana].  I took a day off from school and went down to talk to some of the legislators about this legislation and what it would and would not do and that sort of thing.  And I also were talking to teachers saying, "Look, people are frustrated because we're not producing a product that needs to be produced.  So they're striking out trying to find a way to do this and education--educators are you losing their voice and the political arena is where change is happening."  And I remember having about three or four kids who really were not keeping up.  With a thousand kids at Hilton and I bet I knew nine hundred of 'em, you know, on first name basis. And I had three who just weren't keeping up, and I went to find out where did that money go that was given for emotionally disturbed children.  I'm going to trace it, so that's why I went to Annapolis [Maryland].
Story_ID: 196740
Speaker 1: Around the early '70s [1970s] you started becoming involved in politics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, true, because of education.
Speaker 1: And the one of the first things that you did you were, you were appointed to the [Democratic Party] State Central Committee by Governor [Marvin] Mandel--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In 1972--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what that was like for you?
Speaker 2: Well first of all, we had elected our first woman to be on the central committee.  And there were three committeemen from the district.  And they-- the woman that we elected got married and moved away.  By this time, I had become active in the 5 in 5 Democratic Club [ph.].  And the way that that happened was I told you I knew--had talked to Senator [Clarence W.] Blount but they would meet at members' houses.  So this particular Sunday morning we were in bed, we weren't asleep but we were still--we had not gotten up. The doorbell rings and I go to the--Lawrence [Hall] goes to the door and it's Senator Blount and five or six to men who had come to breakfast--the political club.  So he comes back, and he's just chagrin he'd forgotten to tell me.  And I said, "Well why don't you just take them downstairs and let them start their meeting and then I will get breakfast ready."  And, and then he can come up he eat after the meeting.  So I went I called Emily [ph.], I said, "Emily I got--there will be fifteen guys in my house in another half hour that's expecting breakfast."  So I got Kim [F. Hall] and Reggie [Reginald Hall] and, you know, we all got breakfast together while they were meeting.  They came up, and the table was set and we had sausage and potatoes and, you know, a big country breakfast.  Which we normally had on Sunday mornings anyway, but this particular Sunday morning we were gonna have to do, you know, food for like twenty people.  And so they did not know that I didn't know they were coming, so they thought I was a miracle worker. Whenever Lawrence told them that I did not know that they were coming 'cause he had forgot to tell me.  So all of them said their wife would've walked out.  You know, and there's no way she would've been able to do that and so forth.  So they stayed behind and started talking. Senator Blount then decided and I think [Clarence H.] "Du" Burns might've been the speaker that morning or something.  He was the first black mayor of Baltimore [Maryland].  And he said, "Girl, you need to get out of the kitchen and get in politics," well I didn't pay him any attention.  And so when the woman moved away who'd been elected of central committee, the men had--there were two men and left, and they had the vote for replacement.  So the women in the group said to me, "[HistoryMaker ] Vera [Hall], we think ought to be the replacement."  And I said, "What is a central committee and what does it do?"  So then I had to go find out what the central committee does.  And what--'cause I'm always a sucker for moving women forward.  And do have one award SES [Systematic Equity Strategies] equity award and so anyway I said, "Well," you know, "it won't interfere with my job.  It's not a paying job, it's just volunteer it doesn't meet that often.  You know, so okay I'll do that," so I presented my case for being a member of central committee.  And the men split, so my name went to the governor at Senator Blount's requests because they didn't agree on a replacement.  So since they didn't agree, the procedure is that the name goes to the governor, who names the person.  So Governor Mandel then named me to the central committee, and I served out that two terms.
Story_ID: 196741
Speaker 1: The next time there was a state election, Senator [Clarence W.] Blount fielded a team of people for the [Democratic Party State] Central Committee: Michelle Williams [ph.], myself and Lester Wallace [ph.], and I was the only one who won.  So I went on to be seated on the central committee and it started there that was a volunteer effort.  But my work had been working with, you know, education and accountability and all that and how politics impacts education.  I and that--so they came after me to run for the [Maryland] House of Delegates, and I said no.  Got to educate kids--I have a job not gonna do that, and besides I don't think I'm interested in what they do.  So the sen--Senator Blount just kept saying, you know, "You ought to consider running."  And I said, "Wait, there only two jobs that I'm interested in you have one of them.  And that's senate and the other one is city council 'cause I believe that's where you make a difference.  I don't believe that I can make a difference in the House of Delegates because there's a herd mentality down there," you know.  "And everything the chairman says is law and," you know, "not room for me in that arena.  So, no I don't think I'll do that," so I went on, you know, doing my work and what have you.  So I was at the [Maryland] State Department of Education and as I said this was like the early '70s [1970s] maybe by this time it was 1974.  And David [W.] Hornbeck who was also--I call him an educational iconoclast--he came in with some ideas about how education ought to function.  And he was, you know, talking a different talk about what education ought to be like and I had been working on a project [Project S.T.A.R., Students, Teachers, Academics, Restoration].  The way that I got to work on that project was they were--because of accountability they were identifying schools who were underperforming in the State of Maryland.  So they decided to put some money together and see what could be done to turn those schools around.  They were putting together an all-white team to do this.
Story_ID: 196742
Speaker 1: So Dr. Percy [V.] Williams, who was one of the few--the only black superintendent in the whole makeup of superintendents at that time working on the [David W.] Hornbeck [Project S.T.A.R., Students, Teachers, Academics, Restoration], said that he would pull his money if they didn't put a black on there.  So Senator [Clarence W.] Blount came by my house to get me to recommend somebody because he didn't think I'd leave Hilton [Elementary School, Baltimore, Maryland] 'cause I'd always been--I loved that school I was there for ten years.  And I, you know, it was just like a part of me, and he said, "But I gotta have somebody.  And it gotta be somebody who cannot be turned down on credentials, presence or anything.  'Cause they gotta be black, and they gotta be"--this that and the other--"and Dr. Williams wants me to submit a name."  Well, I had just come from Howard County [Maryland] for an interview because at Hilton the, the principal and others had met during the summer.  And I had gone to teach some teachers volunteering, and they didn't tell me they were thinking about changing my school.  I said, "I'm not going. I don't have to take this. I'm a good teacher," I was senior teacher.  So, you know, I was--and I would been acting principal, vice principal and that's kind of stuff.  So when they had, I said, "No. I'm going to go--I'm leaving the city and I'm going to go to the county and work."  I went for an interview, and they wanted me to take a job as a teaching vice principal.  Well, that was so much like what I had I'm going to travel to do it, but I was still dressed coming from the interview.  I said, "Well those credentials sound like mine.  Would you like me to apply?"  He said--oh he did a dance on my front porch.  And, "Would you really consider it?" I said, "I'll consider it."  Well, we were getting ready to go on family vacation and what have you.  So sent my name up to Dr. Williams and Dr. Williams called me. I went out to interview.  He said, "I don't care what they tell you; you want this job. I'm going to be standing behind you.  You take this job even if you don't stay with it--take the job."  So they said, "Oh," you know, "these schools--some of 'em are in rural areas, do you think that you'll be comfortable?"  I said, "Oh I grew up in a rural area I'm very--I'm rural.  That's my beginnings, I'll be fine." So they asked me catch questions and oh, I mean I would--I'm proud of myself.  I was profound--they couldn't turn me down on appearance, on knowledge, on anything.  And you know, the first thing that happens when--during those times when you were put into an integrated situation was everybody tested you.  To see if you really, really knew what you're supposed to know. Well, I knew what I was supposed to know.  And I knew that I knew it so when they would come after me, I would, you know. And once I got in a place, I felt that I shouldn't be the only black one in there.  So we should find some more, I don't want you to get the idea that I'm the only one who knows what I know 'cause there are other folks like me.  You just gotta find them, so we brought other people into this Project S.T.A.R.  It was a project to improve reading instruction in the State of Maryland.  And while I was working on that project, Hornbeck wanted me to come to work for him.
Story_ID: 196743
Speaker 1: And I said, "Well," you know, "I think I'm going back to Baltimore City [Maryland]" and, you know, "the kids there need me."  And Lawrence [Hall] said, "Get a grip--we got these kids to educate they're offering you more money.  And you're talking about coming back to Baltimore, and they haven't sent anything after you to say, 'come back.'"  And I met with the superintendent [Dr. Percy V. Williams] and--you know, I--anyway [David W.] Hornbeck during that time had a superintendent for special ed [education], who everybody told me was very prejudiced against black kids and so forth.  Well, she wrote a note that said that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s birthday is coming up.  And while you're celebrating his birthday it's also my dog Buffy's [ph.] birthday celebrated his birthday, too.  So all the blacks, which was all of seven or eight of us in the whole several thousand folks, were talking about it. I said, "Has anybody shown this to the superintendent?"  And I said, "Well why are you talking about it? You gotta show it to the superintendent and see if he seen it," so it's the story of who would bail the cat.  I said, "Give me the memo." I take the memo and I charged into Hornbeck's office. He wasn't there.  But I told his secretary, "I want to see him the minute his foot hits this door.  And I want you to look at this and make sure he has it when he sees me."  So ge thanked me. In the meantime, now I had--I was being considered for a job as the assistant superintendent for instruction, assistant to that superintendent. It never occurred to me that they might not hire me.  I just went off, and he had not seen the memo, and so he fired her.  And so, you know, that was a battle that we kind of won and then we, you know, look--her, her attitude will, in fact, will affect the rest of the divisions.  And, you know, people tend to think of us as not being very language efficient anyway and, you know, too many black kids in special ed.  You can't have a person like that. So anyway, then I became infamous at the [Maryland State] Department of Education.
Story_ID: 196744
Speaker 1: Dick Dietz [ph.], who was my--became the superintendent of instruction, was my boss.  [David W.] Hornbeck said, "No, I really want you to take this job."  He said, "I appreciate the fact that you came and confronted me about this, 'cause I really didn't know she [superintendent for special education] had done that," and so I took that job at the Division of Instruction [Maryland State Department of Education] all the time I had been working in politics as a volunteer.  I wasn't, you know, ever getting any pay for and had met most of the local politicos, you know.  So I just kind of knew everybody and they kind of knew me.  Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] was looking for a state relations director, 'cause they were not getting the funding they should've been getting for their buildings and so forth.  [Howard Peters] "Pete" Rawlings told Dr. [Andrew] Billingsley the per--they were looking for a lawyer to come as their state relations director, but the lawyers didn't know the politics.  And they said, "You really need to interview [HistoryMaker] Vera Hall for this job."  So he sent me. At any rate, Dick Dietz I had an agreement that if either one of us--if he started looking for a job he'll tell me.  And so I said, you know, "I've done this. I've helped you get this position off the ground and it's running.  And I don't do maintenance very well; I like to do new things.  So let me get started doing something I'm going to put my resume together. I don't know where I want to go.  But," you know, "I'm just gonna put it together." In November, I put the resume together before the holiday.  And just put it aside. The first day back at work after the holiday I got a call from Dr. Billingsley.  Wanted to know if I was interested in this, in this job. I said, "Well, you got to tell me what the job entails first."
Speaker 2: Dr. Billingsley is president?
Speaker 1: Was president of Morgan, and so I didn't think to ask him how much the job paid.  But I asked him, you know, "What do you expect me to do?"  I said, "You know what they did to the last person who tried to walk on water" (laughter).  You know, he said, "Well why don't we--why don't you come out and let us talk about it," so I agreed to do that.  And then he sent his special--his executive director to come out and talk to me. And I said, you know, "It's really,"-- he took me on a tour of the campus, and I could have cried.  The campus buildings were in such deplorable condition I would not have sent my kid to stay in the dormitory at Morgan at that time.  And I stood there and said, "I will take this job.  And I'm gonna turn this around." And I did (laughter).  So that's the story of Morgan, and so I stayed there from 1983 'til 1992.
Story_ID: 196745
Speaker 1: But in the meantime, you were also embarking on a very serious political career.
Speaker 2: Right, what happened was, again, [Senator] Delores [G.] Kelley, who was one of our state senators had just run unsuccessfully for the [Maryland] House of Delegates, what I wouldn't run for. And [Senator] Barbara [A.] Hoffman, who was another state senator, had been one of the people that I worked with over time Rosalie [Silber] Abrams, and all of them.  I mean, if you look at those little jobs there, they always wanted me to go and arrange something.  So at any rate I mean, I even got arranged one time to go out and talk to [HistoryMaker] Jesse [L. Jackson] about the fight between him and [HistoryMaker] Roland Burris (laughter) in the national level.  So anyway that middle child syndrome I guess.  But any rate, I went on to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and started working there as their state relations director.  We started--my goal was to try to build some support beyond Senator [Clarence W.] Blount, who wasn't a graduate--who was a graduate of Morgan.  And he had always been the one who stood up in the halls of the State [of Maryland] and said you gotta do this for Morgan.  But he really didn't have support, so my goal was to try to get other people to come to support Morgan because it was the right thing to do.  And so I would have 'em out walking the campus and looking at the buildings.  And I'll never forget I walked in her gymnasium, and the kids had cordoned off one area of the building.  And they were playing basketball, and the pigeons were flying through the roof.  This is the kind of condition that the state had allowed Morgan's building to get into. Beautiful--driving by 'cause I hadn't been there since '60 [1960], '60s [1960s].  And at that time, you know, you went to the class buildings where you taking classes, and it looked beautiful.  But you go inside it was falling apart, and I looked at the money they had given over time and it nowhere near matched the need nor what they'd given to the other institutions.
Speaker 1: The predominantly white institutions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And at that time we were up for--Morgan--the first battle was dormitories, the second battle was the engineering school.  And--they were going to put an engineering school in this region, but they were not gonna put it at Morgan.  Yet, all the statistics said we need to  increase the number of black engineers and minorities and women and all this kind of stuff.  But they're gonna put it at you UMBC [University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland] out here on the beltway.  Well, that's when I met Clarence [M.] Mitchell [Jr.]--the elder, I called him--who was a man that you just felt humbled in his presence.  So we decided, you know, I kind of worked with Dr. [Andrew] Billingsley and the rest of 'em to get a battle plan for how we're going to get engineering at Morgan.
Story_ID: 196746
Speaker 1: And so in the meantime, we're still fighting for buildings--make a long story short, whenever [Thomas] "Tommy" Waxter [Jr.], who was one of the representatives for the [Baltimore] City Council in the fifth district decided he was going to run for comptroller, it created a vacancy.
Speaker 2: On the Baltimore City Council (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On the Baltimore City Council and at that time we had a majority white council.  So [Senator] Delores [G. Kelley] came to me and said, "[HistoryMaker] Vera [Hall], I think you ought to run for that. If you don't run for it I will."  I said, "Let me think about it." And the kids out of, you know, they 'bout out of school now.  And I could afford to take a risk on salary and that kind of thing, so, I'll think about it.  So in '87 [1987] I finally said I'll run for Baltimore City Council.  And I made that decision around December and got critically ill in February.  I was still going to work every day. We had inaugurated a new president at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], and things are going along a hundred miles an hour.  And we had created the scholarship committee, and I was out getting ready to decorate the hall for the scholarship committee.  And the scholarship ball and one of my friends noticed I--and said, "You don't look right."  So anyway I had a very serious illness called endocarditis, ended up damaging the heart valve, so I spent about thirty days in the hospital.  But while I was in there, I also had two or three weddings under contract.  And with my business partner we--I said, "Well just bring me some, some of the fabric and I'll just make up a model on the fashion doll for approval.  And when I get out of here we'll get it together."  So she did, and I had brought all the city council stuff and everything, 'cause they told me I would be a thirty-day least recovery time to get ahead of the infection and all of that.  So in the hospital I had charts on the back door, I had fabric.  So the doctor said, "You want me to rent another room for all of your paraphernalia and flowers," and so forth (laughter).  I said, "No, we're gonna call a halt to it," but any rate.  So here was the question: are you gonna be able to, to run to make this run for this office?  And the family was concerned, and they didn't want me to go out and, you know, well we don't know.  So my son [Reginald Hall] who was at Duke [University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina] as a resident at the time.  Wanted me to let him find a doctor there to kinda, look at this statistics and medical records and what have you.  And he said then we'll make a decision after that happens.  And so he did I went to Duke [University Hospital, Durham, North Carolina] it was, it was in May.  And I remember Lawrence [Hall] came to pick me up, and we're driving back and you could look up and see this beautiful sun shining through the trees, and just a gorgeous day.  And almost like out of the clear blue said, run for the job if you don't get it you were not meant to have it anyway.  If you get it, you know, then you just do the job.  That was it, I made the decision, and I went on, and that summer I ran for city council.
Story_ID: 196747
Speaker 1: And you got the job--
Speaker 2: I got the job, I stayed in [Baltimore] City Council [Fifth District] for four years, I went in with a new black mayor [HistoryMaker Kurt Schmoke] and new black council members.  And for the first time we had eight black council members.  Which wasn't a majority, 'cause you need ten votes to do anything in city council but when you got eight, you can get ten, I figured.  And I saw happening to Mayor Schmoke what had happened to me at the [Maryland] State Department [of Education].  And other places where the mayor says, "It's gonna be this way," and then somebody down the chain of command says, "no,"  you know, "but he really meant so-and-so."  And it could be the janitor said you sat right there and heard the same thing I heard.  That's not what the mayor said, and I'm sure he said what he meant.  So I got to be--and they had a lot of machinations going on but the person who got to be vice president of the council the first time out did not get to be his floor leader.  So he didn't have a floor leader he didn't have legislative experience.  And I had legislative experience, so I decided for myself, I'm going to make sure this man is successful.
Speaker 1: Mayor Schmoke?
Speaker 2: Mayor Schmoke, so without him asking me to do it I would just, if it's something I agreed with I said, "Look--here's what we'll do.  If I disagree with your position on something I'll tell you in advance.  And don't, don't ask me to go against it," I said, "but I won't go out and make a big public outcry about how much I disagree with you or any of that stuff.  So--but if it's something I agree with you on I'll fight for." So I would often be his unofficial whip on the floor getting his votes and all that. Now I was the newest member.  The newest black member but two other people [Mayor] Sheila Dixon who's presently council president.  Lawrence [A.] Bell [III] and Carl Stokes came on the council when I did and so over the four years I was in that role. I was also still working at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] still during the legislative liaison there.  We were building buildings by this time. The campus was beginning to take shape.  And I said it won't be too long that I can leave here, and I can go and start my sewing business.
Story_ID: 196748
Speaker 1: So I looked at some places downtown and I'm gonna retire early and I'm gonna go do this.  Well, the illness [endocarditis] then made a difference in that plan but I did have always in mind that the day they did [Edward P.] Hurt Gymnasium [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] I was going to leave.  So anyway in 1991 we had dedication for all those buildings.  And I told Jerry Manuel [ph.] I said, "Jerry, remember I always told you when you got a decent place to work I was leaving.  So this is going to be it, I'm gonna leave now."  And they didn't believe me but I went on and sent in my letter of resignation.  And I--it, it was the second letter of resignation I'd submitted.  I submitted one to the new president, who replaced Dr. [Andrew] Billingsley, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Earl S.] Richardson.  And he wouldn't accept it so, you know, I just felt that he needed his own person.  So I said, "I don't want you to look back in years to come and say if [HistoryMaker] Vera Hall hadn't stayed I might've done X."  I said, "I want you to have the freedom to choose," so he said--and I tried to find that letter I've got it in the scrapbook somewhere.  He asked me to stay in I did, and we did together, turn that campus around.  And today I'd be very proud to have you go look at it so it may and it, it's there will always be a need for Morgan--it's our Israel.  And Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] is another one of ours we need an educational homeland where kids feel they can be successful.  And people believe in 'em, and they're not on view.  And, and having to be--I say the specimen under the microscope to see if black folks really have any brains, 'cause we know we have brains.  But it's good to have teachers who know that, so it's a good place for kids to be today.  And I'm very happy that, you know, the enrollment has gone back up past six thousand.  It had dropped under four when I went.  And I feel that I was really one of the people who helped to bring--turned that around.  And the engineering school [Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr. School of Engineering, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] is now producing more black engineers than all the rest of the schools in Maryland combined.  And they have an excellent dean, Eugene DeLoatch, who was committed to producing himself over and over again.  Who became a very good friend of mine while I was working at Morgan, 'cause we saw eye to eye on so many facets of society and so forth.  So we'd spend hours talking and along with some other--Burney Hollis I mean, you know, they were--it was good to work with that group of educators and what have you.  Education--higher education politics being what it is, I was surprised that I really survived it, and I told my daughter [Kim K. Hall] that.  When she was going into higher education, I said, "Kim, politics--church politics is the worst politics in the world.  Next is higher education and--then you come on down to regular politics."  I said, "So you're going into a political arena--don't ever forget that."  So she's at--she went to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] out of college with her Ph.D.  A teacher said to her while she was at University in [sic. of] Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that she wasn't a scholar.  Mother had to say to her, all the evidence that she had that she was a scholar.  I said, "Don't you ever let anybody define you; you define yourself."  And that was my advice to both kids, my advice to her also would be prepared to take care of yourself, take a job that you like, 'cause you're gonna spend most of your life working. Same thing to Reggie [Reginald Hall], make sure you like what it is because you gonna spend most of your time working.  And I'm very proud of them--they--they're the kind of people that you'd like to know.  And my philosophy about raising them was I want to raise children that somebody can love besides their mother.  So they--they're very well loved by other people.  So, you know, that--I mixed all of it up sort of to say, throughout the whole story of my life I've seen the challenge.  And--believe that you can achieve it, you know just don't go in with the attitude, I can't make a difference because one person can make a difference.
Story_ID: 196749
Speaker 1: I won the chairmanship of the Democratic Party for the State of Maryland by one vote.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992] right after the Democratic [National] Convention.  The chair had resigned.  The governor [William Donald Schaefer] had somebody--congressman he wanted to be the vice chair, but I'd been working in party politics for twenty years.  I was on vacation in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Kweisi [Mfume] called me and said--because the congressman had gotten together and said, "We, we want to make Mike Barnes [Michael D. Barnes] chair."  So the party rule is that if the chair is male, the vice chair is to be female and vice versa--that's the Democratic Party rule.  And I had been sitting there as vice chair, and he says, "Well did anybody call [HistoryMaker] Vera [Hall]?" Nobody had.  Kweisi got on the phone called me in New Orleans and told me what was going on.  He said, and he said "Did anybody tell you?" And I said, "No first I've heard of it."  I knew Nate [Nathan Landow] was talking about resigning, but I thought we'd have a regular election.  And we would nom--we'd elected a chair.  He said, "No that's not how it's gonna be. They're gonna decide who it's going to be.  And when you come back it'll all,--."  I said, "Well let's stop right there."  I said, "I can move out, or I can move up. I'm not stepping aside for anybody" (laughter).  So anyway, Mike Barnes called me I said, "Mike, I'll talk about it when we get home."  And so when I got home the next morning there was some big article in the paper: Barnes and Hall to chair the Maryland Democratic Party--to co-chair.  Well, that was it, I said, "No, we won't."
Story_ID: 196750
Speaker 1: Mrs. [HistoryMaker Vera] Hall, we had ended on a story that you and someone else [Michael D. Barnes] would co-chair the, the Democratic Committee [sic. Maryland Democratic Party], and what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I was on vacation when I got the news that the change was coming.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I, I--they kept calling me so I said, "We might as well go home because, you know, this is just not gonna go away."  I was not--here I am working two jobs.  I was not anxious to become chairman of anything else.  But, what was playing in my head was, women always complain about not being given the opportunity.  And then black women complain about not being selected.  So there's not another person who's in this position except me.  If I don't stand up, even though I dearly did not want to do this.   If I don't stand up then, it negates all of that effort that we put into trying to get women to have equal footing in the Democratic Party as men.  And I won't be able to be comfortable with that, so I deserve a job.  If things were normal, they wouldn't have dared do this.  So by the time I got home--and Mike had proposed as a compromise, why don't we co-chair the Democratic Party because he was gonna bring some skills, you know, in the national and all this kind of stuff.  Well, I had national, you know, affiliations and all of that, so anyway.  And I like Mike; Mike is a very wonderful congressman we ended up serving as chair and vice chair.  And he was a wonderful vice chair, but any rate I said, "Don't say anything about co-chairing anything until I get home."  And if that headline had read, Hall and Barnes to co-chair, I might've had a slightly different attitude, because like I said I was not looking for a new job I had two.  And expecting my first grandchild and all that, so I was not after going to blaze any new trails.  And so when I saw that I said, you know, I told him not to say--I told everybody just not to talk about it until I got home.  And here's the headline in the paper.  So, no, I'm going to get on this phone as soon as I think that people are getting up.  And I'm gonna call all the people all over the State of Maryland that I have been working with all these years.  And I'm going to ask them for their vote.  And I'm going to see whether they're gonna be--stand up or not.  So I did.  I called through the list and when I got more votes, and many of them said, we really wish that you and Mike could make a compromise.  Because we hate to go through this and, you know, we've already got we've already got a chairman had a chairman who split up and the divided the party.  And we've got a governor whose subject to go and endorse [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan, I mean [President George H.W.] Bush.  And we really wish you all could work it out.  I said, "But if we can't work it out, where will you be?"   So, "Well, I'll have to vote for you."  So when I had more votes when I had enough votes that nobody else could win, then I decided, gey, I didn't have anything to lose.  So then they start putting pressure on me. They had [Ronald Harmon] "Ron" [Brown] to call me, and Ron and I got to be friendly, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ron?
Speaker 2: Brown, when he was chair.  And, and they got Senator [Paul Spyros] Sarbanes, who's another friend of mine.  And several other people--they didn't really want to call, but they felt they had to.  To see if they could diffuse the situation.  And I said to Ron I said Ron, Ron said, "Well,  Vera , can you win?"  I said, "Let's put it this way: I don't know if I can win, but I know who--Mike can't."  And he said, "Well if you think you got the votes," he said, you know, "just--go ahead."  He said, "but I'm," you know, "I hope you all get this settled,this is national,"  you know, "we gotta win this White House [Washington, D.C.]," and I said, "Ron, I understand," I said, "but I've been here in the vineyard now for bout nineteen, twenty years.  And I've worked, and I've earned this and they wouldn't do that to somebody else.  So I've got two places to go: up or out.  And I don't mind getting out."  I said, "I'm perfectly fine to get out."  And, "Well we hope you won't do that," and Sarbanes, [Senator Barbara A.] Mikulski, all of 'em called me.  But the women were like, "Hey, we hope she'll do it, we hope she'll do it," you know.
Story_ID: 196751
Speaker 1: And when you won, what impact did that have on the organization [Maryland Democratic Party]?
Speaker 2: Well first of all I believe in inclusion, you know, that you gotta get Democrats of every stripe together.  We don't need all these caucuses and all that; we need to work as Democrats if we want to take this White House [Washington, D.C.].  We need to get behind whoever the nominee is gonna be and really work on that.  So people knew that, that had been my philosophy 'cause I had made arrangements for a couple of national conventions and all that.  So they knew how I worked.  So they were quite comfortable with how I worked.  The rank and file Democrats loved it, 'cause they had felt excluded by Nate Landow [Nathan Landow], who was a very wealthy developer.  But I told Nate I said, "Nate, you don't have any human relation skills?"  So I was talking to him--I was at my desk at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] all of sudden it got to be really funny to me that here I am telling this man how to live.  And he could buy and sell me five times, so I started laughing.  He said, "Well, what's so funny?" I said, "Here I am talking to a millionaire I don't know how many times over.  And I'm sitting here at my desk, a poor working girl, and I got the audacity to tell you where you're wrong" (laughter).  So he kind of chuckled, but he needed human relation skills that he did not have.  You know, you don't necessary learn them in development (laughter), you know.  And I had, had to learn them over the years. So any rate he wanted me to run as his vice--as his lieutenant governor, let him run for governor.  I said, "Nate, we disagree on too many things I can't do that."  And there, you know, there were some talk about that afterwards.  But I won with one vote, and that was Dan Morehand [ph.], who was a physician out in Baltimore County [Maryland] cast that deciding vote.  And Nate was gonna continue to have people vote when the vote was deadlocked I mean, you know.  He would've had to convince at least two people to change their mind.  They were not gonna become convinced. So that Saturday morning [HistoryMaker] Shirley Nathan-Pulliam, who is a house member of the [Maryland] House of Delegates and also central committee.  And I had driven together to Indianapolis [Indiana] where the vote occurred.  And at first you, you're numb; you don't believe that you now have all this stuff you gotta do.  And Tom Koch that I showed you his picture earlier was, was the, the treasurer.  Tom said, "[HistoryMaker] Vera [Hall] let's be practical. But who's gonna open the shop in the morning?" (Laughter)  "We gotta get a key, and we gotta,"--I had already in anticipation of retiring from Morgan paid for myself to go to a retreat in Colorado.  Where we were gonna be doing haute couture with Ann Hyde. I'd looked at it in the magazine for years and said, "When I can do it I'm going to spend that time out there."  And I'd already paid for it scheduled to go.  And here I have to become chairman of the Democratic Party and leave within a week to go out to this retreat.  And I wasn't giving up that retreat.  So Tom said, "Look, I'll get everything together," but the first thing that happened was the people who had been big fundraisers began to peel off.  The unions began not to raise the money they had raised.  We had seventy-some thousand dollars worth of debt; we were way in the red.  All the money was in white banks that they did have in CDs and that kind of thing.  So first of all I said if I'm gonna sit here as chair doing a job I'm not really that excited about, then the minority community has to benefit some way or other.  So, the first thing I did was to take the CDs and put them in Harvard [State] Bank.  And then I hired Elaine McCloud, who was a member of the central committee as the caterer for a big fundraiser we're having at the art museum [Baltimore Museum of Art, Baltimore, Maryland].  And because she was not union and they, you know, they didn't do anything to help her become union. They were going to picket the event, so I arrive at the museum of art, and here are white males out there picketing the event.  And some of our local people were afraid to go through the pic--I said I'm standing on principle.  I went right up through the ranks went in the museum we had a great time.
Story_ID: 196752
Speaker 1: Do you think it--you're heading the committee [Maryland Democratic Party] do you think that it helped the, the Democratic Party in Maryland?  Or do you think--what impact do you think it had on the Democratic Party in Maryland (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We won big, [President William Jefferson] Clinton took Maryland by storm.  And Maryland benefited greatly and Baltimore [Maryland] in particular with Clinton as president.  We got--you'll see on there where I served on the high-rise task force with trying to figure out what to do about public housing.  And we got $100 million over ten years to build rebuild housing because they built those houses in the '50s [1950s] to try to keep, you know, the races segregated.  And they built it thinking that people won't be here long--they'll come in, and there get themselves together in the steel mills or what have you.  And they'll move out into their own homes but their own thinking about moving into their own homes was not moving into the American dream.  It was going to ghettorise even more, and that's what they did.  So I worked on that but if we hadn't had--we had [HistoryMaker] Mayor [Kurt] Schmoke.  He appointed me to that commission, and we had Clinton in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  So for a while we had the stars in line, and we were able to make big differences in housing in Baltimore [Maryland] city.  And I got my brick from the first high-rise that was torn down.
Speaker 1: And some of the naysayers did they eventually come around?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I got Susan [W.] Turnbull, who is still extremely active in Montgomery County [Maryland] and as a DNC [Democratic National Committee] woman.  I--once we were in the middle of a campaign whenever I was elected, and Governor [William Donald] Schaefer went off and endorsed [President George H.W.] Bush.  I was speaking in Howard County [Maryland] that night, I think, when I heard on the radio.  Since I know the press will be all over me the minute I stepped foot out of this car so what am I gonna to say to them.  And I thought there are three times when you're equal in life: when you're born, when you die, and when you vote.  We lost one vote that's Schaefer's vote, and we're gonna provide two votes for his one.  So instead of I said, "All of you who have not decided how you gonna vote or decided not to vote or what.  We need two people to offset what the governor has done."  And said, "We're going to go for two-for-one," so that became a slogan.  And we won big. And course Schaefer doesn't forgive anybody anything.  And he and I always--I mean when he was mayor I wrote him a long letter about how he was underfunding schools and stuff.  And from that time on I got a poinsettia every Christmas (laughter).  So but my point was that here my kids are in a school, Baltimore City Public Schools--and nobody is going to look at them when they go off to college.  And say poor child you went to this school in the city and you didn't have microscopes they don't want him to know what he should've learned, so it's your responsibility to make sure that happens.  So he and I had this sort of cautious kind of sparring relationship all these years.  And he, he just didn't do anything, you know, mean he just kind of kept his hands off the party--and, normally he would be the--when you got a sitting governor, who's, is the same party that's the head of the party.  But he didn't act like it, you know, so I ended up having to be the Democrat.  So [Kathleen] Kathy Vick in Louisiana called me when she heard the news and said, "[HistoryMaker] Vera [Hall], do you realize you do first black woman to head a Democratic Party in the country?"  And I hadn't--
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts?
Speaker 2: Here's a little country girl from North Carolina being the first black woman to overcome those odds.  And, and now what do I do to show that we can do it, you know.  So my goal was to--and I've got a whole bunch of speeches and stuff about it to try to get everybody involved.  And move the Democratic Party forward and stop apologizing for what we believe.  And believe what we believe and move on.
Story_ID: 196753
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Let the work I've done speak for me (laughter).  I'd like to be remembered as a person who believed that the impossible was possible if you were willing to work for it.
Story_ID: 196754
Speaker 1: And what are you hoping your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Hard work and dedication (laughter).  I have tell you a story about my niece. One time, who was not doing well in school, my namesake, so I said during those years the late '80s [1980s], and '90s [1990s] I was just so busy I didn't have time to keep tabs on the kids.  And my, my job in the family was always to make sure everybody was reading (laughter).  So Toni [ph.] had got--she was in high school, and I called to talk to my sister [Barbara Webb Mott] about something.  I said, "How'd Toni do," she said, "oh she did terrible."  I said, "What, her grades are terrible?" I got Toni on the phone I said, "Look, your mother tells me your grades are terrible, come over here" (laughter).  She presents herself, and I'm going through and she did--she had done everything wrong.  And they were getting ready to make an adjustment in her educational program.  And I said, "No we're going to school Monday, and we're gonna talk to all the teachers."  So I went over anyway when I got to lecturing her about how awful it was.  And I said, "Who do you want to be like when you grow up?"  She said, "I want to be like my father," so I went through one of his attributes and so forth.  So whenever we were finishing up the discussion making a decision about how we're going pull her out of the doldrums and what have you.  She said, "I don't want to be like you; you work all the time," (laughter).  So the kids will remember that I worked all the time. They'll also remember an aunt who was always in their corner.  Always took time to make sure that whatever they were trying to do--I kept a file on them in college, you know.  I made my oldest niece go back to school, and I gave her a job, and I said, "We're gonna make hours that she can go to school.  But the deal is I'm going to pay what you're making but you gonna get a degree," that's Stephanie [ph.].  So she went on she got the degree, and then we got Toni through and I said--sure she went to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] and I kept her records.  And then whenever she graduated I said all right now I'm passing this job on to you.  You're gonna keep David's [ph.] records and you gonna make sure that he's doing what he supposed to do.  I said, "Because sometimes you have to change and I also I said," and "I'm not going to be the one making everybody's dress's any more you gotta--somebody's got to do something."  So what did I do this Easter she has two little girls, and I made them sister dress.  So I guess as long as I'm around, and I'm able I'll continue to do what I've always done and try not to complain too much about it.
Story_ID: 196755
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of [HistoryMaker] Mayor Kurt Schmoke and me signing my first bill on housing legislation. It was landmark legislation that changed how we did code enforcement in the City of Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: About 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And people can really come together now.
Speaker 1: Okay that's my, my family Reggie [Reginald Hall], Kim [F. Hall], Lawrence [Hall] and me around 1970.  That's a church photograph they, they had us all come in for pictures.
Speaker 2: Is that okay, [Edgar] Carey [Lane]?
Speaker 1: Okay that's a picture of my dad Wiley Haynes Webb, my sister Barbara [Webb Mott] on his right and me on his left.
Speaker 2: About what year was that?
Speaker 1: Let's see I was about--it was before Ellie [Ruth Webb] was born, so it had to be in the late '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me at the new [Oriole Park at] Camden Yards [Baltimore, Maryland] at the mayor's box and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About what year?
Speaker 1: [Baltimore] Orioles game.  I think it was in the '90s {1990s}.
Speaker 2: Nineteen nineties [1990s]? Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my graduating class from Armour High School [Riegelwood, North Carolina].  I'm on the end all the way over there.  And that's my principal on the back, and it's 1955.  That's me sitting in front of my desk at city hall doing some research.  Probably writing a bill or something--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's in the '80s [1980s] around '80s--nine [1989].
Speaker 2: And although it's like that we will fix this one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When it goes to post-production.
Speaker 1: And that is Lawrence Hall, my husband of forty-nine years, and that was taken in about 1954.  That's my mom and dad; that's Kara [Elizabeth Blanks] Webb.  Kara Blanks Webb on the left and my dad on the right, Haynes Webb, and that was in the middle '60s [1960s].  That's a picture of me as a young teacher back in, about '65 [1965].  That's me between 1991 and I think it was inauguration day whenever we were taking our seats on the council in city hall.  That's another church photo of the family; I like to call it the 'American Gothic.'  It's Reginald, Kim, me and Lawrence.  It would be about 1970.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION): Think it's a grainy picture?
Speaker 1: It's the texture of the photo.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a school picture again of me.  In the--I think at Hilton Elementary [School, Baltimore, Maryland] somewhere around '69 [1969], '68 [1968] and '69 [1969].  Another school picture.  I think that one would have been somewhere in the late '60s [1960s].  That is [Rochelle] "Rikki" Spector, Kweisi Mfume , Iris Reeves and me at our celebration when we won the [Baltimore City Council] election in 1991.
Speaker 1: Now this one's really small Carey.  Can you do it that way?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):  Is that working for you?
Speaker 1: That is me on the, on the right in the black suit and my two sisters-in-law, Catherine [ph.], and Sara [ph.].  And this was before any of the children.  So it had to be before 1957.
Speaker 2: This way, Carey?
Speaker 1: That's, that taken at Atlantic Beach, North Carolina.  And that was-that would have been in '56 [1956], '55 [1955] or '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Okay.
