Story_ID: 102826
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer; Neculai Berghelea, the videographer.  And I'll have you just introduce yourself and spell your name out for the camera.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Carla Ann Harris.  C-A-R-L-A; A-N-N; H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And you're date of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is October 28th, 1962.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Port Arthur, Texas, St. Mary's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 22nd, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: 78 Lloyd Road, Montclair; my home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 102827
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start with five basic questions, People magazine type questions.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is hamburgers.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is black; second, red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is the summertime.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I take that back.  I'd say summertime and Christmastime, they're tied.  I love Christmas because of all the joy that's around Christmas, and it's about His birthday, and it's a very spiritual time and a very joyous ti--joyous time.  I love the summer because there's just a, a freedom that you feel in the summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't think I found a favorite yet.  There are a lot of places that I like.  I'm still in the search of "the favorite", but I--I've enjoyed Jamaica, I've enjoyed Italy.  So I don't have a favorite yet.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me."
Story_ID: 102828
Speaker 1: Great.  So we're gonna start, we're gonna start with your family tree, and we're gonna talk about your mother's side of the family first and then your father's side.  So your mother's name--mother's maiden name?
Speaker 2: My mother's maiden name--my mother's name is Billie Joyce Williams.  That was her maiden name.  And her family hailed from--ultimately, from Shreveport, Louisiana, but then moved to Port Arthur, Texas, and that's where I think her tree was.  Her mother's mother, whose name was Jeanette Williams, and she had a fairly large family and they all settled in Port Arthur, Texas as well.  I don't know the generation behind that.
Speaker 1: So where did your, your mother grew up in Shreveport--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --or Port Arthur?
Speaker 2: No, my mother grew up in Port Arthur, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now what can you tell me about your mother's background?
Speaker 2: She was probably from I'd say a lower middle class family.  She would say she was poor, but from what I could tell, it's a lower middle class family.  She was an athlete.  There was a woman who was very influential in her life, probably more influential than her mother, a woman by the name of Arreader P. Guidry, who was her P.E. teacher, her physical education teacher, who became a counselor.  And my mother really wanted to pattern her life around A.P. Guidry.  She was also the girls' basketball coach.  So you could tell, and these, these women have remained friends and they're in their seventies now.  They called them Guidry girls--Guidry's girls.  And she really instilled in them the power of getting an education and the power of following your dream and working really hard, and no one in my mother's family, up unto that point, had gone to college, so I think my mother was the first in her family to complete college.  And she went to college on a athletic scholarship to--and graduated from Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas], but when she went to Prairie View, she had to end--she had to stop going to Prairie View because the money ran out, and then she received her Associate's Degree at Compton College in California.  She went to California because some of her family members had moved to Los Angeles [California].  And so she stayed there for a few years and then came back to Prairie View to finish up her degree, I believe in either '51 [1951] or '53 [1953].  And she began teaching back in Port Arthur, Texas, as a physical education teacher at Lincoln [High School], which is where she had graduated and which is where A.P. Guidry still was.  And she stayed there until 1971, not at Lincoln, I think she went to another school in Port Arthur until my family then moved to Jacksonville, Florida, which was my father's [John Harris] hometown.
Speaker 1: But before you move on, can you spell A.P.'s name out for me?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Aureda, I think is spelled A-U-R-E-D-A [sic, A-R-R-E-A-D-E-R].  I don't know what the P. stands for.  And Guidry is G-U-I-D-R-Y.  And she just died the Summer of 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Before we talk about your--them getting to Jacksonville and her meeting your father, why did she go--why did the fam--why did she go to Compton in--or what year did she actually go out to Compton, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know the year she went to Compton.  Let me think.  Let's see, she was born in '35 [1935], so she actually finished high school [Lincoln High School] in '53 [1953], and so she probably started Prairie View--I could call her because she's at home, but she, she started Prairie View, my guess is the Fall of '53 [1953].  So she probably went to L.A. in '54 [1954], because I think she had only finished her freshman year when it was clear that they weren't gonna have money again for the next year.  And the reason she went to Los Angeles is because the woman who's now the matriarch of my mother's side of the family, her name is Audrey Smith, she was the one in the family who had left Port Arthur, who had a great job working in Los Angeles, had a family, had established a family, had two daughters, and was middle class, and knew that my mother was trying to make it and said you can come on out here.  And my mother's sister had already gone to Los Angeles before then, and so that was a place to go if you were trying to get out of Port Arthur or do something different, so that's where she went, to L.A.
Speaker 1: How many siblings were in your mother's family?  How many of them--
Speaker 2: Two, besides her.
Speaker 1: So it's just--they, they had a really small family?
Speaker 2: They had three girls.
Speaker 1: Three, three girls.
Speaker 2: Three girls.
Speaker 1: What happened to--one went out to L.A., your mom--
Speaker 2: Then went out to L.A. and then the baby stayed in Port Arthur, yes.  And she's been deceased since '71 [1971], actually; she died the year we left.
Speaker 1: Did your mom ever talk about her life growing up in Port Arthur, Texas?  What was life like for them?  Did they live on a farm?  Did they live in the city?
Speaker 2: No, they lived in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They lived in the city, and in fact, not far from the school.  And as I said, it was--
Speaker 1: How big is the city?
Speaker 2: The ci--oh, boy, I don't know how big Port Arthur is now, but I know it was probably fairly small then because it was an oil town, like most of the towns in Texas.  And there was a big Texaco refinery, and I think that was sort of the big corporation that was there, at that point.  And most of the black people in Port Arthur who were prominent, at that time, were either doctors or they were school teachers.  Yeah, I don't think there were a lot of lawyers or businesspeople unless they were entrepreneurs.
Story_ID: 102829
Speaker 1: What did your--let's--your mother's [Billie Joyce Williams] mother, what was her name and what did--you know, let's just start with her name, where she was born, and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her name was Jeanette Williams.  I think she was born in Shreveport, Shreveport, Louisiana, and I want to say that she was born in 1905, okay?  And she was a domestic, for most of her life.
Speaker 1: Now, did she spend most of her life in Shreveport or did she spend most of it in Port Arthur?
Speaker 2: I'm gonna say that she spent most of it in Port Arthur because I think they had been living in Port Arthur for most of my mother's life.  So if I do the math and, and think about that, yeah, she would've, she would've lived most of her life in Port Arthur, yes.
Speaker 1: Did you know her?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, she didn't--
Speaker 1: And what type of --
Speaker 2: --die until 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was she like?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was tough.  I think one of the things that I am--that I talk about a lot is being tough, and when I think about where I've gotten that from, all the women in life have been very tough, very resilient.  I'd say headstrong, focused, determined, and that was certainly my maternal grandmother and my paternal grandmother [Emma Jane Harris Smith].
Speaker 1: How did your maternal grandmother get from Shreveport to Port Arthur?
Speaker 2: I think her family migrated there, yes.
Speaker 1: And your paternal grandfather, what was his name, his date of birth?
Speaker 2: You mean ma--my maternal?
Speaker 1: Your maternal, yes.
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  I don't know and I don't think my mother knows.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's always been speculation as to who her dad was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't know him then?
Speaker 2: Didn't know him at all, but definitely grew up with my grandmother, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And knew her for all of my life.
Story_ID: 102830
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Billie Joyce Williams] have any stories about her life as a child that stands out for you?  Any little anecdotal stories like--
Speaker 2: None--
Speaker 1: --"Oh, I did this," or, "I did this," or, "This Easter was great one year."  Any stories like that?
Speaker 2: No, none that I can think that really stand out.
Speaker 1: Did they live in a black community?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They lived in a black community, as I said, not far from the school that she attended [Lincoln High School].  And I think that the--when I think about the stories that my mom told about her, about her life, they centered more around her school life.  That's how I know how--because even from a little girl, I knew how powerful Mrs. Guidry [Arreader P. Guidry] was in my mother's life and what a role model she was.  And so when I think about her past life, I think about her as a student.  And she probably was my biggest role model, with respect to being a student, because my mother was very smart, did very well in school.  And I think the only difference between us, with respect to our school career, was probably that she was a, she was an athlete and I wasn't.  I was an aspiring athlete, but I was always heavy and she wasn't.  And so she played--she ran track and she broke records in the State of Texas as a, as a track star; she was a basketball player.  So that's what I remember about, about her childhood.
Speaker 1: Did she--did your mother have any role models, at the time, any--outside of Ms.--
Speaker 2: I think it was Ms. Guidry.
Speaker 1: Ms. Guidry?
Speaker 2: I think that was who her, her focus was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was Gibson--was, was Gibson playing tennis then?  Althea Gibson?
Speaker 2: I think she--
Speaker 1: Was any of that stuff happening?
Speaker 2: I, I think it happened a little bit later.
Speaker 1: Later?  Okay.
Speaker 2: So--and, and when my mother talked about people who were influential in her life, Althea Gibson was a name because I remember reading a book about Althea Gibson very early on in my life because it was a name that my mother had mentioned.  And, and that's how, again, I also became interested in black people who had accomplished a lot in their life and broke barriers because I think Althea Gibson was the most prominent black sports figure when my mother was coming along.  And, and again, because she was--yeah, tennis, and I think she also did track, if I'm not mistaken, that was, that was a focus.
Speaker 1: So your grandmother was a single mom--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and raised three daughters?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Good for her.  And she--and, and decided to do it and never--I mean, in Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And was Texas legally segregated at the time?  Was this--was Lincoln a segregated school that your mother went to?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe it was a black school.
Speaker 1: And it was named after Abe Lincoln or--
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  My guess is that's probably right, but I don't know for sure.
Story_ID: 102831
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother [Billie Joyce Williams] finishes school, meets your father in Jacksonville [Florida]; your father's name and his date of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's name is John Harris and his date of birth is February 2nd, '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: And what did your father do?
Speaker 2: He has been, for most of his career, a captain of a commercial fishing vessel.  And he did--he left Jacksonville to go work with his father, whose name was Rockefeller Brazle [Sr.], because I know you're going to ask me that, and in, in--I think when he was 16 or 17-years-old.  And that's how he actually met my mom because most of the commercial fishing industry, or part of the commercial fishing industry back then was in the Gulf of Mexico, in that Louisiana/Texas corridor.  And all the guys--and that was a great job for black men, at that, at that point, and it was a job that was six months on, six months off, but you made good money, however that was defined back then.  And most of the guys who worked in Louisiana would then come into Texas and, you know, and meet people, as you might imagine, almost like the sailors would come off the boat or the merchant seamen would come off the boat.  And that's how he actually met my mom because one of the taverns that I think he went to, my aunt, my mother's older sister was working there, at the time.  And so it was one of those, "Oh, you got a sister?"  "Yeah, I got a sister."  And so that's how he met my mom.  And they actually didn't get together until 1960.  And they got together because Hurricane Carla was wiping out Texas [1961], or was threatening to wipe out Texas, very similar to what [Hurricane] Katrina did to New Orleans [Lousisana], and my father came by and said, "Hey, do you want to get out of here?" in Port Arthur [Texas] and they went to, I think Houston [Texas] or Galveston [Texas] to get away from the hurricane.  And they got married in '61 [1961], I came along in '62 [1962], and they named me Carla behind Hurricane Carla, which put a whippin' on Texas in 1960, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you talked about this tavern that they, that they went to; now, was it--like was, was that industry segregated, do you know?  Were there enough black fishermen to whereas they would--the, the tavern that they would--was a black tavern?  How did--
Speaker 2: Probably.  Probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because I'm thinking of the movie "Perfect Storm," you know, you see all these guys, but they're all white.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, you'd never envision that being--
Speaker 2: That's because it's New England.
Speaker 1: It's New England, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you'd never even--I've never envisioned that black version of that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which there had to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --down South.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.  Because I would say that the--yeah, I would say that it probably was--largely that portion of the commercial fishing industry was largely the, the workers were largely black because I can remember that my paternal grandfather, I think was an engineer, at one point on the boat, and one of my uncles was the captain.  And it was my father's aspiration to work his way up to ca--captain because I think he probably started on the boat as a young man as like second engineer, and then worked his up--his way up to pilot because being a pilot of the boat was a big deal, and then eventually up to captain.  So when he retired from that industry in the mid-80s [1980s], he retired as captain.
Speaker 1: Are there any black-owned vessels or how does it work, the companies?
Speaker 2: I think it's, I think it's a company that you--that, that then puts out these boats to get the commercial fish.  And they're pogie fish and they're used for all kinds of things, so they're not fish like you and I would eat, they're, they're used, you know, for commercial uses, and I've never quite figured out exactly what they use these fish for, these fish for.  But I don't think the companies were owned by, by blacks at all, no.
Story_ID: 102832
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your paternal grandmother; what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Rockefeller's wife.
Speaker 2: Right--no, not Rockefeller's wife.
Speaker 1: Not--all right.  Okay.  Who, who was Rockefeller then?  Rockefeller was--
Speaker 2: Rockefeller Brazle was my paternal grandfather.
Speaker 1: Grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he and my grandmother were never married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my paternal grandmother, Emma Jane [Harris] Smith, who is also still alive, she will be eighty-five on September 6.  And she's also a pistol.  And she is an entrepreneur, probably the most prominent entrepreneur in my family because she used to work at King Edward Cigars, as a young woman, and then left that, I want to say in 1949, or somewhere thereabouts, because it was always her dream to have her own shop, or again, in, in today's parlance would be beer tavern, her own tavern.  Because she used to pass by and see again, the people who were doing well in the black community had their own stores; they either had their own confectioner stores or they had their own--but they used to call them back then, juke joints or beer taverns.  And she always wanted one, so she saved her money and decided that she was going to open it--open up one.  So she convinced this guy to give her a chance, even though she didn't have all the money to open it up at that point, but she promised she'd pay him.  And so she rented out the place and she made it a huge success.  She bought the place, she bought the corner, she bought the corner across the street, she bought the corner across over there.  And I remember--she's one of the people, I think, that first exposed me to business.  And again, not business as we think about it in terms of Wall Street, but business in terms of having your own thing because as a young girl, because I was so good in math, I used to actually work on--help doing her books.  She had an accountant and then I started learning how to do it, and then I started learning how to do her--the books for her taxes, for her state taxes.  And, you know, by the time I was in high school, I could actually do her monthly--you know, her monthly books so that she could pay her taxes and get her papers in order for her accountant.  But that was my first idea of--you know, I never had a concept that you couldn't do something because again, all the women in my family, particularly the women, and the men, if they really wanted to do something, they did it.  They saved, they focused, they did it.
Speaker 1: Who was the man in her life now?  Just to get it clear.
Speaker 2: Well, my, my grandfather, the one that I call my--(simultaneously)
Speaker 1: No, the--her successful-the successful grandmother.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Emma Jane Smith.
Speaker 1: Emma Jane.
Speaker 2: She married the man that I consider my grandfather, his name is Joe Smith; he died in 1995.  And she married him, I guess in '61 [1961] or '62 [1962].  So for my growing up life, this is who I called "granddaddy."  And he had a career, a long career at Kerr-McGee.  And I've never quite sure what he did at Kerr-McGee, but I think that it was something that was, you know, support or janitorial related, something like that.  But that, that, that was the man in her life, yes.
Speaker 1: Saying granddaddy reminds me of my old southern roots because that's what we used to say, "Granddaddy."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Granddaddy.
Speaker 2: Granddaddy, Grandmamma, yeah.
Story_ID: 102833
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in Port Arthur, Texas, the earliest ones?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can think back as far as I was--as three.  We had a, I would say, probably middle class family, and I remember going to Catholic school, I remember kindergarten, I remember playing with my friends.  At--I don't know what specifically I can tell you, but I remember that it was, you know, a great childhood.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood for me?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The neighborhood was largely black neighborhood.  And again, back then, you know, when you're that young you don't really have any sense of class, so you don't really know upper class, lower class, middle class, so but knowing what I know now, I'd probably say, you know, middle class neighborhood, nice houses.  Everybody seemed to be, you know, gainfully engaged.  You know, the guys across the street--the guy across the street was a post--a postman.  The, the woman--and they were my godfather and godmother.  My godmother was a P.E. teacher, like my mother [Billie Joyce Williams].  The guys to our right--I don't remember the people to our left too well, but the, the family to our right, I think the father was a, was a bus driver and the kids went to public school.  I, I, I went to Catholic school all of my life because we're Catholic and that's what my mother was focused on, make--making sure that I had a Catholic education.  Yeah, but that, that's pretty much what, what--all I can remember.  There were two, two kids that lived next-door, and as I said, the next--the, the people to the other side, I don't remember what they, what they did.
Speaker 1: What was Sundays like?  Did you go to a Catholic Church as well?
Speaker 2: Went to a Catholic Church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Now, were there any divisions?  I mean--and I'm asking you as an adult.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Like were Catholic--black Catholics more upper middle class than say black Baptists or was it just a mix?  Did religion have anything to do with the class you were in?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Not at all.  I don't remember there being--knowing--again, knowing what I know now, to your question, I don't recall there being any divisions at all; I think it was just a function of where you from.  And remember, when you're in that part of Texas, a number of people had come from Louisiana, and Louisiana is, at least certain parts of Louisiana are very heavily Catholic, and so I think that's where a lot of the--you know, the black Catholics in Texas, or at least that part of Texas that come from.
Speaker 1: What were holidays like?  Christmas?
Speaker 2: Fun.  Yeah, I think that's one of the reasons that Christmas continues to be a special time for me because it was, you know, always a time where you got gifts, and my mother always made a big deal out of wrapping gifts.  You know, we always had a Christmas tree, so it was always a fun time.
Speaker 1: Food, which--what foods were on the table?
Speaker 2: Mainly, what we would consider today, black foods.  So there would be a turkey, collard greens, yams, macaroni and cheese, things that I still cook today.  I have--every year, I have a New Year's party for my friends and it's what I call the traditional black New Year's, so I have black-eyed peas, and fried chicken, and ham, and collard greens, and macaroni and cheese, and the, the whole spread; sweet potato pie, the whole thing.
Speaker 1: That you make yourself?
Speaker 2: That I make myself.
Speaker 1: Right on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you described the block, you sort of described the neighborhood, but describe the community, and by that, I mean were there community leaders?  Were there people that you considered to be movers and shakers?  Well, your grandmother [Emma Jane Harris Smith] was within that community, so she was because she had the stores.
Speaker 2: That's the paternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the paternal--
Speaker 2: Remember, she was in Florida, so--
Speaker 1: Oh, she was in Florida?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in Texas, if you're--
Speaker 1: In Texas.
Speaker 2: --talking about Texas.
Speaker 1: In Texas.  I'm talking about Texas.
Speaker 2: I don't have any recollection of anybody really being a mover and a shaker, while I was in Texas.  Because my family really wasn't involved in, in city politics, so there's nothing that comes to mind.
Story_ID: 102834
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When did you leave Texas?  What year?
Speaker 1: In 1971--
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: --so I was eight when we left.
Speaker 2: And there you went to Jacksonville [Florida]?
Speaker 1: And there I went to Jacksonville, but even then I would say that I didn't have any sense of people being a mover and a shaker, as we, as we think of it today.  There was certainly, a concept of people who were important, so I felt like my grandmother [Emma Jane Harris Smith] was important; her doctor was a black doctor, his name was Dr. Cullen [ph.], so he was important; my uncle was important because he also had a tavern and he knew a lot of people; my other uncle, these are my grandmother's brothers, he was important because he had a drugstore and it was one of the most prominent drugstores in, in his community, and it was a black community.  So in my mind, they were important people, but again, as I think about movers and shakers, people who have power today in our--in, in our environment to pick up the phone and make something happen, either they're in the political sphere or they're prominently--they're prominent in their particular industry, but they know a lot of people, so they can make things happen.  That concept of, of power, or movers and shakers, I don't think I, I had a real sense of that, you know, when I was, when I was younger.
Speaker 2: But they were definitely movers and shakers to be able to own--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --their own businesses and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: So in Jacksonville, what was the community like, the--what--the black side?  I'm (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yes.  It was larger.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was my first--I remember that's my first memory of Jacksonville relative to Port Arthur, is that it was so much larger.  Now, in retrospect, it doesn't--it--I've been living in New--in the Northeast for twenty-five years--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so it doesn't seem like it's that much larger, but I remember thinking that there were just more people who were doing a number of different things.  And again, this concept of middle class that I don't think I, I knew back then, looking at it now, if I take today's lens and put on that, there were a lot of people who were doing, you know, different things.  So it wasn't just the people who had the job in the post office, or who were driving the buses, or, or were in education, there were people who were working in offices, there were people who were lawyers, there were a lot more doctors, there were people who were just doing different things that I hadn't--that I had not heard of before.
Story_ID: 102835
Speaker 1: How were you involved in the neighborhood [Jacksonville, Florida]?  And by that, I mean, 4-H Club, YWCA?
Speaker 2: When I was younger, I was a Girl Scout for a period of time.
Speaker 1: You're big with the Girl Scouts now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or is it the Boy Scouts?
Speaker 2: No, the Boy Scouts where--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I had been on the board.  And I've done some things with the Girl Scouts of, of Hudson County [New York] here, but I was--
Speaker 1: You were a Girl Scout?
Speaker 2: --I was a Girl Scout for a period of time--I was a Brownie then I was a Girl Scout, and then very quickly, I started doing other things like bowling.  I remember, I think I was fifth grade that my mother took me bowling, and then we found out that there was a black bowling league run by this woman named Claudezeal Alvin, who is still alive today.  And I look back--because she did a tremendous thing for our community because a lot of kids hadn't been exposed to bowling, but she taught us how to bowl, she got us competitive.  We started competitively bowling around the city.  So we would, you know, whenever there was a juniors tournament, she would always make sure that we were entered, you know, Claudezeal's league was entered.  And many times, again, looking back, it, it never really hit me, Shawn, but now that I can look back on it, again, with today's lens, many times we were the only black kids in those lanes who, who were competing in doubles, and in singles, and in teams.  And it didn't dawn on me then, it was just about winning, you know.  And, and, and so we ended up competing from, as I said, I, I stayed in Claudezeal's league from fifth grade on through to my senior year in high school and then tried to come back and bowl with them, you know, when I was in college because I went home after my freshman year at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts].  But she--there were a number of people who got exposure, and again, looking back, that we never would have gotten.  I remember senior year going around the State of Florida bowling, competing for scholarship money.  You know my mother [Billie Joyce Williams] and I getting in the car driving down to Miami [Florida].  We didn't know where the heck we were going, we had never driven that far, but I had a tournament in Miami and she took me down there to compete.  And again, looking back, that was an experience that proved valuable as I, you know, went on from Jacksonville, went on to Cambridge and went on to new things.  Never was afraid to go someplace I hadn't gone before just because of those experiences.
Speaker 1: She was a community leader?
Speaker 2: She was a community leader.  And, you know, I would not have defined it in that way back then, nor do I think she would have defined that herself, but looking back, absolutely.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: C-L-A-U-D-E-Z-E-A-L; A-L-V-I-N.
Story_ID: 102836
Speaker 1: Okay.  So moving on, we're gonna talk about your years in school.  You said you were, you were always Catholic schools; first grade, do you have any recollections of your first--were they--were you taught by nuns?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Priests?
Speaker 2: My, my--
Speaker 1: Were they black?
Speaker 2: No.  My kindergarten teacher was black, was not a nun.  My first grade teacher was a nun for part of the year and then she left, and, and then she was replaced by another nun.  My second grade teacher was not a nun, she was black.  And my third grade teacher was a nun and she was not black.  And then fourth grade, I was already at--I was in Jacksonville [Florida], and my fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh grade teachers were all black women.  And part of the classes in the seventh grade was taught by the--I think the math class was taught by the principal, who was a white nun.  And then my eighth grade teacher was my seventh grade teacher, she moved up to eighth grade, and again, the math was taught by the principal, who was a white nun.  And then when I went to Bishop Kenny High School--actually, I didn't have any black teachers, yeah, yeah, throughout.
Story_ID: 102837
Speaker 1: Who did for you what A.P. [Arreader P. Guidry] did for your mother [Billie Joyce Williams]?
Speaker 2: I didn't have an A.P. in my life that, that I was exposed to during my academic career.  I'd probably say when I look back, because people have asked me this question a lot is--with respect to who was my role model, I'd have to say my mother was my role model, and I laugh at that because at the time, as I was growing up, I never would've said that because of course, you know, mother and daughters are battling, and--but what made me realize it was when people started asking me the question and started saying, "Why do you do everything that you do?"  And, and I'll never forget my first--what I consider my first really big interview was with [HM] Caroline Clarke, of Black Enterprise, and they did a, a story on me in February of '03 [2003], and I remember her saying--she cut off the tape and I remember her saying, you know, "You're fearless.  That's what I'm getting from you is that you're fearless."  And again, I had never thought about it like that, but there aren't very many things that I'm afraid of, especially when I'm going into new territory.  Sure, we all get those moments where we lack confidence and we get a little bit worried, but ultimately, to move on, no, I don't have a fear of, of going forward.  And I look back and say, "Where did I get that from?"  And my mother--and, and she--and my mother teases me all the time about, "Why do you do so much?  Why are, why are you always going?"  And, and I said, "Ma, you created this monster.  What are you talking about?"  And because growing up, my mother took care of a family, she was a P.E. teacher, she decided she was gonna go back and get her Master's.  She wanted to get her Master's in counseling, but something didn't work out for the, the particular--she was gonna get it at University of North Florida in Jacksonville, and their counseling program had some requirements that either were gonna take her longer, or she'd have to go back and do other courses, and so she decided to take the administrative route and become a school administrator.  But my concept was, "You can do that."  So the idea of having a family and not being able to work, that, that doesn't work for me.  And the concept of, you know, working, having an extracurricular life, because my mother bowled, she played bingo, she hung out with her friends, she had other things, she had me, she had my father, she had her career, so the concept that you can't do all of this is a foreign concept to me.  And that's--so when I look back and say, "Who's my role model?"  I have to point to her.  And also, the whole idea of, of persevering, always doing your best, giving your all, that's what she did all the time, at least that's what I saw.
Story_ID: 102499
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just to wrap up that your--one of your role models was your mother [Billie Joyce Williams], and we talked also about--what was her name, Claudezeal?
Speaker 2: Claudezeal Alvin.
Speaker 1: Claudezeal Alvin made an impact on you, being fearless, also taking you places.  Any other people that you can look back and did similar things that may have helped you that you didn't even put together until maybe now that you're thinking about--I mean, were you a member of Jack and Jill [of America]?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There--Jack and Jill, at that time, at least to my knowledge, wasn't in my community [Jacksonville, Florida], or my mother wasn't involved in that part of the community where Jack and Jill may have been.  But, yeah, I'd probably have to say that it was my mother, and then my friends' mothers, because I spent time with them, but my mother is the one that really sticks out in my mind.  I mean, the whole concept that you could, what we call today multitask and be successful at it.  And my mother and my father [John Harris] used to always say to me, "Make sure you do well, you know, in school."  And my mother told me very early on, and again, my, my parents didn't spend a lot of time talking about black and white and racial discrimination, but they would say things to me like, "You have to be better than."  And my mother always used to say, you know, "Make sure that you," especially when I went to high school [Bishop Kenny High School] where for the first time, I was now in a mixed environment, and she, she used to say to me, "Carla, you have to go all the way to the top.  You have to go overboard.  If you want the A," you know, "If you want an A minus, you have to earn an A; if you want the A, you have to earn an A plus; and if you want the A plus, you have to be so far out that there's just no way anybody can do anything other than give you what you're due."  So I always had this concept of making sure that it was clear, that I would never be on the cusp because she, she said to me subtly--not so subtly, that the cusp would always mean the lower side for you.  And so again, you don't--I didn't grow up resenting that or, you know, feeling angry about that, it was just fact.
Story_ID: 102500
Speaker 1: Jumping ahead a little bit, but will you pass that onto your children?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And it--
Speaker 1: That's something that holds true today?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it's, it's interesting, Shawn, that you should ask me that question because I have this conversation with my, my peers all the time because of awareness because if they have that kind of awareness, then that might x I think that my generation is failing to pass on some of that perseverance, determination, work hard, stick to it-ness that we were given.  Because we were the first generation of, of black people that I think really had the opportunity to go, really go for it, where the field was somewhat open.  There's always stuff.  There's always a couple of mine fields, but for the most part it was open, but our parents taught us you, you know, "Somebody tells you no, you get up again, you keep going."  There is a "yes" somewhere in the equation.  "Somebody knocks you down, get up.  I don't want to hear it.  Don't bellyache.  Get up, keep going." whereas, I think my generation, we're so consciously and unconsciously consumed with making sure that our children have, physically, have everything that says they are equal because we live in the great homes, we drive the fancy cars, our kids can afford to go to the, the boarding schools or the top schools that are--or the schools that are considered the top schools in our environments.  And we're working so much so that we make sure that they have that, that we're not sitting down having those one-on-one conversations where we're kind of saying, "Yeah, you know, the world's not fair and we're working towards getting it there, but in the meantime, this is how you must play this game."  I don't think we're having those discussions because many of my peers don't want to have that discussion with their children.  They say, "I don't want to tell my kids that there's an issue out there.  I don't want them to have that kind."  And so as a result, what I'm saying is in the generation that's coming behind us, as I interview them, as I talk to them, as I mentor them, they don't seem to have that stick to it-ness, that perseverance, that, that, "Well, you know what?  I don't like this, but I'm gonna keep going.  I'm gonna knock this wall down."  They get slapped down and they stay down a little while, and then they kind of slink around to the other side and find something else to do.  Now the generation behind them that I'm seeing, they have some of that, that fire that I think my generation have--has, and that we were forced to have because our parents force fed us.
Story_ID: 102501
Speaker 1: Great.  So when you, when you look back over your elemen-- before you graduated, what sort of sights, sounds, smells, things like that, remind you of those early days in Jacksonville [Florida], today?  A sight, a sound, a smell takes you back to Jacksonville?
Speaker 2: Well, I could tell you a smell that takes me back to Jacksonville, and that's the smell of sulfur because, you know, they had a lot of plants in Jacksonville that every now and then they'd give off a pretty bad smell.  And then there was always King Edward Cigar that was there and that would give off, you know, a pretty bad smell every now and then, but they're no, they're no smells that I think of that make me think of home.  If I smell Hungry Jack biscuits baking, I think about my grandfather [Joe Smith] because that was his thing.  He al--no matter when I went to my grandmother's [Emma Jane Harris Smith] house, there'd always be some hot Hungry Jack biscuits there baking, but nothing else that I can think of.
Story_ID: 102502
Speaker 1: When do you remember being black or being announced that you were black, like in a sense that people were gonna--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --like the conversation we were just talking about that people don't have with their--when did you realize that you were black in that--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, the reason I laugh is because I remember I was in Kindergarten, and I went to an all-black Catholic school, but I remember when I came home the first day my mother [Billie Joyce Williams] said, "How was school?"  And I said, "Oh, it was great and there's a, a bunch of little white kids in my class."  And my mother, "What do you mean there's a bunch of white kids in your class?"  I said, "There's, there's probably," and I--you know, I'm naming them off.  And this is the first day of school, because I have a great memory, and so I memorized some of the kids' names, so I must have mentioned like eight or ten names, and, and my mother was confused.  And she came to school the next day because she knew this was an all-black Catholic school.  So she comes to my class and she looks in the class, and then the next day I get home and she says, "Honey, you don't have any white children in your class."  And I said, "But what about," you know, and she said, "They're black.  They're light-skinned black."  So--because again, you have to remember that all I had seen in my life pretty much had been black people and white people, and all I knew was white people were lighter than me.  And we had a black and white TV, so there weren't any shades of black, there weren't any shades of white, and I go to school and I see--and remember, again, this is Port Arthur, Texas, not from Louisiana, and Louisiana has a lot of light-skinned black people, so a number of those people are in Texas.  So that was my first introduction to the fact that there could be light-skinned black people and dark-skinned black people and then what was the difference between a black person and a white person.
Story_ID: 102503
Speaker 1: And the education continued and I, and I still laugh because when I was a freshman at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], and again, growing up in the South, you know black and you know white, and you don't know--when you think of white, you don't know Jewish, you don't know Italian, you don't know Russian, you don't know Polish, you don't know German, you don't know French; black, white.  And, and I--and despite now I know differently, and when I think about some of my classmates that I went to high school with, I can now think about some of them who had, you know, Isra--who were from Israeli descent--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Jewish, yeah.
Speaker 1: --or who were--you know whose family was from Syria or, you know, other, but there weren't a lot.  And I remember my freshman year singing at Harvard at--in the Radcliffe Choral Society and I was sitting next to this young lady, and I won't say her name on tape, but she had very kinky hair, and, you know, again, I know a lot of black people with kinky, curly hair, and we would call that in our community "good hair," right?  And I sat next to her and I was--you know, for a couple of weeks I had been, "Girl this, girl that," speaking to her as I would speak to another--
Speaker 2: Girl.
Speaker 1: Right, another black woman.  And something I said and she said, "Do you think I'm black?"  And I said, "Yeah."  And she said, "I'm not black.  Why did you think I was black?  I'm not black."  And she was so offended or so she seemed to be, and so of course, that offended me and I'm thinking--and then finally I said, "Because your hair is as nappy as mine, that's why I thought you were black."  And she wasn't, she was Jewish, and so that was my first introduction. So that's one of the things that I love about my, my Harvard career was because that was the next awakening of this big world out there around me, away from the South, the first time I had ever been out of the South, and so the first time I had had exposure to people who were from all over the world.  And, you know, people ask me all the time, "What would you repeat?"  I would repeat my undergraduate experience and my business school experience tomorrow in a heartbeat because I learned far more than I learned in the courses.  And the courses were terrific, terrific, but I also learned so much about people, and about myself, and about interacting with people because we were different people.  I had never seen a bagel, you know, in the South, biscuits.  You don't have bagels.  Just like people in the North didn't know about grits, you know, and--but interestingly enough, by the time I was a junior in college, bagel shops were popping up all over Jacksonville [Florida] because of the migration from the north of a lot of people in the Jewish community now coming down into Florida, and into different parts of Florida, not just south Florida, now in northern part of Florida, and so, you know, very interesting.
Story_ID: 102504
Speaker 1: So when do you re--I'm, I'm gonna ask you two things in one.  I'm asking you currently, how do you feel about the N-word and its use, and then you told me the story that I'd like for you to repeat about when it was announced to you, the first time that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --you were--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Sure.  Sure.
Speaker 1: First, how do you feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's--I don't know was it Richard Pryor or Bill Cosby?  I think first Richard Pryor, because he used to use the word all the time that realists, you know, said, you know, we should curb the use of that in our community, and I know Bill Cosby had said some things about it since.  And I certainly don't use the word anymore and I certainly used it a lot growing up because it wasn't a big deal to me at the time, because it was used so previdly (sic)--pr--prela--it was used so much in, in my community, that it really had no significance to me despite the fact I knew where it came from.  And remember, I grew up during the Blaxploitation era, so I saw all of those movies and that was my first realization too that that word was really used in a derogatory--I'll never forget my first Fred Williamson movie, which was "The Legend of Nigger Charley," that he, that he acted in, and that was when I first realized how terrible that word was and, and how it was used, you know, for us; and I must've been 12 or 13 when I first saw that movie.  And it still didn't hit me such that I didn't use the word because again, in various times within our community, there's slang that's associated with that.  You know, "N please" used to be the--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: --used to be--
Speaker 1: Ha.  Right on.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Do you remember how long ago?  That was the, the thing.
Speaker 1: I haven't thought about that since.
Speaker 2: Right.  Me neither and now I can't even say it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I can't even say it, but back then you'd say it--
Speaker 1: That's a great t-shirt--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --"N please."
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Absolutely.  And--but now I guess my feelings about it are that we can't use it because it did have such a, a horrible--it was such a, a horrible part of our history that I don't want to educate people about that if we don't have to, so I don't use it.
Speaker 1: You don't want to educate people about what if we don't have to?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't want to have to go through the--we need to educate people about how it came to be, but I don't want to keep talking about it if we don't, if we don't have to.  Now, you do have to talk about it, to some extent, so that people are educated, but, you know, I would hate to open up a dialogue that caused people to use it again, because I just--I think, as I said, it just connotes a bad part of our, a bad part of our history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're at the enlightened Howard [sic] or the Ivy League Howard. [sic]
Speaker 2: Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Harvard.  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And someone calls you that?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was interesting because growing up in the South my entire life, I was never called that by anybody outside of my community, and, you know, you just didn't do that.  The--you know, now--again, now looking back with this lens, those were war words if a white person were to call a black person that in the South at that time.  And here I was walking down the street in Cambridge, Massachusetts on a Saturday night and a group of townies passed by and leaned out the car and said, "Hey little nigger girl."  And I remember stopping dead in my tracks and it took my breath away and that was the moment, frankly, that that word took on a different significance for me and that's when I never wanted to use it again because then I got it.  It hit like a ton of bricks in my chest.  What I intellectually knew, what I had studied, and I--as I said, I said I had to come to the enlightened North in this bastion of education, you think about Cambridge and Boston [Massachusetts] and you think about all the universities that are with how--within how many square miles of each other, that that's where I was called that, coming from the South, so that, that really hit me.
Story_ID: 102505
Speaker 1: How did you get to, to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I got to Harvard because in my junior and senior year at Bishop Kenny High School [Jacksonville, Florida], which was a great high school and it really prepared me well for I--the Ivy League, I really didn't have a concept going into Bishop Kenny about the Ivy League, but by my junior year, all of my classmates who were in these honors classes with me were starting to talk about the Ivy League.  And people were starting to talk about how competitive they were and how difficult they were to get in.  Now, remember my family was just focused on me going to college and they really did not participate and say, "You ought to go here, you ought go to where--there," it's, "You're going to college."  And at the time, I wanted to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles in Los Angeles, California] because my favorite aunt, my mother's older sister, lived in Los Angeles so that's where I wanted to go; not knowing anything about UCLA, but that's where (unclear) lived and that's where I wanted to go.  And--but when I started hearing my, my classmates talk about Harvard and Princeton [University in Princeton, New Jersey] and Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] and Cornell [University in Ithica, New York], and I went to see the guidance counselor, and I was always a very good student; I was on my way to graduating summa cum laude, and my guidance counselor sort of said to me, "Well, tho--I--those Ivy League schools are very difficult to get into, and, you know, maybe you should think about some of the Florida schools.  You know, you, you don't want to set yourself up for failure."  And I've always been negatively motivated, so when you tell me I can't do something, then I really want to do it.  So that did not sit well with me that he was telling Richard and Andrea and Nancy that they should go for it, and these were people that were sitting in honors classes with me, and yet he was telling me that I should think about some of the Florida schools.  So naturally, I decided I was gonna go for it too.  And I also noticed that at certain periods during the school day, these kids were leaving x class or y class because they had an interview with the recruiter from those schools, so I started signing up to go to those schools.  I had never heard of Cornell, but I remember going to sit with the Cornell guy.  I had never heard of Princeton, but I went because Richard was going, and, and Bob was going, and Joe was going, I was going too.  And so when I realized how difficult it was to get into the Ivy League, that's when I decided--because my mother [Billie Joyce Williams] had always, again, instilled in me to go for the challenges, go for the top. My father's [John Harris] mantra was always, "You better get As.  You better get As.  You better get good grades."  And I remember coming home one time, actually they couldn't find me because I was scared to come home because I had gotten a B because I didn't know what my father was going to say because I had gotten a B.  And, you know, so from him, it was always, "Get the good grades."  My mother was always, "Go to the highest."  So I--this was the highest, this was the best, I was gonna go for it.  And how I chose Harvard over some of the other schools that I was accepted to was--
Speaker 1: Where were you accepted?
Speaker 2: Cornell and Princeton and Harvard were the three Ivy League schools that I applied to, and then I applied to all the Florida schools.  And the Florida schools were offering me full scholarships, and some of them were even offering me stipends to go there, and so when I decided I wanted to go to Harvard, my folks were like, "Are you kidding me?  How are we gonna pay for this?"  And I said, "I don't know, but we're gonna figure it out," you know.  And this concept of loans and, and whatever else I'd be saddled with, I didn't care, I was going.
Story_ID: 102506
Speaker 1: Just take me back to the day you received the letter that you actually got in [to Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was excited and I told my mother [Billie Joyce Williams].  My father [John Harris] was working because he--his commercial fishing time was from October to--no, from April, from April 'till October, and then he was home from October to March and then he would leave again.  So when I got the acceptance, he wasn't there, my mother was there, and all my mother said was, "That's great.  How we gonna pay for it?"  She didn't say, "(unclear) my daughter got into Harvard," it was like okay, and because she's always been very laid back.  And--but I just knew that that was the right place for me to go, but part of it was of all the Ivy League schools that I was accepted to, Harvard was in a city, and I thought that, at that time, that I might be a singing star and that if I was ever going to get discovered, I'd have a better chance of getting discovered in Boston [Massachusetts] than I would in Princeton, New Jersey or Ithaca, New York, and that's how Harvard won over the two.  Because I said, "Well, there is New England Conservatory of Music [Boston, Massachusetts], there's Berklee School of Music [Boston, Massachusetts], there's the Boston Pops, you know, let me--I'll go to Harvard."  And I went sight unseen.  I did not do any college visits.  My family did not have the time or the money to do the college visits.  And I will never forget, my senior physiology teacher, he--when he was trying to impart upon us his wisdom about colleges, he said, "If you don't have the money to go visit the schools that you're interested in, then you shouldn't go.  You probably can't afford to go there.  So you need to go visit these schools and if you can't then," and I remember thinking, "Well, I'm not gonna see any of the schools, not even the ones in Tallahassee [Florida] or Gainesville [Florida], but I'm going, yeah.  And it was the best decision--one of the best decisions that I've made in my life.
Speaker 1: How did you pay for it?
Speaker 2: Through a combination of my--I did have some parental contribution, but I had scholarships and I had loans and that's how we did it.  And I was--when I got to campus, I had a on-campus job, and by the time I was a senior, I had three jobs, and five classes my junior year, four or five, full load my senior year, and I was involved in three activities, but I worked while I was there.  That's why when I talk to kids today, I say, "Don't tell me you can't do it.  I graduated magna cum laude from Harvard, I had three on campus jobs, a full load of classes, did a thesis.  I don't want to hear it."
Story_ID: 102507
Speaker 1: So when you--when you're at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], your years at Harvard, were they--how did you get into finance?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because you started off--but before you even tell me how you got into finance, who introduced music to you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because by the time you get to Harvard, you're already an accomplished--
Speaker 2: I'm already into music.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And how I started singing was I was nine-years-old in my fourth grade class, and it was raining, and the teacher obviously knew that we couldn't go out for recess, and so she said, "Let's do a talent show.  That's what we're gonna do for our recess today."  And the guy that, that was sitting in front of me by the name of Moses Mailer [ph.], who's still a dear friend today, he turned around and said, "You need to go up there and sing.  You always singing in my ear.  You need to go up there and sing."  And I really didn't even have a concept, at that point, that I could sing.  And my favorite song at the time was Freda Payne's "Bring the Boys Home," and so I went up there, (singing) "Fathers are pleading, lovers are all alone, mothers are praying, send the sons back home."  And that was it and I won the talent show, and I've been singing ever since.  That was it.  And so all through high school, I joined the chorus and I sang solos when we had our, our concerts.  There was also talent shows at school, so I'd put together a girl group.  Because I really didn't have a concept that I would be a soloist, I always thought of myself as part of a group like The Emotions or The Supremes.  And most of my friends really didn't have any desire to sing, they didn't have any desire to dance, but I'd beg them and they'd come in there, they'd, they'd do it with me.  And I remember my junior year, though, I did win the talent show and I was a soloist.  I did Donna Summer's "Last Dance."  And then senior year, I forgot what we did, I think we did something from The Emotions or, or worth--Earth, Wind and Fire, but from then, I would sing--I would--from then on I was singing.
Story_ID: 102508
Speaker 1: And then I went to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and decided to join the Radcliffe Choral Society, and my motivation for joining the choral society, again, as I said, I'm negatively motivated, when we went to the freshmen exercises, they, they were singing the song, "She Wore Cherry Ribbon in Her Hair, Hair, Hair," and there were no black people in the choir.  Now unbeknownst to me, there was one black girl who was in the choir, but she wasn't there for freshmen exercises.  And I decided to take that on as a challenge because I said, "Well, if you can really sing, Carla, then you should be able to sing [Igor] Stravinsky and [Johnann Sebastian] Bach and [Felix] Mendelssohn," because up until then I had sang Aretha [Franklin] and Gladys [Knight] and Shirley Caesar and Andrae Crouch, but no concept of, of being able to sing classical music.  So for me, it was a challenge again, to try to see if I could sing that and I was accepted into the Radcliffe Choral Society.  And again, a wonderful experience for me and the only thing that I would do differently, if I could go back and do Harvard again, is I would sing Kuumba [Kuumba Singers of Harvard College], because that was the black group on campus and that--they did mostly gospel.  But I couldn't justify singing both groups because I also wanted to--I was very concerned that I did well at Harvard academically, and I was scared to death of singing four nights a week because the Radcliffe Choral Society rehearsed Monday, Wednesdays and Thursdays, and Kuumba rehearsed Tuesdays and Thursdays, so I would be leaving Radcliffe Choral Society on Thursdays, then going to Kuumba, and I said, "Boy, if my grades suffer, how am I gonna tell my daddy [John Harris] that I was singing four nights a week."  He's gonna say, "You didn't go to Harvard to sing, what are you doing?"  And so I sang with the Radcliffe Choral Society the first year, with the intentions of singing in Kuumba the second year; my sophomore year, but then I was elected to an office in my second year at the Radcliffe Choral Society, so I said, "Aw, I got a leadership role, I can't do that."  And then after my sophomore year going into my junior year, there was talk of us going on a European tour, and I had never been to Europe before and I thought, "Boy, what an exciting," so I stayed with the choral society my junior year, and I was also still an officer.  And, and then after my junior year, I ended up going to Europe to sing, which was my first realization of how music transcends everything, race, ethnic--all kinds of ethnicities, sex, it just transcends everything.  And that experience for me was singing in Leipzig, East Germany in a church where Bach composed as a young man.  And the people who were in the church I knew did not speak any English, and of course, I spoke no German.  And remember back then, that was before the wall [Berlin Wall] came down, that was the Summer of 1983, and so this was communist territory and we were given guides that we didn't ask for while we were there.  And the song that I was soloing was "Ain't Got Time to Die" because a portion of our concert, we had negroes spirituals in it, and I had a couple solos, and I remember seeing those people crying and reacting the way they should react if you understood the words of the song.  And all of a sudden, it took my breath away because I said, "Oh, my gosh, I am singing this in a way--in the way that the writers meant it and they're getting it and they don't even understand the language."  So it's about the delivery of the song, it's about the music; it's about what I'm putting in there.  And that was such a powerful feeling that, you know, there was no way you were ever gonna get me to stop doing music at that point, so.
Story_ID: 102509
Speaker 1: So how did you, you weren't, you weren't--what made you not a music--I mean not a finance--
Speaker 2: Oh, you asked me--
Speaker 1: --major before, you--
Speaker 2: --about finance.
Speaker 1: --you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You came into Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a--
Speaker 2: I came into Harvard thinking I was gonna be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: A lawyer, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So let's talk about how I got to finance.  I decided that I was going to be an economics major, again, because I was negatively motivated because as a freshman, I was trying to figure out my major and we--there was this course at Harvard called EC 10, Economics 10, and it was the big introductory economics course where 400 people took the course, but then there was also these study sessions that you would go to, which would be your real course where you worked with a--generally a grad student and you really learned economics; you didn't really learn in any of these big seminars.  And the guy who was my freshman leader was a guy from Ghana; I'll never forget his name, Ignatius Peprah.  So when it was time to pick majors in the spring of my freshman year, I went to him and said, "Well, I'm thinking about x and he--economics."  And he said, "Girl, don't you do economics because you can't think.  You can't think.  Do something else.  But you can't--don't do economics, do," and I was already thinking about government because I was thinking at that time about being a lawyer.  So the minute he told me not to put down economics as my major, I went right over to the freshman prefect officer and I put down economics and government; I was gonna be a double major.  And that year, that spring, a lot of my friends were doing this program called the SEO program, Sponsors for Educational Opportunity.  It was their first year actually going to a few Ivy League schools to recruit students of color to come down to Wall Street.  And they, at that time, had convinced probably six or seven Wall Street banks to take on these interns with the hope of exposing minority kids to Wall Street, with the hope of having them then think about Wall Street critically as a career.  And the beauty of doing it at these particular firms is that these firms had pretty much made the commitment that if they found somebody that they liked and they could train them, then they would in fact hire them full-time and then maybe, you know, that person would have a career at, at the--at that particular bank.  And a lot of my friends who I considered very smart, who were Ec. majors with me, did it that summer; well, the summer after my freshman year, I just wanted to go home.  I had, I had made it through Harvard, I made Dean's list, I wanted to go home.  And so I went home that summer, but I promised myself that the next year, I would seriously think about doing the SEO program.  So sophomore year, I interviewed for the SEO program and I got it.  And they took thirty kids from I--primarily, Ivy League schools that summer and placed them at investment banks who were, who were contributing.
Story_ID: 103149
Speaker 1: Continuing with SEO [Sponsors for Educational Opportunity].
Speaker 2: Yes.  The SEO program, as I said, my year in 1982, that was the second year of the program, they had thirty students, most of which came from Ivy League schools.  As I recall, Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] was represented, Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut], Columbia [University in New York City, New York], I believe University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I think maybe a Smith [College in Northampton, Massachusetts]; I think that's it, if I can think about the distribution of my class.  And we went to various banks that were involved in the program.  I think Lehman [Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.] was in the program then, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, what was then First Boston.  And my year, Blyth Eastman Paine Webber was--it was their first year into the program, and Blyth Eastman Paine Webber was the third leg of the Paine Webber family that was focused on investment banking because back then there was Paine Webber Mitchell Hutchins was the asset management piece, Paine Webber Jackson Curtis was the retail piece, and Blyth Eastman Paine Webber was the investment banking piece.  And I was played with a guy by the name of Jimmy Haddon, who is still on the Street, as a matter of fact, James Haddon.  And he was in public finance and so I went to work for him.  And that was the summer that frankly changed my life because I had no idea what investment banking was all about.  I re--I thought I wanted to be a lawyer, but my perception of a lawyer was, you know, that you could run, run the show, you could call the shots, you'd have a certain lifestyle, it would give you a certain level of prestige.  And, you know, back then, Perry Mason was my idea of a lawyer and everyone said, "Aw, you can talk a lot.  You like to argue a point.  You should be a lawyer."  But that summer, I realized that it was the business people who called the shots.  The lawyers made it happen within the context of the law, but the business people said "yay" or "nay" to that particular point in the contract.  The businesspeople said "This is how much money we're gonna raise and this is when we're gonna go to market, this is how we're going to sell the story."  And that's when I realized that Wall Street gave me a lot of the things that I thought I was looking for in law, and it also gave me a chance to marry my interest and love of analytics and, and quantitative analysis, to marry that to being able to call the shots.  So that's when I decided that I was going to get an MBA [Master of Business Administration].  Before then, I didn't even have a concept of an MBA, but everybody that I met that summer that was in investment banking had an MBA.  So in my, my economic parlance, an MBA was the barrier to entry in going into investment banking.  So that summer I said, "Well, I'm gonna get a law degree and I'm gonna get an MBA."  And that's how I became focused on investment banking.  Then my pursuit was after college, I would get in one of these two-year analyst programs because again, that was the entree to investment banking full-time.  The track at that time was to come out of college, do a two-year analyst program, go back to one of the top five business schools and then go to Wall Street to start as an associate.  So I thought that would be my track, but instead of doing just business school, I was going to do law school and business school.  And even as a senior, when I told my professors I was going to do law school and business school, they dissuaded me from doing that.  They kept trying to say, "Carla, you're only going to use one degree, so do you really want to go--do you really want to have the opportunity costs of two more years in school, and the money associated with that, if you think you want to come out and be a banker?"  But I, you know, being a typical Harvard student, you want to keep all your options open.  I thought that's what I wanted to do.  And it was ultimately the financial considerations that made me decide to drop the law school, because by the time I was in the joint program, because I did get into Harvard Law School and Harvard Business School, and by the time I was in the joint program, I realized that I really was gonna come out and do this investment banking thing.  And given the financial considerations and the debt that I would have if I were to pursue the full four-year degree that maybe that wasn't worth it after all.  And if I felt less than a whole person for not getting this law degree, after two years of Wall Street, I'd have enough money, I could go back and, and get it.  Well, nineteen years later, I haven't done that, but I still sort of say, "Hey, late 40s, early 50s, I could always go back to law school," so who knows, that may be something I decide to do.  But I've had an incredible ride on Wall Street and I'm still enjoying what I'm doing.
Story_ID: 103150
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate undergrad at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1984--
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: --from Harvard undergrad, and then from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1987.
Speaker 1: And your first job, did you go--
Speaker 2: I went--
Speaker 1: --back to Jimmy [James Haddon] at Paine Webber [Blyth Eastman Paine Webber]?
Speaker 2: No.  My first job out of Harvard Business School was with Morgan Stanley, and I spent my first four-and-a-half year--four years in mergers and acquisitions and then moved to work for Bob Scott [Robert G. Scott] as an operations officer in equity capital markets, and then from there, started doing equity deals.  So I spent, I've spent the bulk of my career now in capital markets.
Story_ID: 103151
Speaker 1: Who helped you along the way, outside of James [James Haddon], who else was there and what support did they give you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'll say that James helped me that summer.  He, he really wasn't somebody that I used as a mentor after then; I might have had maybe one or two conversations with him along the way in my career.  And I'd say that there were a number of outside people that I considered mentors.  When I say outside people, I mean people that weren't in investment banking at all.  And then there were also really good friends of mine.  And this is an important point, Shawn, that, you know, people looking at this that I'd want them to understand that if you're going to do this business, and frankly, if you're gonna do any business, there's usually two, two types of people that you need to help you along the way; one is a mentor and one is a sponsor.  And the mentor does not have to be someone that's in your environment; it's helpful because they understand your context, but they don't have to be.  The single most important attribute of a mentor is someone who has, as their only agenda item when they're talking to you is you; you're the only thing that's on their agenda when they're talking.  Not their own agenda, they're not processing their own stuff as you're bringing a problem to them.  They know you very well and it has to be somebody that you trust because you need to be able to tell that person the good, the bad and the ugly.  And you also need to be able to tell that person when you're scared or when you just don't know, and they need to be able to give you the answers and be honest with you and lay it out for you and not feel like that's a problem in doing that.  The sponsor is somebody, on the other hand, that's carrying your paper, so they need to be somebody that's in the room.  And when I say carrying your paper, all the decisions that are important to your career are made when you're not in the room.  Promotion decisions are made when you're not in the room, compensation decisions are made when you're not in the room, new assignments--new assignment decisions are made when you're not in the room, and a sponsor needs to be someone who's pounding the table for you, really speaking up for your case.  So they don't necessarily need to know the good, and the bad, and the ugly.  They need to know the good, the good and the good.  Now, they need to know a little of the bad because if something comes up behind closed doors, they need to be able to defend it, but they need to be your passionate advocate when you're not there.  So you need both of those because no organization is a true meritocracy.  When you think about the definition of meritocracy in, in any dictionary, there is a subjective part of the equation that makes you successful and an objective part of the equation that makes you successful.  So the objective part is, do you do the work correctly?  You know, is it on time?  Is it pristine without error?  Is it right?  Is it creative?  Is it forward thinking?  What--however the work is valued in your, in your environment, but there is this subjective piece, do you fit?  Do I like you?  Are you playing the politics correctly.  And so that subjective piece is always the piece that's hard to, to master, and you need to have somebody behind, behind closed doors that says when all is said and done, there's always gonna be a loser in an organization.  There's always gonna be someone that doesn't get paid the same way that somebody else or somebody loses out on this promotion, and that sponsor needs to be the person that say, "Okay, you can make that happen to somebody else, but it's not gonna happen to her, or it's not gonna happen to him."  And you need to have both in any environment because there, there aren't true meritocracies that exist across all industries.
Speaker 1: The subjective side, is it tougher for African Americans than for anyone else?
Speaker 2: I think it's at the margin tougher for people of color because there is, there is a natural human tendency to see things a certain way when you're looking at somebody that looks like you.  Like, I will make an assumption because you look like me about what you can and cannot do; now that assumption could be right or wrong, but it's a natural thing.  And so I think that you have to work a little bit harder sometimes to educate people about who you are and what you can do, if they look differently than you, because they're looking through a different lens.  By definition, we're all looking through the lens of where we come from and, and how we've been educated and how we've been sensitized and what we've been exposed to.  So it might be, and I shouldn't say that it always is, but it might be and you should be prepared for it to be a little bit harder for you to create the perceptions that you want people to have about you because everybody comes to the table, everybody comes to the table with their own set of baggage and you might have to work through that.
Story_ID: 103152
Speaker 1: On Wall Street [New York City, New York] is--has it been tougher for you as a woman or tougher for you as a black, a person of color?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  And I'll tell you that--and I have said this often public, often publicly, that as a black woman, I never would've thought that I would've heard myself say that there's more of an issue with being a woman than there is an issue being black.  As a black woman, I never would've thought I would've heard myself say that, but I do think that over time, if people can get past the ra--if people can get past the race issue, there's still the fundamental difference that, you know, we have different plumbing, right?  And so I'm looking at you in a certain way with a certain perception, and you're looking at me in, in a certain way with a diff, with a, with a certain perception.  And so I do think that women, again, have to work a little bit harder to work through the stereotypes or the perceptions that people might have about who they are and what they can do as a woman.  And so I won't say that it's been harder, but I do--I would say that I've been more, I've been more aware of, of people having a perception about me because, because I'm a woman, and I would attribute it to be because I'm a woman and not because I'm a black woman.
Speaker 1: And you would know the difference--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I would know the difference.
Speaker 1: --between race and being a woman?
Speaker 2: I think I would know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --especially being from the South; I think you are, you are more sensitive to that, yeah.
Story_ID: 103153
Speaker 1: Talk--let's talk about some of your achievements.  You know, you were part of the largest acqui--was, was it the, the public--
Speaker 2: At the time--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At the time, it was the largest IPO [Initial Public Offering] in U.S. history and that was the IPO of United Parcel Service, UPS.
Speaker 1: UPS.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that was--I'd say that was a hallmark in my career for a number of reasons.  Number one, it was the largest deal that--the largest IPO that had ever happened in the United States.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was in 1999.  Number two, it was, it was really a wonderful experience because for the first time, I had worked on a company that people knew. I mean, you--everyone knows "Brown," as they say today, "What can Brown do for you?"  But there's no one that hasn't been touched by a UPS truck or hasn't seen a UPS truck, so to work with a company that, at that point, had been a ninety-two-year-old private company, it was a big deal for the company and its employees and its retirees to be coming to, to, to come to the public market, to become a public company.  So it was really exciting to me just to be a part of that evolution in the company's history.  The third thing, there was a wonderful management team, and a lot of the, the management teams that I've worked, worked with and worked for have been absolutely terrific.  In fact, I can't think of any that haven't been, but again, maybe I was associating the warm and fuzzies of working with the UPS, with this management team.  But the CEO, the CFO, and most importantly, there was a woman who was a senior woman, her name is Lea Soupata, and she's still the most senior person in the human resources area.  She was the first woman that I had come in contact with at a major corporation who really had a lot of power and who I connected with right away.  Now, I had worked with other women who were CEOs, but this woman's power transcended her, her title and that was--again, that was a big deal for me.  And it was also an opportunity for me to work with a number of senior people within Morgan Stanley that I hadn't had a chance to work with before, that finally had a chance to really see what I could do, so that was important to me.
Story_ID: 103154
Speaker 1: And then there were other things going on in my life at that time that helped me just sort of reach an apex.  That was the year [1999] that I was also up for managing director, and I knew it, and I had decided that year that I was also going to record my first CD.  Because I remember saying to myself at the beginning of that year, and definitely by June of that year, that if I got to the end of that year and I didn't get promoted, and I hadn't done something for me, I was gonna be really mad.  And I was gonna be really mad at me because Morgan Stanley had its decision to make about whether or not I'd make it to managing director, but I had my decision to make about how I was gonna handle that year and what I was going to accomplish that year.  And I knew that I wanted to knock the cover off the ball professionally that year.  And I was--I mean, if there was ever a year where I felt like I was in the groove, it was that year, because at the time that I was doing the UPS IPO, I was also involved in four other transactions, and no management team knew that I was doing anything other than their deals, so I knew I had really--there was nothing else that I could do.  There was nothing else that I could show the organization about my readiness to become a senior officer, at that time; in my opinion, it just couldn't get any better.  And that was the year I also decided to record "Carla's First Christmas," and I knew that much about recording a CD.  And I used some of my connections internally, because there are other very talented people at Morgan Stanley, and I networked with one guy and I said, "You know I think--I'm thinking about doing a CD; how do I do it?"  He said, "Oh, why don't you talk to this guy.  He has a recording studio in his, in his house."  So I was actually hoping he would record me.  Not.  But he turned me onto a guy who said, "Well, I know somebody who could be a good producer for you."  And this guy, his name is Ron Melrose, a Jewish guy, and he was, at that time, the musical director of the Scarlet Pimpernel.  He's now the musical director for one of the most successful shows on Broadway [New York City, New York] right now, Jersey Boys.  And he, he had me come over to his dressing room actually for lunch, during my lunch hour and I sang for him and he said, "Yeah, I'll help you."  And the next thing you know, we started a series of rehearsals outside of the recording studio, so when we went to the recording studio it was all business.  So, of course, he saved me an enormous amount of money because it wasn't playing around in the studio; when we went in the studio, it was time to lay down the tracks.  And so by December 1999, I had "Carla's First Christmas" in my hand, and I also had my managing director title in my hand.  So that was, again, nine--when I think about 1999, it was definitely the apex of my career, and it also underscored for me that I could do--I could execute my dreams and also execute my professional platform at the same time.
Story_ID: 103155
Speaker 1: Were you the only person of color on most of those IPO [Initial Public Offerings]?
Speaker 2: Interestingly enough--that's a great question.  Most of the time I was, but on this particular transaction [UPS], one of my partners, a guy by the name of William Wright [II], who you should also talk to because he's been on Wall Street for twenty years, he was the execution--he was the senior execution guy on that; now we--execution you can put in, in two different terms.  He was the guy who was responsible for making sure from a legal and regulatory perspective everything went right in the deal.  My job in execution was on syndi--on the syndicate desk making sure that we design the roadshow correctly making sure we came up with the right valuation to put on the cover, book building, and making the final judgment on where we should price the deal and how we should distribute the deal.  So both are execution, but one is actually, you know, pricing--
Speaker 1: Pricing.
Speaker 2: --and distributing the transaction.  One is making sure that, again, from a regulatory and a legal perspective, that everything is happening--
Speaker 1: Legal and--
Speaker 2: --the way that it should.  And the reason why this is an important story is that he really gave me a shot to show what I could do.  Now, he was a peer, and that's why going back to this idea of mentorship, your mentors doesn't--don't necessarily have to be someone that's more experienced or older than you, they can be someone that's at your level who can give you the good and the bad and the ugly.  And I remember Billy saying to me, he knew this was an important year for me, he said, "You know, I'm gonna give you a shot to show what you can do," because he had already built a great relationship with the CEO and the CFO.  So he called a meeting where I had to go down there, as a senior syndicate person with him, just, just him and me, and with the CEO, the CFO, the senior human resources person and he said, "This is the woman that's gonna talk to you about how this IPO is gonna happen."  And we did it.  And none of the other senior guys on the team knew that we had done this, and the CFO called the senior managing director who was responsible for the relationship and he said, "You know, this, this woman came down with Bill and they did a fabulous job, blah, blah, blah, blah," and the next day, the senior guy sent an email out to the entire team, including my boss in equity capital markets and said, "You know," and again, I won't use his name but he said, "So and so called me yesterday and said, 'You know what?  Morgan Stanley can have all their business as long as Carla Harris is on the team.'"  And so that put a completely different spin on, on who I was because of who this person was that was calling, and who this person was internally at Morgan Stanley, that was leaving this message for everybody.  And, and my shot came from this guy who said, "Come on, you can do it.  You and I, we're gonna go down and do this meeting."
Speaker 1: That guy was black--
Speaker 2: He's black.
Speaker 1: --also?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did it feel like to have these two black African Americans--
Speaker 2: You know what--
Speaker 1: --in this room presenting to--
Speaker 2: I got to tell you, Shawn, at the time, I wasn't really focused on the fact that there were, you know, two senior black people in this room, you know, presenting to these senior people at this firm.  What I was focused on is that my friend had given me a shot, and he's a friend; my friend had given me this shot and I wasn't gonna let him down.  I went in and giving my best.  You know, he was taking a risk and I was gonna make this risk work while--worthwhile.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 103156
Speaker 1: So what happened after the manager--managing, you became managing director [at Morgan Stanley], but then you--
Speaker 2: I became--right.  And then I became managing director and then I stayed on the syndicate desk continuing to do deals for another year or so, and then the market tanked, as the tech bust, bubble--
Speaker 1: Now, what year was that?  2001--
Speaker 2: Two Thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: Two Thousand [2000].
Speaker 2: Two Thousand [2000].  Two Thousand [2000] was when things started to get a little ugly in the marketplace, but it was really 2001 when things really fell apart.  And at that time, the guy who was running equity capital markets asked me to focus on the private placement product and I became head of equity private placements.  And it's never been a big product for our firm, but it was something that we wanted the capability of doing, particularly in bad market environments, you still want to know where you can raise capital, even from private sources.  So I started focusing on that and did that for a couple of years solely, and then the public market started coming back.  And so while I still had that as an expertise, I, I started to do public market transactions as well, so now I'm doing, I'm doing both.  I'm doing public market transactions, primarily in the retail and consumer space, but I'm also doing public market deals for financial sponsors, and they're very big in the marketplace right now.  And, you know, this year, they'll probably account for 50 or 60% of all the equity transactions that happen in this country because they're just that, that powerful in the marketplace, with respect to the companies that they're bringing to market and the size of the companies that they're bringing to market.  And then I'm also working on a couple of private placements as well.
Story_ID: 103157
Speaker 1: You said that most people jump around or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why have you stayed at Morgan Stanley consistently for nineteen years?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I will tell you, over the years, and I am one of those anal people that sort of, you know, check the plan, check the plan every quarter.  Are you still getting what you want?  And when I think about the things that are important to me in a career that I'm challenged, when I think about not just the career, but the environment, that I have a voice in the environment, that I think I'm being treated fairly, that there's still something for me to learn there, that I think I have a fruitful platform.  Every time I've looked at what's going on with me at Morgan Stanley, even in some of the tough years where they haven't--things haven't gone that well, but when I look at that as a platform and as an opportunity relative to the other things that I have been presented with, even though sometimes it's won by a hair, the, the chips have always fallen on the side of the equation with Morgan Stanley because I do think that I've had a platform that have allowed--that.  That has allowed me to do a number of different things that has given me visibility where I can infect and im--impact my community.  And I still felt at the margin that I'm still learning things, that I keep getting new challenges, that I keep getting exposed to new products.  I keep getting exposed to different types of clients where I can say to you that after nineteen years of doing this business, there isn't a day that goes by where I don't feel like I add something to my toolkit.
Story_ID: 103158
Speaker 1: What does Wall Street look like today, 2005, as far as men, women, race?  I mean, is it diverse?  Is it--does it--is there still room for diversity?  What does Wall Street look like?
Speaker 2: Wall Street is much more diverse than it was when I started in 1982, as a summer intern.  I would still say that it lacks a lot of diversity because the fact that almost all the black managing directors of Wall Street know each other, that tells you that the numbers can't be that big, if we can pretty much name each other, you know, at, at other firms.  We don't all know each other, but I'd say ninety percent for sure.  So I, I still like to see, you know, more folks of color on the Street, but the fact of the matter is, Shawn, it is far bigger than it was in 1982 because now you can't name them on your hands and your, and your feet. Back then, you could name them on one hand in terms of the senior folks of color that had positions of power on the Street, so it's, it's different.
Speaker 1: What do you contribute to that being the biggest--that changing so rapidly?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would--I'd give a lot of credit to the SEO [Sponsors for Educational Opportunity] program because the SEO program has grown tremendously over the years.  As I said, my class--excuse me--in 1982, there were thirty of us; this summer's class is 276 kids and they are African American, they are Caribbean American, they are Hispanic, they are Asian, they are Indian.  You know, so--and I think that's done a lot, in terms of raising the awareness among candidates of color that this is a viable career for you, try it.  And a lot of people who have tried it have decided to stay over the years; so that's one thing that I think has, has contributed.  The second thing I think that has attri--has contributed is roughly, 13, 14, 15 years ago, a lot of the firms decided to earnestly start diversity efforts and diversity outreach to undergraduate institutions, as well as business schools.  So the firms themselves have been trying to reach out.  Now, that has ebbed and flowed over the years.  Back in the mid-'90s [1990s] to the late '90s [1990s], I'd say that it was a real focus.  When the market got bad, I don't think people were paying as much attention.  Now, the market has improved again, people are very focused on it again and are really making strides and really making efforts to try to bring more people in at the entry level.  And now there's enough people, again, to your point--your earlier question, there are enough people on the Street where there are certain firms that have diversity lateral recruiting efforts, which means they're taking people from other firms, where there weren't enough people to take from other firms, frankly, you know, twenty years ago, but now there are, to your point, that, you know, in terms of how things have changed.  So I think that that has also helped a lot, that the firms themselves have said, "Okay, we will use SEO and we will use some of these other programs, but we can actually go out and do this ourselves."
Story_ID: 103159
Speaker 1: How do you feel when you--with all the accolades you receive, like top 50 most influential African Americans [Fortune's "The 50 Most Powerful Black Executives in Corporate America"], then the black women on Wall Street [Black Enterprise's "Top 50 African Americans on Wall Street"]; like what--all of the stuff you--how does that make you feel?
Speaker 2: I'm very proud of it because I've worked hard to get to the point where I am recognized externally.  But I will tell you the, the real deal on all of those things and why they matter to me is that I always wanted to be able to look at somebody in the eye and have credibility and say to them, "I did it.  You can do it.  And there is no magic, this is how it happened.  It's a really simple formula.  This is what you need to do."  And you know, unfortunately or fortunately, however you want to look at it, when you have acquired some of the accolades for that unconfident student who is not sure whether or not she can make it, having, having an accolade of top 50 or top 15, she has to stop and say, "Wow.  Well, if she says I can do it, then maybe I can.  What is she seeing?"  And especially when you go beyond that sentence and say, "If I did it, you can do it," you say, "Tell me your story."  And then you take their story and tell it back to them with the right spin, and they sit there and say, "Wow."  And I said, "Wait a minute, that's not my story, that's your story.  And that's why--and that story can--let me tell you why that story can sell."  So to be able to do that, you know, is, is a tremendous--it, it gives me a lot of satisfaction.  I think it is a sort of power, and if I want any kind of power, I want that power to be able to make somebody think that they can do it and give them that, that gas so they just--they go do it.
Story_ID: 103160
Speaker 1: How did you get to Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: As the commercial says, "Practice, practice, practice."  Well, I'll tell you, the, the whole Carnegie Hall process was one of divine intervention, and I believe that you get divine appointments, and especially if you're looking for them and God will speak to you through all kinds of people.  June of last year [2005], I had gone to an event at The Apollo [Theater], and I'm on The Apollo Theater Foundation Board, and there was a man there, and forgive me because I'm blanking on his name.  And, in fact, I just saw his poster at Carnegie Hall; and he said to me, he said--I said something about, "Yeah, one day, Carnegie Hall."  And he said--and this--I had never met this man before in my life, you have to understand it, this is why I said this was divine appointment.  He happened to be standing there, I happened to be standing here, we happened to start a conversation, somehow we talked--oh, I had sung that night, and he said, "Oh, you have a nice voice," blah, blah, blah.  And I said, "Yeah, maybe one day Carnegie Hall."  He said, "I do concerts at Carnegie Hall all the time."  And I said, "Really?"  He said, "Yes.  I just go and I rent the hall and I just do a concert for free for my friends.  I do it, every year because I'm a renowned singer, I've sung all over the world," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And you know, I call them those cayenne pepper moments; you know, Oprah calls them the "aha moments," but for me they're the cayenne--you know, how when you have cayenne pepper, everything opens up?  I thought to myself, "What if it's that easy?"  I've only had that feeling one other time in my life when my pastor was giving--Monsignor Wallace Harris at St. Charles Borromeo, he was giving a sermon and he said, "Go have an extraordinary life.  God intended for all of us to have extraordinary lives."  And I remember sitting in the pew saying, "What if it's that easy?  What if all you have to do is just decide that you're gonna have an extraordinary life?"  Well, that's what happened to me that moment.  I thought, "What if it's that easy?  What if you just decide you're gonna give a concert at Carnegie Hall?"  So I talked to him a little bit more and that's when the idea was born.  And then I kept sort of chewing on it and then I went out on my friend's boat with the Monsignor and I said, "What about Carnegie Hall?"  I said, "You know, I've, I've cut," by that point I had recorded my second album, and all the proceeds from the albums that I sell go to these two schools; St. Charles Borromeo up in Harlem, New York, and the other down in Bishop Kenny High School [Jacksonville, Florida], my alma mater.  And I said, "But this would be a way of getting a big chunk of money to the schools instead of record by record by record."  Because record by record is only a certain portion of the sales that actually go to the school.  So I said--because you got distribution costs, you have all of that, so I said, "Okay.  Let me think about it."  And I remember feeling it in my heart, and that was the Holy Spirit said, "We can sell out.  We can sell out," but I didn't know how because in the world of Gospel music right now, I'm nobody, so how could I sell out Carnegie Hall?  And I started looking into it and decided I'd go talk to people at Carnegie Hall.  Before you know it, I was in Zankel Hall, we got a band together, I put a show together, we sold out.
Story_ID: 102522
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Carnegie Hall.  So I didn't know how we were gonna do it, but as I said, we sold out.  And I now know and have a lot of respect for producers.  I now know what producers of concerts do.  But, Shawn, this was my first time ever being the show.  I had sung at The Apollo [Theater], I had opened for Yolanda Adams, and I had opened for Take 6, and I had opened at Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts in New York City, New York], but I had never ever been the show.  I had sung in all these places, one or two songs, but never the show.  So one of my close friends, Mark Howell, had a choir called The Voices of the Spirit; it's a citywide choir that was made up of a number of singers from different Harlem churches and so I had them open for me because I said, "You know, big stars always have somebody open."
Speaker 2: Nice.
Speaker 1: So they--they're a fabulous choir.  Fabulous choir.  So they opened and then members of that choir came together to form the Mark Howell Singers, and they had never sung together as the Mark Howell Singers before that night at Carnegie Hall.  And they were my choir, they sang behind me.  And it was truly a magical night.  And I had one goal that night, outside the money that we're trying to raise, I had one goal that night and that was I wanted everybody who came to that concert to feel like they had taken home something, that they got a gift, and that no matter what, they knew whatever was going on in their life, it would be okay because they were not alone; they were--He was with them.  And I kept talking about that throughout the night and what so fascinated me, why I have a smile on my face is that it was truly a magical night.  I feel like I saw the same show that everybody else saw because I felt like I was out here watching myself.  Intellectually, I know that I was doing what was supposed to be done, and I was executing, and I was singing, and I was performing, but I felt like I was watching myself.  And I will tell you that the feedback that I got from the concert was tremendous, and how I know the spirit was in the room, and that everything that I wanted to happen that night, spiritually happened, is that there were two people sitting next to each other, one was a Jewish man and another one was a black woman and they both gave me separate feedback.  And the, the Jewish guy said, "It was so wonderful.  She was so focused in her faith and that she didn't shove it down your throat.  And it was so tangible.  And it just made my faith come alive because she didn't push it down my throat."  And the woman said, "She was so bold, she was so in your face with her spirituality," and I thought that had to be the spirit that two people sitting next to each other watching the same show, had two completely different experience, experiences.  This guy felt like I was not in your face and this guy--this woman thought I was all in your face, and so it was, it was, like I said, it was magical.  It was a great night.
Story_ID: 102523
Speaker 1: So when you look back over, just because we're gonna start to wrap up basically, when you look back over what you've done professionally--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what stands out most for you as--I mean, and you have so much to do still--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but up to this point, what is sort of one of the crowning efforts?
Speaker 2: When I think about what has--what, what stands out for me as an investment banker, it is 1999 and working on so many deals at the same time and doing them all successfully.  And then, also, fulfilling things in my personal life like cutting the CD ["Carla's First Christmas"], like having a successful relationship, so that's one crowning achievement.  The other crowning achievement is finding somebody that I think is a true life partner, and it was somebody that I knew at twelve and who I never in a million years would've thought that I would've married and wanted to spend the rest of my life with, but he is truly a very, very good partner and somebody that, you know, I love with all my heart.  And then the third thing is being able to pursue my passion of singing.  And then also a passion that has emerged that I never thought about, but that I love doing, and that's motivational speaking and doing speeches about careers and career enhancement and how to be successful in a career and, and other topics, as well.  So being able to--I'd say one big achievement is being able to do all three of those at the same time on one platform that is Carla Harris, that, to me, has been a really, really big achievement.
Story_ID: 102524
Speaker 1: Who do you think or who do you give the most credit for being the wind beneath your wings?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I'd have to--God; that's it.  I mean, I don't do anything in my life, I certainly don't make any major decisions, I don't even make small decisions without consulting the spirit.  And I have been on a, what I'm going to call a conscious spiritual journey since about '88 [1988], '89 [1989].  I've always--and, and this is where I think parents should really think about exposing their children to church very early on because even though they might not know what it means, and when you're a kid you're thinking about everything else except what the pastor is saying, but I think having that as your background and having that as a part of your life will emerge, it'll emerge to be a focal point because you've been exposed to it, you won't have to find it.  You may have to find your voice, you may have to find your relationship with that higher being, but you have a platform to do that.  (thunder) Uh-oh.  You have a platform to do that because you've been exposed to it, and I think it's the trials, the tough things that happen in our lives that draw us to do that.  And the reason I articulate it as a journey is because now I have a relationship where I can really hear the spirit talking to me more often than not, the same way I'm talking to you, whereas five years ago, and certainly 10 years ago, and definitely 15 years ago, I did not have that awareness and now I can--I'm, I'm in a meeting with someone and something will say, "He's doing this, that and the other blah, blah, blah, blah," and I will, instead of wondering, I will react to that as a fact.  I won't question it, I won't doubt it, I will react based on that data and it's right, all the time.
Speaker 1: You sound like Oprah Winfrey.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: No, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --someone asked her like, "Well, how often do you pray?" let's say.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or I can't remember what the question was exactly, but her response was, "I live there."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: "There is not a moment that I am not in that--"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: "--spiritual space."  And--
Speaker 2: I try.  I try to live there, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering if that is how much of a trait that is of successful women.  I never, never hear men speak--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to a spirit that way.
Speaker 2: But I think, I think you don't hear men talk about it.  I don't think you hear men talk about it, but I'm not sure that they don't live there or that they don't--they're not on this journey that I'm talking about because I'll never forget, I gave a speech three years ago.  I think I was in Atlanta [Georgia], and I was speaking at a conference and I talked about how I call on the spirit all the time with respect to me because my business is largely judgment.  Yes, there's an analytical portion, yes, there's a quantitative portion, but you have to render a judgment based on that data that you see or based on what's going on in the market.  So I always, as I said, consult the spirit to make sure that my judgment is on point.  And I was talking about that in this, in this conference and this guy came up to me and he said, very senior guy.  You could tell he was probably in his early 50s, and senior at a corporation, he said, "Sister, I just want to say thank you.  You have just released me to be able to call on my faith the way I'd like to be able to call on my faith, and now I will close my door and get on my knees and pray when I feel like I want to get on my knees and pray, when I feel like I need to get on my knees and pray."  So--excuse me--I think that there are men who experience this as well, but maybe they don't feel as comfortable talking about it.  And people ask me all the time, "Why do you feel so comfortable talking about it?"  And they find it fascinating because I will tell you, Shawn, I didn't realize that it wasn't being articulated in the marketplace, that people weren't talking about it, and when the article came out about me in the "Wall Street Journal" earlier this year, the feedback that I got from people was not just, "Oh, congratulations.  Great article," it was, "Thank you for having the courage to talk about your spirituality and how your spirituality can be integrated with being an investment banker."  And that feedback overwhelmingly came from white men, not just from, you know, black women or black men or people, you know, of color, it came from what we would have thought of as unexpected places.  And I said, "Well, well," and I, you know, it was almost like people have been wanting, wanting to unlock that, but haven't had an opportunity to do that.  And it's opened up some terrific dialogues with some of my clients that, again, I never would've thought I would be having a conversation with the Chairman of X Company where he said to me upon meeting me after reading that article, he said, "I read that article about you, and I also am a man of faith."  And I don't make any of my decisions as CEO with, that wouldn't have been a conversation that we would've been having, certainly not a conversation I would've had ten years ago.
Story_ID: 102525
Speaker 1: Who do you admire and black, white, women, men, and just a little statement as to why, on record, why you admire these people?  It can be Wall Street, outside of Wall Street.
Speaker 2: I--well, I've already said that I really admire my mother [Billie Joyce Williams], so I'd put her at the top of the list.  And I admire my father [John Harris] as well because as I always say, he's, he's a hustler.  And I think there's a part of, a part of me that's like that as well, that will just keep going no matter what.  But in terms of people that we recognize, you know, dead and alive, one of the people that I admired most in my life for a long time was [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].  And I was five going on six when he was killed, but he was somebody that I studied a lot growing up.  And he was sort of the first prominent figure that I knew, knew of and wanted to be like because he was a prominent figure that touched a lot of people.  And I think that that's been a part of my dream, wanting to be able to touch a lot of people.  Barbara Jordan is somebody that I've always respected because of who she was in our politics.  Shirley Chisholm having the courage to go out there and to be the first woman to say, "I'm going to run for President."  I have a lot of respect for [President] Bill Clinton just because of what he can do in, in, in his reach and how he can touch a lot of people and how articulate he is because he can pretty much infect and impact anybody in a room that he's in.  I have a lot of respect for Oprah Winfrey and the platform that she has built, and more importantly, how she's chosen to use that platform.  And then there are a number of people in the entertainment comm--community that I have a lot of respect for, in terms of their longevity and their perseverance, and how I admire them as singers like Aretha Franklin and Gladys Knight and Shirley Caesar and Yolanda Adams, and, you know, there are men as well, like [HM] BeBe Winans, and Donnie McClurkin, and the people that I consider to be icons, you know, in the music world.
Speaker 1: Within your industry.
Speaker 2: But in my industry, I would say that I have a lot of--
Speaker 1: Because these are people I will not necessarily know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, these are people in my industry that I have a lot of respect for, Bill Lewis [HM William M. Lewis, Jr.] is one because he's been in the business for so long and was one of the first, if not the first, black men to become a managing director in an area of investment banking where we didn't exist.  There were managing directors in public finance, but there have been black people in the public finance for a period of time, but he was the first that I knew of that was in corporate finance, mergers and acquisitions, so I have a lot of admiration for him.  [HM] Deborah Wright is another person who's now CEO of Carver Bank.  She's someone that I have a lot of respect for because she preceded me as a black woman in this business and, and she was somebody that I would say was a mentor and is a mentor to me, because I have a question now I'd, I'd go and talk to Debbie about it because she's seen a lot.  She, she knows a lot of people in this industry.  She has networked effectively.  She told me a long time ago, the challenges that I was going to have as a woman of color in this business.  And that we had a line that was a little different than everybody else's line and you have to be, you know, you have to be cognizant of, of when you--when somebody crosses your line and what that means and how you're gonna react to it versus someone else's line or the line that doesn't even exist.  So just giving me an awareness that I would encounter these sorts of things was helpful to me, so when I did encounter them, then I would--I'd, I'd know okay, this is one of those times that I got to get out the tool chest and figure out how to react to this.  So those are some of the people that I'd say that I admire.
Story_ID: 102526
Speaker 1: Is there a black network on Wall Street?
Speaker 2: There is a black network of sorts.  There is NASP, which is the National Association of Securities Professionals, that a number of people of color belong to, but I wouldn't say that there's one organization that all people of color that are in the business belong to.  Because there's so many different pieces of this business, it makes it easy for us to be fragmented because you have those people who are in corporate finance; you have those people who are in capital markets, very few; you have those people who are in sales and trading, but there's fixed income sales and trading, there's equity sales and trading; there's asset management; there's the operation side of the business.  So it's so easy and the challenges that exist in each little pocket of this business that we call financial services or Wall Street investment banking broadly, there are challenges that are unique to each of those different areas, so it's hard to, to, to say that people are pulled together on one, on one platform that is effective from a network standpoint.
Speaker 1: Do you think that has not arisen because there are not enough black people in the industry or--I mean, I'm just thinking, like there's a National Black Journalist Association [NABJ]--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --you have writers, you have people on TV, you have people on radio, you have people in HR [Human Resources]; I mean, you go to the convention and we're all under the same umbrella--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --yet we do various things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I know that was founded, for whatever reasons--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I'm sure to, to bring us together and to--so that we would network--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and create more jobs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that hasn't happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I think NABJ is different--
Speaker 1: Because--
Speaker 2: --because--well, like you said, because of the history of that organization and, and how people came together, even though someone was a print journalist, someone was a news journalist, someone was a magazine, someone in newspaper and it just grew.  I don't think there's been--but there was critical mass because you had black newspapers, right?  And so there was challenge that was consistent and it was the same for black people who were in journalism, at that time.  And then when you got one or two people who were on TV, they clung also to NABJ because that was, that was the only network they had; whereas, in financial services, like I said, is so disparate that there's never been that one thing that--or this one organization that could speak to all constituencies that just grew over time, and there wasn't that critical mass at the time.  There was always been onesies and twosies.  Now, you have a critical mass, but as I said, it's so disparate, in terms of the different pieces and the challenges are different.  And the other thing that's different is the time commitment to my business versus your business because if you're on my side of the, the, the equation, you are consistently doing 12 to 16-hour days, and if you have a family, you really, in the early days, you don't have time to, to have this outside organization.  And the organization has to be deemed to be important to your having a career, long-term in that business and there hasn't been--that hasn't been the thing in financial services.  There was a time--well, let me put it like this, to my knowledge, there's no black journalists worth their salt that would not want to be a part of NABJ; there's just something wrong if you aren't a part of that organization, and whereas, you can exist and be successful in financial services without that kind of organization, so maybe it's necessity.
Story_ID: 102527
Speaker 1: What--tell me about some of the things you're doing outside of your--some of the things you're doing for other people.
Speaker 2: Almost all of the things that I do outside of my day job are focused towards trying to help other people.  As I said, I've recorded the two CDs, and all of the proceeds go to the two parochial schools [St. Charles Borromeo up in Harlem, New York and Bishop Kenny High School in Jacksonville, Florida].  So then--
Speaker 1: Well, we didn't talk about them on camera, so let's just talk--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --about them a little bit.
Speaker 2: The two--yeah, the two, the two CDs that I have recorded, one is "Carla's First Christmas," and the second is "Joy Is Waiting," and all the--and that's all Gospel, and all of the proceeds from the sale of both of those CDs go to two schools, one in Harlem, St. Charles Borromeo, which is a K through eight.  And it's going to help them what I hope build a best of breed science and math program so that our kids can be really competitive when they go to high school.  The other money is going to--the other half is going to Bishop Kenny High School, and that's for scholarship money because I find that black parents, if they can send their kids to private school K through eight, often have a challenge 9 through 12 because the tuition goes up four-x, five-x from that.  So I wanted to have a pool of money at Bishop Kenny so that if there was any young lady, and I'm now going to extend it to young men, but if there was any young lady who was academically able to get into Bishop Kenny, but financially unable to go, that money would be available.  And that money also comes--it's a performance grant, you have to maintain a 3.5 in order to maintain the scholarship, if you don't you lose the money.  Now, I have a student now who missed the mark, but I have faith in her and I'm gonna give her one more shot, but if she doesn't make it sophomore year, the money goes away because I really want to tie it to performance as well.  And the other things that I do is I am chair of the New York City Food Bank, which is the largest food bank in the country, and I'm a part of that because, frankly, I believe everyone has the right to eat.  And there's so many hungry New Yorkers that when I joined that board, that board--that organization was distributing a few hundred thousand pounds of food to hungry New Yorkers a year.  We're now distributing almost 70 million pounds of food to hungry New Yorkers, almost twenty years later.  And there are an enormous amount of children that are being served in emergency food pantries and emer--emergency food kitchens today, and unfortunately, a number of children that are using the food bank services has grown, so there's the children connection there.  I'm also on the board of The Apollo Theater Foundation, and you know The Apollo is a historic, historic landmark, but the foundation is going to start to do things that are also going to touch kids, and hopefully, try to get the arts and music back into the schools.  But that's my music pursuit, but that's also, hopefully, connecting the dots with children again.  I'm also on the board of A Better Chance, and that is an organization, a national organization that actually goes out and finds talented minorities, students across the country in places that you might not look and put them into some of the best schools in this country; the Andover's [Phillips Academy Andover in Andover, Massachusetts], the Exeter's [Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, New Hampshire] of the world, the St. Paul's [St. Paul's School in Concord, New Hampshire], the Groton's [Froton School in Groton, Massachusetts], the Lawrenceville's [The Lawrenceville School in Lawrenceville, New Jersey], some of the other schools where they are feeder schools to some of the best colleges in the country.  And there are--all the other boards that I sit on, and I'm on the Board of SEO [Sponsors for Educational Opportunity], we've already talked about SEO, but all the other boards that I sit on, you--there's usually, you know, two or three main themes, it's either children, education, education and children, or music.
Story_ID: 102528
Speaker 1: So what do you hope for yourself in the banking world?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where--I mean, yeah--
Speaker 2: I hope to--I think I still have a few good years in investment banking, and I hope to continue to grow my platform.  And I don't know if that means that I run capital markets, at some point, either at Morgan Stanley or at some other firm, but I'd like to grow my platform on that front.  I probably, before I hang up my professional cleats, will run something.  I'll probably be CEO or COO of something, I don't know if it's a financial services firm or not.  And then I'll probably expand my, my motivational speaking.  I don't know whether or not I'll expand the singing.  I would like to have a Grammy before I die, but we'll see.
Speaker 1: Bill Lewis' job--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --are there any women in--on that same level?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  There are two, three, three, and if you want to include American Express, there are four senior men in financial services right now.  Bill Lewis [HM William M. Lewis, Jr.] is co-head of investment banking at Lazard; Ray McGuire [HM Raymond J. McGuire] is co-head of investment banking at Citigroup; Stan O'Neal is CEO of Merrill Lynch, so he's on top of everybody; and [Kenneth] Ken Chenault is CEO of American Express, and you have to consider American Express a financial institution as well, but there are no women at that level.
Speaker 1: Any--why?  Just not enough time has passed by?
Speaker 2: I think that's right.  I think not enough time has passed by.  I think my generation has a shot, so we'll see.
Speaker 1: Is that a trajectory--is that something you'd be on the path of?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you on that path?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I would definitely consider myself on that path.
Speaker 1: What does it take?
Speaker 2: It takes opportunity, first of all.  And it, it, part of it, frankly, Shawn, is being in the right place at the right time.  You know, if you've done what I've done as long as I've done it, then you certainly have the skills and the experience, but there also--you need to be in that spot when that decision is being made.  And as I can connect the dots for all four of those guys, they were at that next level where when the time came for that type of decision, they were one of two or three contenders, and you need to be on that short list of contenders to make that happen.
Speaker 1: So why--
Speaker 2: And you need to have that sponsor--
Speaker 1: And you need the sponsor.
Speaker 2: --as I was talking about earlier.
Speaker 1: Can you name your sponsor or is that something that's off record?
Speaker 2: Off record.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you have one?
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: Or is that something you grow out of?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a very interesting question.  Your sponsors may change over time because the sponsor, as I said, needs to be someone that can carry your paper into the room, so by definition, they needs, they need to be somebody in your organization that is passionate about you and your trajectory and it's, you know, it's conscious for them.  And in many cases your sponsor may be your direct boss and bosses change, so as your bosses change, your sponsor may change.  And if your sponsor moves on, then you have to--your goal becomes trying to find a new sponsor, and I'd say I'm at the point now where I'm looking for a new sponsor.
Story_ID: 102529
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to end on something that's dear to you and, and that's the music.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you said you hoped for a Grammy.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you working on something now that would lead in that direction?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I just finished "Joy Is Waiting" a year ago, and it's gotten some radio play.  I, I can't say that it's gotten critical acclaim, so I don't know if I'll have to do a third CD before I get to critical acclaim, but probably so.
Speaker 1: And let's just briefly talk about the book, the stuff you're gonna put in the book.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I hope to write a book that will encompass what I call "Carla's Pearls."  I've given speeches across the country at colleges, at graduate institutions, in churches, in large corporations where I've talked about Carla's Pearls, and they really are a collection of things that I've learned along the way that I think will help you be useful--I mean, will help you be successful and will be useful to you across all careers.  I don't care if you're in financial services or you're in consulting or you're in law or you're in corporate America, you're an engin--you're an engineer in corporate America, you're a marketing professional, you're a sales professional, I just think these are things that will be useful to you and they're things like understanding that perception as the co-pilot to reality, and therefore, having a way of--having three words that you want people to use when you're not in the room because all the important decisions are made when you're not in the room.  Understanding the difference between a mentor and a sponsor; understanding the importance of taking risks and not having fear when you're in your career; understanding that you need to tell on yourself if you make a big mistake and under--and, and conditioning people to think that if you make mistakes, it's the exception not the rule, but you know, those sorts of things.
Story_ID: 102530
Speaker 1: So in closing, what--who has been--I mean, I'm thinking of like a strand of pearls and each person give you a pearl and you put on your, on your string and make it a knot; who do you think has contributed most to that string of pearls?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, I think my experiences have contributed most to my string of pearls.  It--there really--there hasn't been anyone in particular who has given me a nugget that I say, "Okay, I'm gonna live by this," but yet, it's--but instead, it's been the experiences that I've had that have formed those phrases for me.  You know, there's one phrase that a dear friend of mine, who's a partner at Booz Allen [Booz Allen Hamilton], by the name of Reggie Van Lee who said to me, "It's always easier to beg for forgiveness than ask permission," so I use that one a lot.  And that, to me, I, I talk about that when I talk about taking risks.  That many times we ask people for permission to do x, permission to do y, and often you ask those who don't even have the power to give you permission, but by you're asking them, you just gave them the power to tell you no or to tell you yes.  And, in fact, what you should do is just go do it.  And if you stepped on somebody's toes or you made a mistake, you can always say, "Oh, I'm so sorry I did that," but you've got the experience now.  And most of the time it won't be a bad thing that you've done it.  So, I mean, that has been a pearl that I can think of, but most of my pearls have come from the experiences that I've had.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much for being a history maker.  I'm trying to think of--let me just see.  Let me look--
Speaker 2: I think you got--
Speaker 1: --at my notes.
Speaker 2: --it all, Shawn.
Speaker 1: Let me just--one thing just to see if I left anything out.  You're too young for a legacy so we won't even talk about it.  And I, I mean, I guess we, we've covered it all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's been a joy talking to you.
Speaker 2: It's been great talking to you as well.  You did a great job.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Yes.
