Story_ID: 444145
Speaker 1: --Good morning I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  We have Matthew Hickey on the camera as the videographer.  Observing we also have Syd Nathns and that's S-Y-D, N-A-T-H-N-S.  I will start by having you state your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: I'll start first by welcoming you and telling you that my name is [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding and officially the full name is Vincent Gordon Harding and what else did you want me to say?
Speaker 1: If you can just spell that out for us.
Speaker 2: V-I-N-C-E-N-T, G-O-R-D-O-N, H-A-R-D-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: So Dr. Harding your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 25, 1931.
Speaker 1: Your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: April 21, 2006 along time away from 1931.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: At the Veterans of Hope office in Denver, Colorado on the Iliff School of Theology campus.
Story_ID: 444146
Speaker 1: We start by asking five simple People magazine type questions.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You should have warned me about such things.  I love fish and I could let that be one of the answers to the favorite food question if you don't ask me too much about which kind of fish or anything else, fish is my answer.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like blues and browns and have as long as I can remember myself.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think about now springtime even though sometimes the early fall is a beautiful time for me as well.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My dreams.  I can't say that I have a favorite vacation destination Shawn [Shawn Wilson].  I enjoyed my parents' [Mabel Broome Harding and Graham Harding] native land of Barbados when I was there a long time ago but I wouldn't necessarily classify it in that way but that's a nice place to be.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I just heard one that I would like to gather among my favorites.  [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover was quoting someone that he knows and this person, older black person said, "If you know, you owe," and I think that's great.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I consider myself a teacher more by calling than by profession.
Story_ID: 444147
Speaker 1: So we will start with your family tree.  If you can give me your mother's name and mother's date of birth and place of birth we'll start there.
Speaker 2: If you sent me something about this I didn't read it and if I had read it, it would have been a good forewarning of me but let's see what we can do.  My mother's name is Mabel Broome [Mabel Broome Harding] that was her maiden name.  She was born on May 18, 1898 and she was born in Barbados in the West Indies.
Speaker 1: What can you share with me about your mother's life in Barbados as a young girl?
Speaker 2: Not a great deal except for the fact that she and one of her sisters seemed to have spent a lot of time longing to be away from there and they seemed to be the more adventurous of the four girls.  From all that I can gather they enjoyed school, they enjoyed playing, they enjoyed their brothers and their parents.  I don't have any clear memory at this point showing of anything particular about my mother's life here.  I've spent a bit of time especially over the last twenty years or so since she has been gone kicking myself for not talking a lot more with her about her life as a child and as a growing young adult.  But that's where that is at this point.
Speaker 1: When did she arrive in the United States?
Speaker 2: As far as I remember from documents that I've seen it would have been something like 1921 or so with that whole group of folks who came after the end of World War I [WWI].  I think it was about then.
Speaker 1: Did she come with her three sisters also?
Speaker 2: No she came by herself, not--by herself as far as her immediate family was concerned but she tells me that there was a friend of the family from that part of Barbados, which was Britain's Village [ph.] the name of the community that she grew up in.  There was a friend, a woman who travelled also to the USA with her at that time.
Speaker 1: Do you know what she did for work when she arrived in the United States?
Speaker 2: There must have been some contact with someone who was here before because apparently fairly early in her time here she was able to get a job working in one of the garment factories in downtown New York [New York] and she did that for a number of years.  How many I'm not sure but I know that she did that.  She wasn't doing that when I began to come into consciousness but that's a part of her story that that's what she did when she first came.
Story_ID: 444148
Speaker 1: Before we talk about your recollections of her as a child do you have any, do you remember your grandparents at all, your mother's [Mabel Broome Harding] parents?
Speaker 2: The only recollections I have of them are from two beautiful photographs that she had in whatever apartment we were living in and from her memories of them that she would share sometimes and especially from the great grief I still remember when she got word, I guess first of her father's death and then of her mother's death.  I never met those grandparents; in fact never met grandparents on either side of my family.
Speaker 1: So what are your recollections of your mother when you were a child?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I pause because I am trying to make sure that I do as little romanticizing as possible.  But on the other hand I don't mind some romanticizing because basically I have very, very positive recollections of her along several lines.  One was that as a person and as a mother as I recollect she was fairly easygoing.  She encouraged me in a whole variety of ways but did not get anxious about what I was about, what I would be, what I would do.  I was the only child.  My father [Graham Harding] and mother separated some time I would think before I was five I'm not quite sure exactly when and so there was that bond between a single mother and her only child that was very important.  I knew in very real deep ways that she loved me, never any question about that.  That she valued me and that she had great expectations of me even though she went only to, I guess the equivalent of eighth grade.  She was like many of the folks from Barbados almost a worshipper of religion and what it could be and what it could do.  One of her brothers was a superintendent of schools kind of person in Barbados and she clearly was projecting me some of the love and appreciation she had for him and for the kind of strength as an educator that he represented to her.  So she encouraged me in the area of education.  There was never any question but that I was going to go as far as I could possibly go where education was concerned.  None of that was a question.  I don't even remember much discussion about that but it was simply something that I knew.  I knew that that was what she wanted; I knew that she believed in it and I knew that she felt that I could do whatever was necessary.
Story_ID: 444149
Speaker 1: So that kind of love, sense of great expectations, confidence in me, confidence in my capacities all of that is part of what I remember.  I also remember that she [Harding's mother, Mabel Broome Harding] seemed in many, many ways to be a very friendly person with others and we as I remember in my earliest years we lived in what would be the equivalent of rooming houses.  I remember her getting along very well with the people in the house and of course that's always a very helpful thing to do in a rooming house.  Whereas I remember in one situation we were sharing kitchen and bath and had our own room to live in but there were other people.  Some of whom I recollect, some of whom I don't but I do recollect that my mother always seemed to have no major difficulty in relating to them.  On a certain level I think she was a very even handed person and that's also what I remember.  The next thing that I think I need to throw into the memory pot is the fact that without being a kind of zealot, she was a deeply religious person and was interested in religion, read the Bible a lot and encouraged me in that direction.  We may want to go into this more later on but one of the very important choices that she made when I was about five or six was to follow the advice of some friends and become a member of a little church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church] in Harlem [New York, New York] that in a sense provided a larger sense of family for us and particularly for me.  How consciously she thought about that element, I'm not sure but that was very much a part of her life; the church, religion, the reading of the Bible, the connection to that community of faith that was who she was--very much a part of who she was.  I think she tried as much as she could to live up to the teachings of the religious life that she had chosen to follow.  So that would be another thing, oh the other thing I've already mentioned some of this, my mother--I have this memory of her always being ready to be at school on my behalf regardless of what kind of work she was doing.  I'm not quite sure how she arranged it but that's one of the memories that I have that she was there, she was with the teachers, she was on my behalf and that was a good feeling.
Story_ID: 444150
Speaker 1: So I was going to ask if you grew up with a sense of a single family household.  Did it feel that it was just the two of you?  Did you have a sense that there was extended family around or did you feel that it was just you and your mother [Mabel Broome Harding]?
Speaker 2: That was part of what I was referring to when I spoke about her choice of the church.  That was my extended family and I was very conscious of that.  I was also conscious of the fact that we were a somewhat small version of family and so one of the things I remember doing a lot of was visiting with my friends from the church at their house where they might have had families larger than mine.  So I'm sure that that sends that we were somewhat constricted family was real for me and that that was part of the reason why the church was so important and that was part of the reason why I spent so much time visiting in my friends' houses from the church.  Much more as I think back on it, my friends by and large through college [City College of New York, New York, New York] was more from that church community than from neighborhood or school and so that was really my tribe.
Speaker 1: So you mentioned that church, do you know the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes I know the name and the address.
Speaker 1: I'll take both.
Speaker 2: Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church [New York, New York] and it's been for a long, long time at 252 West 138th Street in the next block from the great Abyssinian [Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York, New York] just off of 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard] or whatever 8th Avenue is called now.
Story_ID: 444151
Speaker 1: So let's just step aside and give me your father's name and tell me what recollections you have of him even though you were only five what do you remember about your father?
Speaker 2: That is the major empty space in my life as far as family is concerned.  I remember almost nothing about my father; his name was Graham Alexander Harding [Graham Harding].  I have no concrete memory of seeing him in the same living space where I was.  The one memory that I have of actually seeing him was an occasion as I recall maybe I was five or six or seven or something in there and he lived apparently within walking distance of where we lived.  We were on 130th Street in Harlem [New York, New York], he lived someplace that we could walk to, I don't know how long it took but we were there and she [Harding's mother, Mabel Broome Harding] had gone to get some money from him for our needs and he didn't have any to give her as I recall.  What I remember was a kind of sadness or sheepishness in the body language and in the face of my father.  But that was the only time Shawn [Shawn Wilson] that I actually remember seeing my father except for a photo that I've seen since then.  My daughter [Rachel Harding] has been a very powerful family historian and so she's done a good deal of research on the family.  But I don't have anything else really to offer as far as memories of my father are concerned at this point.
Story_ID: 444152
Speaker 1: Did the church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] also supply your mother [Mabel Broome Harding] with that sort of companionship that a life partner would?  I mean there are no other, I mean who took care of her, your mother?
Speaker 2: When you say took care of her what do you mean?
Speaker 1: I mean who did she go to for comfort, who did she go to to say, "This is what's happening in my life?"  Who did she turn to for someplace to lean her head on?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question and I assume that if you were to genderize it you'd be talking about what male was there for her to have that kind of relationship with.  First in the church as in the living space my recollection is that my mother was again a very friendly and open person.  There were a number of women in the church who she felt close to and I'm sure who she talked to.  There was one man in the church who was a kind of close friend of hers and who she also shared her concerns with.  But I don't know a great deal more about what that was all about.  But the church then was a source of community for her and that probably would be the best way to put it in terms of her own sense to me.  I don't have a great deal of memory about neighborhood people with her as well and I may just be projecting but I think that much of her sense of connectedness came from the church.  There was some after one of her sisters moved to New York [New York] and I don't know when that was, it was some time after her when they spent some time together but I don't think that they were as close as perhaps they had expected to be when they came to this country.  But then there was some other sort of distant relatives.  One woman that I think stayed very close to my mother and I think she was a kind of a cousin and her name was Maisie [ph.] and Maisie was someone who just loved me and clearly felt very close to my mother.  I remember a lot of times back and forth to her house with her, she and her husband who lived there in the Harlem [New York, New York] area as well.  What I remember as much as anything else about them was that he liked to play golf and I'd never seen anybody or anything like that before.  He had a big set of golf clubs and I used to like to at least be around them but I didn't pick up any golf skills from them.  But they were friends for as long as my mother lived as long as she was in the New York area especially.
Speaker 1: We have two minutes left on this tape but do you remember their names?  You said her name was Maisie do you have a last name?
Speaker 2: Maisie it's coming to me right now but it may well get to me before we're finished.
Speaker 1: And his name? Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Not off hand.
Story_ID: 444153
Speaker 1: We were just talking about your sense of Harlem [New York, New York] and growing up there.
Speaker 2: Yes I've always felt that New York [New York] at large and Harlem specifically--Harlem is a great place to grow up.  I have just wonderful memories not primarily about the great ones of the renaissance [Harlem Renaissance].  By the time I was conscious of what it meant to be in Harlem the '30s [1930s] were about over.  So I did not have a great deal of contact specifically knowledgeably but I knew it was a good place and one of the interesting things about being in Harlem and a member of Victory Tabernacle Church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] was that Victory Tabernacle was one of those places that might be called fundamentalists, at this point, might be called evangelical at this point I would give it another kind of title but the important thing was that they discouraged you from nightclubs, from dances, from all that kind of thing.  So I was cut off from some of the stuff that was all around me but I was also conscious of some of the stuff that was all around me and for some reason I have this memory of being--of living on 130th Street that boarding house or rooming house I mentioned to you was at 4 East 130th Street and I have a recollection of the jazz, I guess he was a trumpeter or saxophonist Lucky Millinder living right next door down in one of the basement apartments.  Why that is still on my mind I have no idea but that was one of the things that I remember from childhood rather than from teenage hood or young adulthood when I would be expected to remember more of that.
Story_ID: 444154
Speaker 1: Harlem [New York, New York] and the renaissance [Harlem Renaissance] did not come as a powerful thing to me in my childhood.  I didn't have access to some of those directions except for this, my church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] was one of those kinds of churches that was very, very culture conscious and practically every Sunday afternoon there was a kind of culture event.  I'm trying to remember what we called them and that may come back to me too because it was a terminology that I heard in a number of churches later on as I was studying that experience.  But there were on that Sunday afternoon event people in the church did musical presentations, vocal, instrumental and I was what was called in those days a something reader--that's terrible I can't lose that piece of my identity whatever it was--dramatic reader and did all kinds of poetry readings.  And what seems fairly clear to me is that at that point in my life which was early teens that I started doing that the only poets that I regularly used as a part of my presentations were Paul Laurence Dunbar and James Weldon Johnson's 'God's Trombones' ['God's Trombones: Seven Negro Sermons in Verse'].  But in terms of anything that was happening immediately in Harlem at the time that hadn't seeped into me at that point.  But I'm still trying to remember the name of those Sunday afternoon gatherings, it was something like symposium but it was one of those old fashion Greek terms but it will come back to me.  We were living in the middle of Harlem but sort of creating another reality in terms of culture in the midst of that and I guess that's the way communities often go.
Speaker 2: What was the pastor's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lyceum, Sunday afternoon lyceum and I think it was practically every Sunday afternoon.  Since we were Saturday church goers, Sunday afternoon was the time for the cultural event called the lyceums.
Story_ID: 444155
Speaker 1: What was the pastor's name at Victory Tabernacle [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Very important pastor and name.  His name was Philip J. Bailey, Philip Jonathan Bailey and he was one of those magnificently self-educated ministers who had come out of Jamaica and a lot of the members of the church were also people from Jamaica.  That's a whole story in itself that I shouldn't get into too much on but the important thing about it Shawn [Shawn Wilson] is that from all that I can gather Victory Tabernacle came into being as a part of a larger movement of black Seventh-day Adventists who broke away from the national Seventh-day Adventist church over Garveyite like issues.  Particularly having to do with black power and black responsibility for the financing and for the leadership of the churches and back there in the '30s [1930s] towards the end divide of the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement apparently there was a fairly strong movement of black churches in the Seventh-day Adventist movement breaking away and Victory Tabernacle was one of those churches that did it.  We didn't come upon them until after.  It seems to me that they had not been more than five years or so out of the Seventh-day Adventist fold when they formed themselves as a congregation.  They'd gone through another stage of an all-black Seventh-day Adventist organization and then that had internal difficulties and they then became Victory Tabernacle I think sometime around '35 [1935], 1935 or so and it was in that period that my mother [Mabel Broome Harding] met them and brought me along.
Speaker 1: Do you know why the congregation is largely Jamaican or people from the islands?
Speaker 2: Well I think that was part of the pattern of Harlem's [Harlem, New York, New York] development that groupings from familiar backgrounds tended to group together.  A lot of the church was made up of families some of whom had known each other from the islands, some of whom had gathered after they came to the USA and those family connections were taken right into the organizing of the church and the families stuck together as church members then.
Story_ID: 444156
Speaker 1: Did you participate in the church more than just being a member [at Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York]?  Were there youth programs that you can talk to me about to kind to flesh out the structure of the church, mothers of the church, the deacons of the church?
Speaker 2: I was deeply involved in the church and its activities.  The church was also sort of the leader of a little national conference of churches and I was deeply involved in that.  I was in the minds of a lot of people tagged for the next leadership of the church whenever Pastor Bailey [Philip J. Bailey] went on his way and was fairly clear that he was sensing that he wanted to groom me in that direction.  I worked with him especially on the development of church publications.  I guess even before I went to journalism school [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] it was clear that was one of the areas of particular interests for me.  So I helped him develop some publications there in the church.  I was very much involved in the very active youth organization in the church.  I was a part of the youth choir in the church.  I was a part of what we called the Sabbath school structure of the church, the missionary association.  So everything that went on in the church I was very much a part of and in her way my mother [Mabel Broome Harding] was too.  She was one of the ushers in the church.  So that structure was something that was--that's part of what I meant when I said that this was my community, this was my family so it was not just membership, it was deep engagement.
Speaker 1: So then the pastor became a role model for you?
Speaker 2: In some ways, in some ways yes.
Story_ID: 444157
Speaker 1: I'm jumping ahead now but we'll go back.  When did you receive your calling into the ministry as a preacher, as a pastor yourself?  Does that make any sense?
Speaker 2: It makes sense but your assumption needs to be worked with.  I chose not to be an ordained minister and that itself is a very, very long story but the essential thing that I should say is that my own sense of what my vocation is in the deepest sense of that word is not as a preacher but as a teacher.  For me that is an equally sacred calling.  So there was no sense of calling to pastoral ministry.  I have done some of that, I have enjoyed it very much but I think I've always known that my deepest sense of purpose is as a teacher.  If you want to jump ahead I can spend some time talking about where that came from.
Speaker 1: And then we'll go back, I mean let's do it and then we'll go back to fleshing out the community of Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: (Pause) Okay I think that the best context for dealing with that is to talk about my basic sense of what I wanted to do with myself as I was growing up.  As I mentioned a bit ago one of the areas of work at a profession that I was very interested in was journalism in a variety of forms.  From the time that I was in junior high school, I was always either on the staff or editor of student magazines, student newspapers right through and at that point in the history of our country I came out of high school [Morris High School, Bronx, New York] in 1948 so a lot of the stuff that I was doing was a part of the whole phenomenon at that time of what some of us like to call the first Negro syndrome.  So I was the first Negro editor of this or of that, the first Negro editor of the City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] newspaper, first Negro editor of my high school newspapers, et cetera, et cetera.  And journalism seemed to be the area that I wanted to go in.
Story_ID: 444158
Speaker 1: One of the memories that is really a precious one for me is a high school experience where in the '40s [1940s] I had this (laughter), I guess you might say delusional sort of image of myself as really loving sports and I was a pretty good softball player and on the Morris High School [Bronx, New York] softball team.  Before that I enjoyed that in junior high school as well but early on when I got to Morris in '46 [1946], Morris is a high school in the Bronx [New York] that I attended, there was a notice put up that the time for those who were interested in trying out for the basketball team--see you can imagine this right--and it turned out that the time for those who were interested in trying out in applying for the staff of the Morris newspaper.  Interestingly I still remember that the Morris Piper it turned out was going to be the same afternoon.   So I made the mistake of going to this teacher that I liked very much.  She was my French teacher and I asked her what would your advice be--that I really was interested in both of these things and what would she advise me to do, Francine Prevost [ph.].  She did what any teacher is supposed to do, she said, "Well Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding] I understand that you really like them, I'm so glad but you know sports well you can only do that for so long but if you go into something like writing in a newspaper you get to do that all your life," and so she helped me to make the choice.  (Laughter) I'm sure that the coach on the basketball team would have also helped me to make the choice if I'd gotten to try out.  But I remember that kind of choice making and I started then with the whole newspaper business.  I also became, I guess it was vice president eventually of the student organization there at Morris.  Journalism and student leadership were the things that were combined in my life for a long, long time.
Story_ID: 444159
Speaker 1: So when I was going on to college I was still trying to decide what I really wanted to do.  There was no temptation toward basketball (laughter) any longer at the rate of 5'9" even though of course in those days 5'9" could take you into a guard in a good way but City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] was also a championship basketball team.  And so I had no temptation in that direction but I did get involved in the college newspaper.  Again became the editor there and really would have majored in journalism if City College--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Continuing.
Speaker 2: At City I was trying to figure out what should my major be but I'm very, very glad that I had hard time figuring that out because I really believe that I got a tremendous liberal education.  I took some of everything that was going on there.  The one thing that I regret that I did not take and I guess that could be a story in itself was Kenneth Clark's course when he first came.  We came to the school about the same time.  I think he came to City in '48 [1948] maybe a little before but I never took any of his courses and I'm not sure of all the reasons for that.  But I did get to know him as a faculty member.  I was involved in working as a student assistant in the dean of students office so I got to know a lot of faculty and by the end of my--no I guess it was the beginning of my senior year the academic dean came over to me and said, "Harding [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding], we're going to be making up the commencement program before long and you're going to have to make up your mind so that we can have something to put down there as to what your major is."  What I did then was just went back and counted all the courses that I'd taken and then figured out what was the one that I had most credits in.  It was a kind of close tie between English and history and turned out to be history that I had more credits in that than anything else.  So by default I became a history major.  I enjoyed it but I enjoyed everything (laughter) so that was not enough of a help to me but the numbers were--
Story_ID: 444160
Speaker 1: I saw myself at that point going in the direction of journalism, becoming the first Negro maybe on The New York Times because at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] one of the traditions was that the editor of the City College newspaper often became a kind of part time college reporter for The Times.  I did that for a little while.  It was very, very clear that the managing editor of The Times, a guy named Adams [ph.], was not at all comfortable with seeing this first Negro coming into the traditional Times correspondence job from City College but I stuck with it for a while anyway.  Then, and all of this is on the issue of calling, had to decide what I was going to do after City College was over.  That was a period of the Korean War.  When I graduated the war had moved into its negotiation stage, its armistice stage but the draft was still going on.  I was trying to think of a way at least to put off that draft experience and yet in the crazy way that so many young guys have, I wanted the experience.  It was that old traditional stuff of I wanted to experience what my generation was going through.  Actually as a member of the Seventh-day Adventist type church I could have gotten a classification of what was called noncombatant to be in the [U.S.] military but to be in without any responsibility for taking up arms.  But Shawn [Shawn Wilson] I had all kinds of crazy kinds of conflicts.  One of the craziest of all was that I wanted to travel wherever I could and I figured the [U.S.] Army since there was no war going on would be one of the best ways in which I could be sent all over the world.
Story_ID: 444161
Speaker 1: --Korean War you wanted to travel. You said it was a conflict (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  One of the things that I decided was that if I declared myself as a noncombatant I might not be able to get the chance to travel that had been so crazily, wonderfully important to me.  So while I was still trying to figure out what I wanted to do with my life, I decided to go ahead and try out journalism school and see what that opens up to you.  Maybe that would help me to really know about journalism as a possibility.  So I applied to Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] and was accepted at the school of journalism and I went there from '52 [1952], I started out in '52 [1952] and graduated in the class of '53 [1953] and then was drafted.  That was a powerful period of what many religious communities call discernment, figuring out things because I had never lived any significant period away from my home, away from my church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] before.  This was going to be the first time that that happened.  The funniest thing happened on this matter of traveling around the world.
Story_ID: 444162
Speaker 1: When I was drafted, the center that you first go to the name of which I don't remember what they called those kinds of centers but the gathering center was Fort Dix, New Jersey ninety miles away from my home.  So I knew I had to (laughter) go beyond that but I made a major mistake.  When I went into the personnel office where they figure out what kind of skills you have and where those skills are needed wherever, I went in hoping that mine would be needed in India or someplace.  But I made the mistake when they asked of telling them that I could type forty words per minute or something like that and their eyes lit up.  What was very clear very quickly was that they weren't going to send me anyplace.  They needed somebody who could type like that right there in the personnel office at Fort Dix, New Jersey so that's where I was assigned to (laughter).  Fort Dix, New Jersey and meanwhile I went through basic training and in the course of basic training I did much more thinking about this matter of my sense of purpose, vocation, direction, profession than I'd ever done before.  Through a long, long story two things probably should be mentioned.  One, I spent a lot of time in that period of basic training as lots of people do in basic training having nothing to do but read and I did a lot of reading and a lot of reading of the Bible for one thing, more than I'd ever done before.  I began to be very drawn to this strange guy Jesus who had not had a lot of emphasis in the church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] where I grew up.  Because that church in a sense, as a lot of break out places do, had to justify itself as a church that worshipped on Saturday rather than on Sunday and did a lot of emphasis on the Ten Commandments and on being almost more Jewish than Jews in our practices and Jesus did not get much real attention there.  When I began to do that reading and do that studying what began to almost overtake me was this idea of who this was and what he was teaching and what did that mean for my life.
Story_ID: 444163
Speaker 1: And one of the most powerful moments in all of that came for me when I was down on my stomach on the firing range.  I remember it was one, it was a winter day, very cold, very damp and very Fort Dix [New Jersey] and I was shooting whatever we used at that time M something and I was enjoying the target practice which is sort of like me.  I enjoy all kinds of testing out of skills and things of that sort.  Down on my stomach it was almost as if someone said to me: "So you're enjoying this.  Isn't that nice?  You think the [U.S.] Army is paying all this money so that you can enjoy yourself here at Fort Dix?  No they're teaching you how to kill somebody without him even being able to see you and what does that have to do with Jesus."  I really got into a big struggle with myself over that issue of the Jesus who teaches us to love our enemies and I was training to kill my enemies.  It was probably even more vivid and hard when I began bayonet training and quite consciously was being taught how to rip somebody's guts out of them as quickly as possible and while doing it to yell and growl like an animal.  The sergeant told us, some of us like crazy me always asking why, I was asking why were we yelling and growling like that and he said well that was to throw them off balance.  I really knew that it was really to help us to forget that we were humans and that we were acting like some of the worst practices of animals.  I had a long struggle at that point.  First with my own deep convictions about being in the Army.
Story_ID: 444164
Speaker 1: And then in that same period I remember after being captured by the personnel office, being sent to personnel school.  At that time, I don't if it's still--this time the [U.S.] Army sent people to Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indiana [Fort Benjamin Harrison, Marion County, Indiana] to a six or eight week school for personnel specialist who I was supposed to be and at that time I had already gone through Columbia University's [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York] placement process and as I remember they had gotten me a connection with the St. Louis Post-Dispatch and I was supposed to be the first Negro there when I was finished with the [U.S.] military.  But in the course of this school, one of the interesting things was that fortunately there was an imaginative teacher in one of our classes and part of his process was that everybody in the class, I think there were about twenty or twenty-five of us in this class, had to on one day teach the class.  On my day I taught it and I enjoyed it very much and one of my fellow--one of my classmates came to me later on and said, "Hey Harding [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding] that was really good.  You ever think about being a teacher?"  That was a whole business there because actually loving school they way that I did, someplace along the line sure I had thought about that but hadn't let it go in very deep.  But I had such wonderful teachers that I couldn't really avoid that possibility for myself.  I knew that teaching experience that day at Fort Benjamin Harrison was just powerful for me and it may not have been as quickly as I think it was but I decided I was going try to figure out how to become a teacher and not to be the first Negro on the St. Louis Post-Dispatch or any place else.
Story_ID: 444165
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that's good place to go back because you talked about you had such wonderful teachers.  Let's just go back to Morris High School [Bronx, New York] and or even a step--let me just take you back and then we'll move forward.  Do you remember first grade, do you remember where you went to first grade?
Speaker 2: I am pretty sure Shawn [Shawn Wilson] that among the many PSs in New York [New York] at the time my PS was P.S. 24 [New York, New York].  I was still in Harlem [New York, New York] yes and I think it was very close to where I lived.  I lived on--by the time I was getting ready to go into school we were on 119th Street near Park Avenue and I'm fairly sure that was the school that I was going to, yeah.
Speaker 1: What type of a student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: One of my favorite memories is of one of my report cards in which in those days the teacher put down a grade and a comment.  I'm not sure what the grade was but I think it may have been C which I think was the lowest grade I ever got and the comment was talks too much in class (laughter).  The trickster part of me could not take that card home to my mother [Mabel Broome Harding] and so I changed the C to an A (laughter).  I don't know what I did with the talks too much in class but the next issue was what would I do after my mother signed it and I was supposed to bring it back to school.  I remember vividly that the card got lost down one of the nearby sewers.  But by in large probably because I enjoyed school so much, I was pretty good at most of the school stuff and got very good grades.  For me most important was that I got great encouragement from my teachers.  They felt that I had possibilities and most of them as I can recall felt that it part of their responsibility to encourage me and I'm sure that part of it was here is this little colored boy but part of it probably for some of them more of their own sense of calling what it is a teacher is supposed to be about.  I've always felt in my own life that one of the major things a teacher is supposed to be about is an encourager and I got lots of encouragement from those folks.  As I remember at that point in New York's history most of the teachers were white that I had in Harlem.  I remember a few black teachers but most of them were white.  That was an interesting dynamic going on there.
Story_ID: 444166
Speaker 1: How did you get to Morris High School from Harlem [New York, New York] because it's located in the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: Right. It's a complicated path.  One part of the path sometime around my junior high school years and I think I entered junior high school in '44 [1944] maybe and started junior high school at a sort of East Harlem [New York, New York], below East Harlem all the lines were not as clear as they are now to a school on 109th Street called Galvani Junior High School [New York, New York].  It probably was originally an Italian neighborhood and was there for--that's when I lived on 119th [Street].  One of the nicest memories I have is a bunch of us guys who used to walk from that 119th, 120th [Street] area down to Galvani but during that period somebody broke into our apartment and stole, interestingly enough mostly clothes out of our closet and it was so distressing to my mother [Mabel Broome Harding] the idea that we were so vulnerable that she was very afraid and decided that she was not going to stay there.  That was the point when people were beginning to move from Harlem into the Bronx southbound especially.  So we moved to the Bronx and moved to Dawson Street, 856 Dawson Street in the Bronx near Longwood Avenue.  I found out later on that I had preceded into the area of Secretary Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] who was three or four years younger than me came onto the scene on the next street, Kelly Street is where he lived.  Dawson Street and Kelly Street backed up on each other.  It was there that I was living--I went to the same junior high school that he later went to, Junior High School 52 [P.S. 52, Bronx, New York] and the name doesn't strike me right now.
Story_ID: 444167
Speaker 1: But the important thing about Morris [Morris High School, Bronx, New York], Shawn [Shawn Wilson], is that I did not want to go there.  My first choice was Stuyvesant High School [New York, New York] because at that point in my life (laughter), oh boy I had been spending a lot of time building model airplanes and at one point I won an award at some kind of contest and my teacher again encourages, told me I should think about aeronautical engineering.  So not having any idea about what aeronautical engineering was except that if you build good airplane models you should try that out so I applied to Stuyvesant.  As you know Stuyvesant was and to some degree still is one of those elite schools that you take exams to get into high school and I applied and I didn't get in.  My math was shaky enough that I didn't get in and that was a great disappointment to me, I was very unhappy about that.  The next possibility there in the Bronx [New York] from all that I gathered from friends and teachers, et cetera, was DeWitt Clinton [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York] and I'm not sure, oh I know what it was I was a couple of blocks out of the DeWitt Clinton area and so I couldn't go to DeWitt Clinton.  Everybody was telling me about well Morris isn't that good at all, it's no place near as good these other places but that's where I ended up, going to Morris because I was right in the Morris High School area.
Story_ID: 444168
Speaker 1: And for me that was really one of the most powerful experiences I had and I've had a lot of experiences like that in my life where a lot of the stuff that you know this is what I want to do but you're not able to do it.  The question is why is that door closed, what is going on next door and next door was Morris High School [Bronx, New York].  One of the beautiful things about the principal of Morris at that time was that he really had a vision of creating what he used to like to call a little United Nations [UN].  The school was just totally--if you talk about diversity we had it there.  When I entered Morris in 1946 I was there with Armenians, Italians, Puerto Ricans, Irish, Jews, African Americans and a half dozen others.  It was just for me, I think, one of the most powerful and decisive experiences in my life and to become a leader in that kind of a setting and to see that as a real possibility was just great.  As I said we had marvelous teachers.  I remember two of the Ph.D. guys they--I remember the one was an administrator and the other taught one of the courses, Mr. Acker [ph.] and Mr. Shore [ph.] they were Mutt and Jeff but both of them had their doctorates teaching at Morris High School.
Story_ID: 444169
Speaker 1: At Morris High School [Bronx, New York] one of the most important people for me besides the opening that Mrs. Prevost [Francine Prevost (ph.)] offered to me, one of the most important people to me was a woman who was officially my academic advisor.  A woman named Irene Berger.  Like many of the teachers there, a Jewish woman who just took to me and very quickly met my mother [Mabel Broome Harding] and seemed so determined that she was going to really shepherd me through.  One of the things she did for me was to help me find summer jobs.  Some of them were people who were friends of hers or friends with her family.  She lived over on Grand Concourse [Bronx, New York] in that area.  Listen to this 975 Walton Avenue, she used to write to me after I got out of Morris High School and that address has stayed with me.  She helped me to find summer jobs; she encouraged me to know that I could get into City College [City College of New York, New York, New York].  As you may know that was another of those examination places.  I had never as I was growing up thought really about going anyplace else to college except to City College because my understanding was that college was where you had to pay and I knew that we did not have money for me to go anyplace else and so City College was on my mind.  Mrs. Berger encouraged me, convinced me, helped push me and of course you had to have a combination of grades and pass the tests.
Story_ID: 444170
Speaker 1: And another teacher there at Morris [Morris High School, Bronx, New York] taught me a wonderful lesson.  I was--oh yeah, I ended up as the valedictorian at Morris High School but someplace a year or so before my senior year while I was competing with some of my friends for who would get on the dean's list and all of that, I had a fascinating encounter with my biology teacher and it turned out that I would have gotten the highest grade--the highest average at that time if only I had a few more points in my grade average.  I went to her and told her that and asked her if she could change, I think I had an 89 [percent] in her biology class and asked her if she could change it to a 91 or a 92 [percent].  I have a memory of her and I won't even try to go into what she looked like but she said, "Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding] I could do that but that would not help you at all.  You were lazy in my class, you could have done much better than you did and if I were to change that now, I'd be encouraging you in that laziness and you don't have to be lazy.  You have much more in you than that.  So just take it as a lesson Vincent.  No I'm not going to change your grade (laughter)."  Just so beautiful, powerful of course it wasn't very powerful and beautiful to me at the time.
Story_ID: 444171
Speaker 1: Was there anything important or anything you'd like to share about your contributions to the Morris Piper, I mean I'm interested in what you were writing about at the time for the high school paper?
Speaker 2: Well I was the editor of the paper and my vague memory, Shawn [Shawn Wilson], is that I wrote a number of things about this vision that the principal had and about what I saw there at Morris [Morris High School, Bronx, New York] in terms of a community developing.  I'm fairly certain that that was one of the areas that I paid attention to.  It's interesting that you asked, I've not looked back at those Piper archives ever, I think since I left those but that was one of the things that I remember about what was on my mind as I was writing for the Piper.  But it was organizing the Piper that probably was my greater contribution at the time because we had a fascinating staff of people there and we enjoyed ourselves working together there.
Story_ID: 444172
Speaker 1: --Teaching thing because it's another part of those developments that are totally unexpected and on some levels unexplainable.  When I decided that I was not going to go in the direction of journalism, the next thought that came to my mind was in the light of that experience at Fort Benjamin Harrison [Marion County, Indiana] was teaching but at that point in my life teaching for me meant high school teaching.  I went to one of my favorite high school teachers [at Morris High School, Bronx, New York], a woman named Mrs.--was she a Miss or Mrs., I don't remember.  At that time she was probably Mrs. Wolf [ph.].  A relatively young woman, I would guess probably in her late twenties, early thirties and I asked her what I had to do to be able to teach in high school.  I knew nothing about that arena at all and she said, "Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding], I think that you would make a wonderful teacher."  She was talking to me before the world of tooth changes came upon me and she said, "But I want to tell you that space that you have between your two front teeth the New York Board of Education has a oral exam for high school teachers and I think that space they wouldn't let you get by so I don't think it's going to work for you."  I didn't question her, I didn't try anything, I just figured well I've got to teach someplace where you can teach with a space between your front teeth and we talked about well maybe college teaching would be the thing.  I knew nothing about how you prepared for college teaching either.  The world of higher education was just totally lost to me except my experience at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] and at Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York].  But what I did then was to go back to one of my favorite teachers at City College, John Fenton [ph.] and he was the American history teacher and he said, "Well you should have at least a master's degree in your field and preferably a doctorate."  Again I didn't know how you got a doctorate or anything like that.  So I asked him where shall I apply to school in order to get a doctorate and he recommended Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and I applied to them and I got accepted at all of them.  One of the funniest things was that I guess it was Yale that required us a second language.  I had French and they required a second language just to get in and they or somebody recommended that I choose German since it was a scholarly language.  So for the last year or so of my time in the [U.S.] Army I was doing what would now be called distance learning course in German (laughter).  And I think that helped me to cross Yale (laughter) off my list finally.
Story_ID: 444173
Speaker 1: I ended up going to Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] primarily because Victory Tabernacle Church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] had a kind of little mission church out in Chicago [Illinois].  They had difficulty finding a full time pastor for the church and my dear P.J. Bailey [Philip J. Bailey] probably figured that if they could talk me into going to Chicago to school, being the part time pastor at that church they would gather me in.  So that's why I went to Chicago basically to be able to help the little church on the South Side of Chicago and then a whole other world opened up to me from there including the world that led me to leave this very precious community of mine Victory Tabernacle and move in another direction for my life.  That's what I wanted to be sure to add to the teaching question.
Speaker 2: What world opened up for you in Chicago at the smaller version of Victory Tabernacle?
Speaker 1: Well for one thing I'm very glad that I had the opportunity to be a lay pastor in that setting that was very, very basic.  A church about the size of this office practically with just some old folks and some children there and I learned a lot about me and them and what it meant to try to share my convictions with others.  There was also a point when I was trying to figure out what my convictions really were and that's what opened up the space to explore even further what my convictions really were.
Story_ID: 444174
Speaker 1: Because when I went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I was registered in the history department where I heard for the first time in my life that there was such a thing as the history of Christianity and I didn't know that there was any such thing and when I heard about it I said to myself well maybe if I study that I'll learn more about what I really believe.  So that was one of the major openings Shawn [Shawn Wilson], the discovery that I could study about this faith and not simply practice it but learn about it and understand where it came from.  In the course of that lots of things opened up.  Probably for our purposes and for the point of putting a period on some of this was that I also came in touch with people who were thinking some of the same things that I was thinking about Jesus and how you deal with your enemies.  I then entered the world of what we sometimes call in this country the peace churches and particularly the Mennonite church and that was a kind of new beginning.  The other major new beginning for me was that was where I met my wife [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] and she introduced me to another magnificent world as well which we will not try to go into right now.  But that was all part of the Chicago [Illinois] experience for me.
Story_ID: 444175
Speaker 1: So when you realized that there is--that the study, the history of Christianity did you make any connecting of the dots between Pastor Bailey [Philip J. Bailey] having been--did you think about what was his self-education versus what would be this formal education in Christianity that you would receive?  Did you think about him at all?
Speaker 2: I did not think about him in terms of comparison or contrast to that.  All through my life I have thought about him as someone who was of tremendous value to me, partly just his commitment to study.  That was one thing that was very, very important for him.  One of the difficulties Shawn [Shawn Wilson] is that every question opens up a whole other arena but let me just mention this, while I was still at that little church in Chicago [Illinois] I was living on St. Lawrence Avenue in a rooming house run by two old lovely black people.  He was some podiatrist and I lived on the third floor, shared a kitchen with a couple of people up there and I remember one Friday which was when I was usually preparing my sermon for the next day, sitting in the kitchen working on it and a young woman, I think she was probably in her twenties, who was also living up there saw me as she was going out to work and when she came back from work I was still in the kitchen working.  She said, "What are you doing (laughter)?" I said, "I'm trying to prepare for--," and she said, "But you've been here all day," and I said, "Yes."  She said, "Well I thought that all you had to do was go and stand up there and God would put the words in your mouth."  I said, "No it's not quite that way (laughter)," but P.J. Bailey helped me to know that there was something more into the process of preparing.  So I think of him when I think of that story and what I am sure is that if he had had the opportunity to have a theological education in a more formal way he probably would have been very, very happy for it and would have done beautiful things with it, probably different things than I did with it.  But I know he would have had great appreciation for it.
Story_ID: 444176
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh Shawn [Shawn Wilson] almost no answers can come from me straight like that.  I left the university after I had finished my class work, my course work.  My wife [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] and I left from there at that time to go south to participate in the movement.  So there was a whole period when I was not at the University of Chicago.  I didn't finally come back to the university until '54 [1954].  Let me stop I will answer the question first, I finished in '65 [1965], came back in '64 [1964], finished in '65 [1965] and then went on from there to Atlanta [Georgia] to teach at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  But there's a volume in between there.
Story_ID: 444177
Speaker 1: Right, I'm going to just throw out some, like, historical moments.  For example, in '54 [1954] when Brown vs. the Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], the [U.S.] Supreme Court came down with a ruling.  Does that jar your memory of what was happening for you at the time, where were you, what was your perception of the ruling and what was going on?
Speaker 2: I was in the [U.S.] military at that time and I'm pretty sure that I was back at Fort Dix [New Jersey] from Fort Benjamin Harrison [Marion County, Indiana] and I was aware that something really important was going on and I think that I made a point of getting a newspaper that following day.  I'm not certain again because I've seen so much of this on video and in books that I can easily insert myself into that history but I think that I went to make sure that I had a newspaper.  Yeah because I think that I saved that newspaper for a good while.  So I was aware that something was developing in my country and I had no idea about how I might be involved in it but I'm pretty sure that I had some kind of sense that I was going to be connected to it.  [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson Reagon in our interview with her speaks about what it was for her as a high schooler when she became aware of what was going on in the movement and she said that she just felt that she wanted to make sure that she didn't go to sleep or miss anything because she just felt that something was happening and she wanted to make sure that she had an opportunity to be a part of it and that it did not pass her by.  And I think that I had some of that sense when '54 [1954] came around.
Story_ID: 444178
Speaker 1: When did you become aware of what your role may be within the movement?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I don't know for certain Shawn [Shawn Wilson] we'll have to negotiate how to tell this story because it's a rather expansive one like most of my stories.  After I came out of the [U.S.] Army and came in connection with the Mennonites and with my wife who had already been a part of the Mennonite church before I discovered it.  What was very clear to us was that whole emphasis on finding nonviolent ways to struggle for change was something that was part of the Mennonite heritage even though lots of Mennonites, perhaps most Mennonites especially white Mennonites didn't necessarily recognize that.  Part of what became clear to us was that one of our responsibilities was to help the Mennonite churches understand that what was going on in the South was a movement that was connected to what Mennonites said they believed in for hundreds of years.  Another part of our responsibility was to be present to that southern movement in the light of what we had learned and probably maybe more dramatically than it actually was.  The moment that became clearer to me was in 1958 when a group of us from the interracial Mennonite church that I was helping to give leadership to in Chicago [Illinois] decided that the five of us, three white, two blacks would get into a station wagon and drive through the South and pledge not to allow ourselves to be separated.  In the course of that, we decided to go and see Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] who was just a name to us at the time and he was recuperating from the stab wound that he'd received in New York [New York].  But Coretta [Coretta Scott King] was glad to see what we were trying to do and thought that Martin would be glad to meet us.  She took us into his bedroom; he was sitting there in his pajamas recuperating.  By the time we left he said especially to me and the other black guy who was in the group, Ed Riddick [George "Ed" Riddick] was his name, said, "You guys know about what we're doing here, you ought to come down here and work with us."  I think that stuck even though again it might be romanticizing but I think it stuck and that was part of eventually what brought Rosemarie [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] and me to go south to participate in the movement.
Story_ID: 444179
Speaker 1: The precise detail was that we started saying to Mennonites,  Mennonites ought to be in the South in this movement not in some quiet safe places but should be there because that's a part of what we say we believe.  After a period of time finally some of the powers in the church said well that is right, you're probably right why don't you go for us (laughter).  So that's what we did, we became the official representatives of the Mennonites churches to the freedom movement and that double task we understood to be our task, probably triple just to learn as much as we could about what was going on, to encourage people, to know that this was part of the biblical teaching that they said they believed in.  To encourage Mennonite to know that was what was going on in the South.  To help them to become supportive of it in whatever way they could and to be with our friends who were in the movement in the South and to encourage them, support them through whatever teaching we could, do whatever kind of helping we could.  So maybe I knew it through that visit with King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in September '58 [1958] but maybe I knew it before that.
Speaker 2: With the 1958, when you're with the three, with the interracial Mennonites through the South can you tell me how that played itself out that trip to Mississippi?
Speaker 1: Actually we started in Little Rock [Arkansas] and drove across and went through your state and then got to Atlanta [Georgia] and then went back up north from there.  We had some fascinating experiences including one in which I guess in Tennessee where the five of us pulled up to this restaurant and went in to take our seats and as soon as we got in the owner closed all of the blinds in the place.  I assumed because he didn't want people to think that he was serving black folks and white folks in his restaurant.  The waitress told us that she couldn't serve us that they didn't serve colored people there or whatever the term was at the time and said that if we wanted to they would serve the black guys in the kitchen.  So the white guy said, "Well if they can eat in the kitchen, we're going to eat in the kitchen too."  "No you all can't eat in the kitchen together," and finally the owner came and told us it was time to leave and all of us coming from either academic or church backgrounds started to want to talk with him.  He wasn't interested in talking (laughter) and on the way out which is where he insisted we go we stopped at the counter and wanted to talk to him some more and he pulled out his pistol and said, "You better shut up and get out of here," (laughter) and we stopped talking at that point (laughter).
Story_ID: 444180
Speaker 1: One of the memories that I continue to find coming up again and again in my mind is the memory that represents for me my mother's [Mabel Broome Harding] commitment to me and my own development.  While I was growing up she was almost always working as a domestic in other people's homes mostly Jewish homes in New York [New York] even though apparently at the time not long before I was born she was working for an Italian family and what she tells me is that they had a son whose name was Vincent and she--he was the most wonderful boy and she wanted her son to be named Vincent.  So I was named after an unknown Italian young man.  But that work that she did I think only later in my life did I come to understand what a domestic did and what kind of work she had to do to support me and her.  We were also, I guess until I was sixteen, we were on what was called welfare at that time--no not welfare at that time what was it called at that time--well it was equivalent of welfare and what I remember Shawn [Shawn Wilson] that's at the point when I think I was in my senior year in college and that year I served maybe the entire academic year as a kind of dorm assistant at the one living in dorm that City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] had at the time.  A place called Army Hall originally built for the guys who were at City during World War II [WWII].  It was my only period of time at City living away from home because other than that I was like everybody else commuting back and forth from the Bronx [New York] to Convent Avenue.  I remember coming home at some point maybe on a weekend and it was not until I got into the house that I realized that what my mother [Mabel Broome Harding] was doing in addition to her regular job, she was taking in ironing; ironing peoples' clothes to earn extra money for me to be able to do what I was doing.  I was just overwhelmed by that and have never forgotten that and she of course said oh it wasn't much, she could do it, et cetera, et cetera.
Story_ID: 444181
Speaker 1: And maybe it was about that time that she had gotten a job now working at the Hotel Pierre [The Pierre] in New York [New York].  This big fabulous hotel and one of the most exciting and beautiful things for me was when I signed a contract for my first book, 'There is a River' ['There is a River: The Black Struggle for Freedom in America,' Vincent Harding] and got a very helpful check for that.  What my wife [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] and I decided was that we would take my mother who was living with us, I guess we were in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area at the time but we'd take my mother to the Hotel Pierre and a lot of her friends were still working there in the housekeeping department.  When word went around that Mabel [Mabel Broome Harding] was back and she was a guest in the hotel (laughter) it was just a magnificent thing and my mother was absolutely happy and I just was so glad that we were able to do that just as some very small response to her faithfulness.  I should add with my mother the other powerful fan that I had her favorite brother came to this country also.  As a matter of fact he came apparently a bit before she did and he came to Boston [Massachusetts] and lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  He was really my surrogate father and every summer I remember when school was out my mother would put me on the train and I would go from New York to Boston to Back Bay Station [Boston, Massachusetts] where Uncle Gordon [Gordon McDonald Broome] would meet me.  I would be assured that before the summer was over he would take me to this tailoring place and get two suits made for me for that school year, knicker suits.  Uncle Gordon eventually ended up living with us in his last days as well but that was another great source of support for me even though he always used to kid me and tell me that he was going to train me to be the next Joe Louis (laughter).  He was quite capable of that kind of joking around.  But the two of them were really very, very powerful in my life.
Story_ID: 444182
Speaker 1: What is it that you came to understand about African American heritage through your wife's relatives in the South that you had not understood before?
Speaker 2: Well I think that one of the important things about growing up in that Harlem [New York, New York] experience and particularly in that West Indian based black church [Victory Tabernacle Seventh Day Christian Church, New York, New York] that I really did not have much exposure to the black community that was not West Indian in that earlier part of my life.  I met some in school, et cetera, et cetera but in terms of a real friendship, family kind of thing, I had very, very little of that and one of the things that was powerful for me in that connection with Rosemarie [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] was one, she came from a massive family.  She was the last child of twelve who lived and sixteen all together and she came from a setting in which all kinds of family had moved up primarily from southwest Georgia into Chicago [Illinois] and into New York [New York].  So there were family all around and she herself grew up there on the South Side of Chicago where she could always walk to family, get on the bus or train to family and family and its power and its living force was part of what I learned about from her and from the way in which that family just took me in.  I'm still in a sense living off of that love and it's been a magnificent, beautiful thing.  It was there through that family that I had some deeper sense of what it meant for people to come through the southern experience to come to the North to survive, to overcome and to continue building and creating.
Story_ID: 444183
Speaker 1: So it was having an opportunity to take the southern black experience beyond simply intellectual knowledge to personal deep spiritual connection and I think that when we went south it was so important for me to have the background of her family to help prepare me, to help me to understand what I was living in and living through.  She just obviously belonged there in some deep and powerful ways.  So those were the kinds of things that I was thinking about.  Just knowing what it meant for people to live through the experience that they lived through and I think it was through Rose [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] and her family that I was able unselfconsciously to keep speaking about my sense of we-ness with this African American community of the USA that in some ways that I don't even fully understand yet.  I have entered that family so that some of the things that we were talking about earlier concerning the kind of West Indian sense of superiority.  I simply have no connection to or desire to be connected to and as you probably figured out from our conversation one of my major desires is to blow it out of the water because I don't think it helps anybody.  Neither the people with the sheriffs or the queens can have any reason to be thinking that they're better than anybody else and that we've got to figure out how this new community comes into being.
Story_ID: 444184
Speaker 1: So Dr. Harding [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding], what were--what do you consider the motivating factors for you going to the South to do the work you did in Mississippi and throughout the South?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm not sure that I can identify them Shawn [Shawn Wilson] with any full clarity.  As I mentioned earlier I knew that something of great significance was going on.  Just as I did not want to miss the experience of my generation going through the [U.S.] military, I knew that this was something that I needed to be a part of in the South.  That partly because of my own deep religious convictions and commitments, partly because of my social concerns many of whom I don't fully understand where they came from, partly because of my connections now deepening, deepening with Rosemarie's [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] family and my sense that this was now a deeper part of me than ever before.  I think all of those were part of the motivation and of course Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] invitation was important recognizing that I could have something to offer, something to learn.  When I was in the South after we had moved south and was participating in the movement what struck me was that of all the people that I knew who either were based there or had come there, there were very few people who were there with academic training as historians.  I really felt that that was a responsibility that I had to take very seriously.  I don't feel that I have fulfilled the seriousness of it yet but I'm glad that I did have the training, had the preparation and had the magnificent gift of the experience itself.  So I think that's one of the things that kept me alive to that experience.  A sense that perhaps I could do something with it in terms of translating it for others in other places or for other generations but I just had this sense that I could make a contribution by being a participant, by sharing my gifts and then by trying to tell the story, tell the story--
Story_ID: 444185
Speaker 1: At what point do you actually get to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then start your work at Spelman University [sic.]?
Speaker 2: We moved south the year after we were married in '61 [1961] to participate with the movement.  Atlanta [Georgia] was our base.  One of the things that we did was to be the co-directors of a kind of a movement house there in Atlanta and living there we got to know the people on the Atlanta universities campuses including some of the marvelous people at Spelman like Staughton Lynd and Howard Zinn.  I was involved with the people who were protesting the firing of those in Spelman College and so I got to know those men in very important ways for me and got to know their protagonist, the president.  Interestingly enough it was after I went back to Chicago [Illinois] from the South and finished my degree [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] that it seems to me it probably wasn't but it seems to me like five minutes after I'd finished my dissertation and was on the way for the degree Albert J. Manley [sic. Albert E. Manley] called me and said, "That I hear that you're finished now."  We had met each other over the issue of Zinn and Lynd, "Would you come back to Atlanta to teach with us at Spelman and be chairperson of the history department," which was Howard Zinn's position.  I called Howard and asked him for his advice about that.  My inclination was to go and accept the teaching position but not to accept replacement for him in the chairperson's position that didn't quite feel right to me.  We had a wonderful conversation.  He was, I guess, someplace up north at the time and he said, "Vincent [HistoryMaker Vincent Harding] it is very important for you to teach there and I hope that you will take that position."  He said, "But you must also take the chairmanship because that's not a setting where you were to go without any power."  He said, "You must have something that you can stand on in that situation and I would take the chairpersonship also."  So we talked some more and I thought some more and Rosemarie [Rosemarie Freeney Harding] and I talked some more and eventually I went to chair the department at Spelman in the fall of 1965 and did that until Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated and Coretta [Coretta Scott King] asked me to help her get The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] started.
Story_ID: 444186
Speaker 1: Perfect segue into what was your role as director in starting, helping to get The King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta, Georgia] started.
Speaker 2: Before the perfect segue how much time do we have on the tape at this point?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Five minutes.
Speaker 2: Oh only five minutes?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Actually yeah.
Speaker 2: Is that too big of an issue to tackle in five minutes?
Speaker 1: I can start it and we can then have a marker from there.  The major task, challenge whatever might be--my mind is changing even as I speak.  One of the major tasks was to help Coretta [Coretta Scott King].  At that point I don't think I even thought deeply enough about how much help she needed and what kind of a situation she was in but it was clear that she knew my connection with Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and she felt that as an academic right there in Atlanta [Georgia] who had also been a part of the movement that perhaps I could really help her get the center started.  So helping her was one thing, connected directly to that tremendous responsibility was to figure out what a King center was all about.  What would a Martin Luther King center be in 1968 with the cities burning all over the country with the whole question of why was Martin assassinated with all of those issues still alive with lots of people full deep, deep disappointment that his life had been ended in that way, what was The King Center for.  That was the second part of the responsibility and for me all of that kind of responsibility is always something that I want to carry out with others.  So gathering a community of scholars, artists, active- organizers, activists, religious people bringing all of that together and saying this is what we should be doing was a major part of my role and then trying to offer some wisdom to what our answers might be.  All of that was part of what I was doing and fighting a lot of political fights especially that was a moment when people were still in a kind of backward way of thinking that if you wanted to care about King then you couldn't be talking about black power and trying to help ourselves and others to understand that those were not things that were contradictory to each other but that they belonged together.  I didn't understand then how much that I knew that there was a place where they met and I was hoping that we could help the King Center to be a place where they met.  It was hard at the beginning but I think it was worth the try.
