Story_ID: 661641
Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe, interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Judge Glenda Hatchett [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett], G-L-E-N-D-A, H-A-T-C-H-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: All right. And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 31st, 1951, Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a judge. I am also the founding member of The Hatchett Firm [The Hatchett Firm, PC], a national law firm based here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: October 5, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 661642
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask--
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) they're sort of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I did have a favorite (laughter) food. This is a funny story. I became a vegetarian in 2007, but before that, my favorite food on the face of the earth was salmon. I love seafood. And since then, tofu is not quite the same (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. It's how you season it, you know. But, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red, red is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love red.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime, because things are in bloom, and it's beautiful and, I love springtime.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anyplace that has a beach. I am sand and water--my, one of my favorite things to do is just to take long, long, long walks along the, along the beach. If I had one city to go back to, in terms of traveling, it would probably be Florence, Italy. I love Italy. I love the history. I love the culture, the art.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Really, it's my dad's. And my dad [Paul Hatchett, Sr.], when he was very pleased with something, would say, "Great day." And that just reminds me of his optimism. And it reminds me that we always need to operate from the side of hope.
Story_ID: 661643
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --your mother's side of the family and your father's [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Clemmie Elizabeth Barnes Hatchett [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett], C-L-E-M-M-I-E, Elizabeth, standard spelling, E--E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, her maiden name, Barnes, B-A-R-N-E-S, and Hatchett is same as mine, H-A-T-C-H-E-T-T.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 13th, 1921, Florence, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, and what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What are the stories from that side?
Speaker 2: Yes. My mother's mother, Hattie Barnes--I'm gonna think of her maiden name in just a second. And her parents all lived in Florence, South Carolina, and that my mother's grandmother, think about that, my mother's grandmother, which would be my great-grandmother, was 107 when she passed. And I remember these vivid stories about her. Obviously, she passed long before I was born, but think about the longevity of somebody living to be 107 years old. And she was fiercely independent up until three days before she passed. She was living alone, had her own garden, chickens, cooked for herself, washed, cleaned her house. Except that her eyesight was failing, she was independent and never was in a hospital. She had all sixteen of her children at home and lived a very long, remarkable life. My mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute. I want to talk about her some more--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because her story reaches back to beyond the Civil War.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: She was born in--I don't--well, prior to the Civil War, and I don't know if she was enslaved or not. Not everybody was, but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what, what's her story? Where there any stories about--
Speaker 2: I don't know if she was a slave. I know that all of her children didn't survive childbirth. It's my understanding that maybe ten of the sixteen survived.
Speaker 1: Sixteen, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she, but she gave birth to sixteen children. I think that there were two, two, two births that were twins. But you know, even so, she had a lot of children, again, all of them born at home. And think about the fact that she was never sick. She had never been in a hospital literally until three days before she passed. She became ill, she was hospitalized, and she passed away. When we take a break I'll call my mother and get more information. But she was--you know, I've seen pictures of her, just remarkably very beautiful, beautiful woman. Obviously, you know, as so many of our ancestors were, clearly she was of some mixed race, because you can tell by her complexion and her hair, as, and you can see that in my grandmother and, and in my grandfather [Leon Barnes] too on my mother's side. But I know that she lived in close proximity of her children, that they never, ever left this area of Florence, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did they own land there going all the way back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, they owned, yes they owned land. I do know that they owned land. They farmed land in that area.
Story_ID: 661644
Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandmother, and I'll have to come back and fill in some more about this, this great-grandmother. But my grandmother, who I did know, who, who died my first year in law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia], was--I had never met anybody like her before. My grandfather was a lot older. She was fifteen when she and my grandfather married. My grandfather was from North Carolina. And basically he was transient, in that he was a carpenter, and so he had to move from place to place to place depending on work. And it is said, although he never told me this 'cause he died when I was fairly young, that he actually would pass to be, as white, to get some work. And today I can still drive in Florence, South Carolina and see these antebellum style homes that he built. He was a very, very, very skilled carpenter. I mean today he would be considered, you know, a top notch contractor. But because he was black, you know, opportunities were very limited. But what he did, very, very astutely, his name was Leon Barnes. I do know that he was a twin.
Speaker 2: N- Neon you said?
Speaker 1: Leon (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leon, okay.
Speaker 1: L-E-O-N, Leon Barnes. I know that he was a twin. I know that his twin died at birth. We don't know very much about my grandfather's side of the family because he left home very young. We know he's from No- North Carolina and was very transient. The story is that he had to fully be black once he married my grandmother because he could no longer kind of do that and, and live in a very segregated, racist community in South Carolina. But he was very smart in that because there was no pension; he didn't have insurance where he worked, obviously; and he was, on the times when he wasn't working, he built houses. And they, he and my grandmother, acquired land, and that was how he provided for my grandmother, knowing that he was fifteen years her senior. He was thirty years old when he married her, she was fifteen--that he built these small houses, and they rented them out. And that was the income that he would know that she would have when she--in her older years. That was her retirement plan. And at the time that my grandmother did pass, there were thirteen houses, including the house that was their home, which I thought to have that kind of foresight and to have that kind of discipline to be able to provide for my grandmother long term, knowing that because of the age difference that he would most likely die before she died. And my grandmother only had an elementary level education. But she was one of the most disciplined businesswomen you will ever, ever, ever, ever meet. I remember as a child sitting on the front porch of her house and people coming because they would have to pay rent weekly. And, and the sheriff would--as she got older, the sheriff would actually go and collect her rent. And he'd come by, the white sheriff would come by and she'd sit on her porch, and he'd say, "Ms. Barnes [Hattie Barnes], here's the rent," and she would give him the fee for it. And she had--there was a plot of land when I was a little girl directly across the street from her house, and she grew all kinds of vegetables, and she had a cow that she would put out to pasture every day. And she'd put that cow back. And she'd make butter, and we'd have milk, and we churned ice cream. And, but you know, to have, to have that level of education, to manage. And even after my grandfather died, she later cleared that land, which was her garden, her--she had a huge garden. And she literally built on that plot of land; she then built three more houses there. But I thought, what great ingenuity and great survival skills, because she and my grandfather had nine children. My mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] is number seven in the lineup. They had a son, then six daughters straight, my mother being the youngest of the daughters, and then two sons.
Story_ID: 661645
Speaker 1: So your mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] grew up in Florence?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And went to school in Florence?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, she went to elementary school and to high school. Wilson High School was the only black high school there in Florence, and my mother went to Wilson High School in Florence, South Carolina. And the younger children, starting with Aunt Alberta [Alberta Barnes], my mother's sister who was only I think thirteen months older than my mother. So Aunt Bert, my mother, Uncle Leon [Leon Barnes], and Uncle Frank [Frank Barnes], the four younger children out of the nine all went to college. And my mother went to college at Claflin. It was Claflin College then in Orangeburg [South Carolina], now Claflin University. But I have to tell you a really good story. And stop me if I'm going too long with these answers.
Speaker 1: No, no, go ahead.
Speaker 2: So, really good story is--and I did not know this until about ten years ago. And relatives were visiting us from Louisiana in Atlanta [Georgia]. And my cousin's daughter, who really is like my little sister to me, Cheryl Teimer [ph.], and I was sitting curled up in my living room and built a fire, and we were just listening to my mother's stories. And my mother told us the story about how my grandfather [Leon Barnes] had bought this huge plot of land, but it was outside the City of Florence, I mean out in the country somewhere, right. And because he could build houses, he had built a house and it--moved my grandmother [Hattie Barnes]. And at that time they had three little children and moved there. Well, my grandfather left to go on a job and left her there. And she was totally opposed to moving to the country, because she said, "I want my children to be educated. I do not want my children to be in the country. You know, they can't get schooling out here, in the middle of nowhere." And while my grandfather was gone, she loaded up the wagon, put the three little ones--I mean, they were like stair steps, Uncle Bill [Willie Barnes], Aunt Joanna [Josephine Barnes], and Aunt Ruth [Ruth Barnes], put them in the wagon, and set the house on fire, burned it to the ground, right. She comes back to Florence with just the stuff she has on the wagon. I don't know if my grandfather ever knew that, but that's what she did. But she burnt--'cause she was so determined for her children not to grow up in the country and not to go to school every day. So she comes back, and it gets really complicated because my--her mother said, "Well, you can't move here." So they had started building, in fact, it's the house that my mother and her siblings grew up in that I knew as a child, that--you know, I don't go back and visit now because they're all passed away, but it's the house I knew as my grandparents' house. That house they had started building when my grandfather decided to build this house out in the middle of the country, but it wasn't finished. My grandmother literally did the interior and finished the house. (Laughter) I was like, she did what? Out--I mean I just always knew she was this amazing, remarkable woman and just very strict and very stern and very--but I was like, she did what? I mean, you know, I worked in the House for Habitat [sic. Habitat for Humanity] and I was struggling, right, I mean, the fact, the fact that she was so determined. And she, she came back and, and that's where they lived--
Speaker 1: Okay. So your grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until she passed away.
Speaker 1: --never really knew what happened?
Speaker 2: I don't think he ever knew that she burned down the--I just found out about ten years ago. I never knew that story. But it showed her absolute commitment to making sure that her children were educated, you know, the premium she put on education, you know, because she, she didn't have, you know, she didn't have that.
Speaker 1: Your mother wasn't born yet I guess when this happened?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, it was just, there were nine children in all. Mom was number seven in the lineup. So these are the three, the first three children, and they were literally stair steps. I mean, imagine having three teeny tiny kids.
Story_ID: 661646
Speaker 1: So she grew up in the Town of Florence, and you said she went to Wilson [Wilson High School, Florence, South Carolina] and then to Claflin [Claflin College; Claflin University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and I know she eventually went on to, to earn a master's degree, right?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: So, was she a teacher or what, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She's a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's a teacher. My mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] always wanted to be a pediatrician, always wanted to be a doctor. And she actually dropped out of Claflin for a year because my mother--my grandmother [Hattie Barnes] was in a very bad accident, and she had to come home to help care for my grandmother. And she went back and finished Claflin and came and became an elementary school teacher in Florence, South Carolina. And the summer of 1948--let me get the right--'48 [1948], she was at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] in summer school working on her master's. My father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] was at AU working on his master's, and that's how they met. And there's a beautiful love story. If we have time I want to tell you how they met.
Story_ID: 661647
Speaker 1: First I want to talk about his side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's name and?
Speaker 2: Yes. Paul Lawrence Hatchett, Sr. [Paul Hatchett, Sr.], and it's L-A--L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E, had to think about that for a second (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was he named after Paul Laurence Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was. My grandmother [Mamie Hatchett] named him, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She named him after Paul Laurence Dunbar. He was one of three sons. He was the middle son. My grandmother--there, the, the, the, the stories are so different in terms of my paternal, my paternal and my maternal grandmothers and their pasts. My father's mother actually went to Spelman [Spelman College] here in Atlanta [Georgia] but spent her whole life as a domestic, which it just always, I'm always challenged by that story, that how these women, both dynamic and bright, smart women in their own ways, one educated and one not traditionally educated [Hatchett's maternal grandmother, Hattie Barnes], were relegated to being domestic workers all of their lives. So my, my father's story is very unique in the sense that--well, maybe not so unique--in the sense that my grandfather, who he really never knew--my grandparents were married, but my grandfather, Frank [Frank Hatchett (ph.)] was his first name, Milas, M-I-L-A-S, Hatchett, was in the Army and of course, a segregated army. He died when my uncle Milas [Milas Hatchett], Uncle Milas was the oldest, was five years old; my dad was three; Uncle Fred, Frederick [Frederick Hatchett], was a year old. And my grandmother was left with these three sons, who all turned out to be these remarkable men. But my grandfather died. If he had been white, he would have survived. In the United States Army he died from tuberculosis, which was treatable.
Speaker 1: Now this, this is, this is when?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was born in 1921. So let's do the math. That would have been 19--what, twenty- my dad was three, so that would have been 1924?
Speaker 1: But tuberculosis in those days was not necessarily untreatable. The, the treatment was dry air, rest, and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --maybe the body can overcome it. Paul Laurence Dunbar died of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --tuberculosis and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true, so we should strike, strike my--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but that--
Speaker 2: --my, my comment out.
Speaker 1: I think they didn't have the drugs to treat it 'til--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the '40s [1940s] actually.
Speaker 2: Right. So he died.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He died in the Army.
Speaker 1: It's called consumption in those days.
Speaker 2: It was called consumption; that's right. And so my mother--my grandmother was left to raise these three wonderful children who became incredible men, all of whom went to Clark, at that time Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 661648
Speaker 1: Your dad [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] grew up wh- where?
Speaker 2: In LaGrange, Georgia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In LaGrange, Georgia--
Speaker 2: --Troup County [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My m- grandmother's [Mamie Hatchett] family, McCords [ph.] were their name, McCord, and my grand- my great-grandfather, my grandmother's father, and wife owned a substantial amount of land in Troup County, and they were farmers. Of course, all of this happened before I was born.
Speaker 1: Is there, is there a story about how they acquired the land or anything? Or--
Speaker 2: I don't know how they acquired the land. I can tell you how they lost the land.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I ask you these story--these questions--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause you know, you know, we, we weren't really in favor in the United States in those days, and so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --if you were a slave or even if you were free, I mean, to acquire land was a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a huge thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) tough thing to do.
Speaker 2: And he, and, and my, my father talked about, you know, how, how he, his grandfather really distinguished himself because he was a landowner. But I don't--you know, and I need to know that. I don't know how he acquired the land, but I know that he was a landowner and that I remember my father being very, very disturbed, because when my--when his grandfather died, John McCord [ph.], he left the land, but did not have a will, and--to his children, of course, were the heirs, were the surviving heirs, one of them being my grandmother. And they fought and fought and fought and fought. And the white lawyer down in Troup County ended up being the one who benefited because they got hardly nothing, partly out of their fighting each other and partly out of just the ignorance of not understanding the worth. Because my father would say often--I mean, that land was very near where Callaway Gardens [Callaway Resort and Gardens, Pine Mountain, Georgia] is now, right.
Speaker 1: What, what, what is Callaway--
Speaker 2: Callaway Gardens is a lovely resort down in that area of Georgia. Bo Callaway and his family developed this--and you know, very painful, because we would go down there sometimes for a little short vacation as a family. And my father knew, I mean, he knew that that land was worth something. And he would say, you know what, just the timber rights on that land would have really been wealth for generations yet born. But the person who benefited was the lawyer basically, who really swindled them out of this and gave them, you know, just to settle the squabble. And they did not know enough to really push back and to do that.
Speaker 1: Is there--do you have any idea what the origin of the, the discontent was with the, with the siblings, you know?
Speaker 2: Greed is what I gathered. You know, I never had that conversation with my father. You know, clearly, this all had happened long before I came around. And, but I knew that as my dad would drive in that area, and he would point to the area, you know, and he actually took me to a relative's house once with land adjacent to where his grandfather's land was, because his grandfather was such a huge figure in his life, became a, a father figure for my father and my uncles [Milas Hatchett and Frederick Hatchett] because they had lost their father [Frank Hatchett (ph.)] so young, and talked about what a great man he was and how disciplined and what a hard worker he was. But I--you know, and this is just my own deduction, that it was just greed about who would get what. And you know, some people wanted to sell it; some people wanted to hold onto it; some people understood--you know, there were sisters, like my grandmother, who had gone to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, my aunt Francis [ph.], my aunt Melvina [ph.], my aunt Sally [ph.], were educated women, and they understood the value, whereby I think some of the men wanted, you know, it to be cashed out. And it just got to be horrible because they couldn't see the long view of it.
Story_ID: 661649
Speaker 1: What were your father's aspirations growing up?
Speaker 2: My father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] to get his master's in bus- business administration. I'm--
Speaker 1: Did he get his bachelor's there?
Speaker 2: He didn't, he didn't quite finish. He didn't quite finish, but he had substantial work toward his master's. He was working and put himself through school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I was asking about his bachelor's degree.  What--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes--
Speaker 1: --what, what did he get that--
Speaker 2: He got that in, in business administration--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--
Speaker 2: --at Clark--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And you know, I know that my father, but for his commitment to his family, would have taken some risk. He wanted to be his--he wanted to own his own business. He wanted to be a businessman. And instead he kept a steady job, and he worked up until the time, actually I was in, in college [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts]. My father worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] sorting mail. And he would take the supervisor's test. Every year I would see him studying for it. But he'd never get promoted, even though he would get perfect scores on his test. And he was always very positive. I never saw him bitter, was a remarkable man. And I have always said that if my father had a fraction of the opportunities I have had, just a fraction, that he would have been on the Supreme Court of the United States. He was a very smart man, was a very wise man, could cut through just anything. You know, see, he was a very fair man, very practical man. And his supervisors were white men with a GED [General Educational Development]. And year after year after year, and looking back on adult eyes, I don't know why he kept doing that.
Speaker 1: That's here in Atlanta [Georgia] right?
Speaker 2: Yes, here in Atlanta. I don't know why he kept doing that. So finally, you know, things started opening up, civil rights acts, and people started getting more opportunities. He was hired by the EPA, [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency. And he started to, to, you know, have more opportunities to show his, his brilliance and his work ethic.
Speaker 1: So this, would this have been during the '70s [1970s] I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--
Speaker 1: --with EPA?
Speaker 2: --yes, yes, during the '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with the EPA.
Story_ID: 661650
Speaker 1: Your story about your father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] is, is one that's a familiar story for those days. A lot of black folks with Ph.D.'s were working in the post office (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: They couldn't, couldn't get out, couldn't get another job at the professional aspirations--I mean, it was probably easy to be successful with a business than it would be to, to try to be a prof- well, you know, you could, you could teach or, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Be a preacher or the post office.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: That's pretty much it, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he didn't venture out to be a businessman because of the economic uncertainty. And I have two younger brothers [Paul Hatchett, Jr. and Kolen Hatchett], and I think that he was just committed to making sure that we had a solid economic floor under us.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Now, did he serve in the war at all? Did he--
Speaker 2: He, he did. He actually got--he actually left Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. He was drafted into the war.
Speaker 1: This is World War II [WWII], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, World War II. He was actually, fortunately, he was not, he was not on the combat lines, but he was stationed in Hawaii. But he was in the war, and then he had to come back and finish college. But he was in college at the time, was drafted into the war, served in the [U.S.] Army, and then after he was discharged, he came back and finished his college education.
Speaker 1: Now you said there's a good story about how they met, so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --now is the time to tell that, so--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. But I have to tell you the story about him in college though first--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --how he--you realize my grandmother [Mamie Hatchett] had three sons in college at the same time, you know, because of their age and because of the service in the war, all of that. My father worked at the Piedmont Driving Club as a waiter, right, at night. And often the trolley would have stopped service so he couldn't get back to school before his shift ended, and he would walk. A lot of nights he would walk from Piedmont Driving Club, which is in Midtown Atlanta, right there on the edge of Piedmont Park, as a young--at that time considered a young colored guy walking through Atlanta, Georgia, at night by himself. And he would walk all the way back to campus, and campus was ways out on Pryor Road, which has to be at least six, maybe seven miles. I'm gonna clock that one day. He would go to bed, get up, go to class, study, and do the same thing. Years later, my husband and I bought a house diagonally across the street from Piedmont Driving Club. We're the only--that time we were the only black couple in the neighborhood. And my father stood at the edge of my porch, and his eyes welled with tears. The discipline that it took for him to do that, knowing that there was not family money to support him, that he really had to work to support himself through--I mean, my grandmother did everything she could, speaks volumes of who he was as a man, as his commitment to his education, to his commitment to better himself. And that's why it was so emotional talking about the post office story, because I know how hard he worked to get what he had.
Story_ID: 661651
Speaker 1: So, my mom [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] and dad [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: On a happier note, my mom and dad were in summer school that summer, didn't know each other. And one Sunday morning, my mom was in the cafeteria at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] getting, having breakfast, and she was at the water fountain. My dad's roommate, who we affectionately grew up knowing as Uncle Al, Albert Sadler [ph.], was with my dad. And my dad said, "(Gasps) I wanna meet her." Well, I got the adult version of the story when I got older. I just knew that that was what he told us when we were kids. But later, he said, "Your dad only saw her beautiful legs and her hips. He didn't even see her face 'cause she was bent over the water fountain." He was like--and they called each other mate, like short for roommate. He'd said, "Mate, I gotta meet her." And Uncle Al says, "No, no, mate, you can't just run over there. She's a, a schoolteacher, and she's intelligent. You just can't run over there like that. You gotta show some class, and you need to go get a newspaper," right. So (laughter) my dad runs out of the caf- dining hall, runs down to, there used to be a drugstore right at corner of what is now Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], what was then Hunter Street, and the street where the, where the dining room was. And he goes and grabs a Sunday newspaper, and he runs back and he invites my mother to go and sit outside under this tree and read the newspaper, okay. So then he says to my mother, "Would you like to go to church?" So she goes and gets dressed for church. He goes to get dressed for church. Every morning that was their ritual. They would have breakfast, every Sunday morning they would have breakfast together. They would sit and read the Sunday paper, and they would go to church. That was June of 1948. June of 1949 they got married. My dad came Christmastime and asked my grandparents [Hattie Barnes and Leon Barnes] for my mother's hand. And it's just this wonderful, wonderful love story. But this is the, this is the topping on the cake. Every Sunday--I don't know how he timed it. It never came on Saturday. It never came on Monday. We're not talking FedEx overnight here. We're talking about U.S. special delivery. My dad would send my mother a special delivery letter. Every Sunday morning she would wait for it, and she would always get it before she went to church every Sunday, until the Sunday before they got married. My mother has them in a box, in chronological order, of these love letters that he sent her, pretty cool. I told a young couple who was engaged that story, and she looked at her fiance. She said, "I'm doing good if I get a text message" (laughter). But you know, just he was special--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a very special man.
Story_ID: 661652
Speaker 1: You have siblings, right?
Speaker 2: I do. I have two younger brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They are both here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Paul, after named--he's named after my dad [Paul Hatchett, Sr.]--Jr., Paul Lawrence Hatchett, Jr. [Paul Hatchett, Jr.]. And my younger brother--Paul is four years younger than I am, and Kolen is nine years younger than I am, Kolen, K-O-L-E-N, Sydney, S-Y-D-N-E-Y, Hatchett [Kolen Hatchett]. So they are both here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when you, you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their dispositions--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --their sense of humor, what they look like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --their height and all different kinds of things--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I definitely, physically I look more like my mother, but I am my, I am my father's child in terms of just, I mean, his handprints are all over my life. I was daddy's girl. And I'm gonna tear up again, but I was a daddy's girl. He, for instance, you know, he made so many sacrifices, as I was saying, for our family. When I was a little girl, my dad was home because he worked at night at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] because my parents couldn't afford the adequate child care, all of that. And so, you know, I'm in first grade. I have a little brother at home who's, what, two? And my dad kept us, you know, 'cause I'd get out of school earlier when you're in kindergarten and first grade. And my dad was, is, and will always be my, my hero, that he just was my confidante. He died very suddenly twenty-three years ago this year, and I was devastated. But you know, I, I talked to him about everything. I talked to him about advice. You know, we just were so, so, so close. I know that there may be women who love their fathers as much, but it is humanly impossible for a daughter to love a father more than I love my dad, you know. I was blessed and still am. And I say this often, that my hero was in reach. I didn't have to read about my hero. I didn't have to see my hero or shero on TV. My father was my hero, and he was right there fully present in every step of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--
Speaker 2: My mother is the fire. My father was the anchor. My mother is the fire. My mother is ninety-four years old. She, of course, was born in 1921, soon to be ninety-five this year. She drives a convertible sports car, lets down her top, puts on her glasses, goes about her business, lives independently in the house that we grew up in. She is just fire and spirit. And you know, they were great, great balance, 'cause my, you know, my mother is just like (makes sound), and my father was like, "All right, Clemmie [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett], let's just keep focused," you know, so they were great; they complemented each other. I don't know anybody like my mother. I never met anybody like my mother. I don't think there's anybody like my mother. She is my biggest critic, and she's my biggest cheerleader. She, as I mentioned, wanted to be a pediatrician, young colored girl growing up in the Deep South, just didn't have the opportunities, although she graduated at the top of her class at Claflin [Claflin College; Claflin University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], very, very smart. For the fiftieth anniversary, fiftieth class reunion. What was the last family trip that we all went on, that May, my father died suddenly that September. My father endowed a scholarship fund in my mother's honor, which I have subsequently contributed to and we support as a family for students at Claflin who want to go on to medical school because that was her dream.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. But she is, she's amazing. I mean, she's, she started the AIDS ministry probably thirty-five years ago when people were afraid to touch people or shake hands with people with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. She does an incredible amount of volunteer work. She, I think she gave herself this title, she's trustee emeritus (laughter) at Claflin. She still goes and participates. My mother was trustee at Claflin. Dad was trustee at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] up until his death. So my parents really put a premium on supporting education and supporting young people.
Story_ID: 661653
Speaker 1: You started school in Atlanta [Georgia]. And what, what, what school--what, what neighborhood did you live in?
Speaker 2: I lived in Dixie Hills [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My parents bought their first home in Dixie Hill. We live on Penelope [Street] in Dixie Hills. And I went to Anderson Park Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in my second book ['If It was Easy, Everybody and Their Mama Could Do It: Real Advice for Real People,' Glenda Hatchett], I tell this story about being in first grade, and I was bored to death because I could read. My mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] was a schoolteacher, and my father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] was an avid reader, and so I knew how to read. So going to school and going, "See Dick run, see Dick jump, see Jane stop, and Spot, the dog," was getting on my last nerves 'cause I was just out of my mind. And my, my desk was raggedy and too big, and I couldn't touch the floor. So it would rock when I would move. And Ms. O'Neil [ph.], remember her like it was yesterday, would say, "Glenda [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett], stay still." I hated first grade. I was miserable. And so she kept saying, "We're gonna get books, we're gonna get books. Class, we're gonna get books."
Speaker 1: There were no books in the beginning?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) No, there were no books. And so, you know, she would write on the board, but there were no books. And she kept saying, "We're gonna get books, class; we're gonna get books." And we finally got books.
Speaker 1: So this is like 1958 or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yes, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And no books in--
Speaker 2: There were no books.
Speaker 1: --Atlanta Public School.
Speaker 2: Atlanta Public Schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, but there's a story. So, one day she finally passes out books. And we were reading out loud. I remember this day like, like it is etched on my soul. I even remember what I had on that day. That is how deeply engrained that day was for me as a child. And so, she passed out the books. And you're going up and down the row to read, and I'm like, I get to read out loud. You know, it's like a big deal for me. When you're in first grade, you know, and you've been waiting to read, I mean, this is a huge deal. So she gets to me and my page is torn out of the book, and she skips over me. And so when class was over that day, I stood at her desk and I said, "Ms. O'Neil, I need a new book please." And she said, "Glenda, nobody has a new book." Well, I wasn't putting that raggedy, dirty book in my new book bag. I just wasn't doing it. I needed a new book, and I needed to be able to read, you know. I was just like, this is not right. And I didn't get another chance. So I look back now, again with adult eyes, and I realize how difficult this was for Ms. O'Neil. And this is what she said to me, she said, "Colored children don't get new books." I didn't understand that. So, you know, usually I walk home with my friends. I ran, ran, ran, ran, ran, ran home, went busting through the door. Back in those days you didn't lock stuff; you know, everybody, all the neighbors knew everybody--went flying through the door, and I said to my daddy, "Daddy, daddy, daddy, please," because I was thinking I don't have to sit here and talk to this woman. I can go home. You know, 'cause at six, I believed my dad could fix anything, right. You know, I'll just go tell my daddy. So I rush home, and I run in the house, and I say, "Daddy, daddy, daddy, daddy, you gotta go up to the school before Ms. O'Neil leaves. You gotta get me a new book. Ms. O'Neil says I can't get a new book. She says colored children don't get new books." And this is what my dad said to me, and this is--has been one of those valuable life lessons that I didn't fully appreciate, didn't appreciate at all at six. My daddy said, "Glenda, she's right. Colored children don't get new books." And so, historical footnote for people who are looking at this not understanding what I'm saying: the books were trash. They were literally thrown out in these huge garbage cans outside of white schools. And the custom was for the colored janitors to come over to the white schools to collect the books. That's why my chair didn't fit, because it was trash. That's why the crayons were nubs in the little can that they were thrown in. Everything was trash. And so the teachers would do the best they could. They'd take a, a cover from this and pages here, and they'd try to, you know, tape them and patch them together as best they could. And there would be, you know, scribbles all in the book where they'd taken crayons and you know, just marked the books. They were trash, and they had sat outside in the rain, in the heat, smoldering summer, molded, all of that. And the cal- and that was the tradition. That was the custom. The colored janitors would come up and gather all of that and bring it to us. That's what I had as a book.
Story_ID: 661654
Speaker 1: My father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] said, "She's right. Colored children don't get new books." Well, I didn't understand that. And he said to me, "So I want you to go into your room and get your box of crayons," I had a little red table with two red chairs. And he said, "I want you to sit down and write your own story." I didn't get that at six, oh, but baby, I got it now, because my father in his wisdom knew that he and my mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] couldn't fix a society where colored children were not treated equally like they should have been and that even though there were decisions coming down from the [U.S.] Supreme Court that clearly hadn't made it down to my little elementary school [Anderson Park Elementary School] in Atlanta, Georgia, and this is what happened. He said, "Write your own story." I've used that story in motivational speeches all over the country to say that he didn't let me linger at the pity party about what I didn't have. He told me to go on and write my story. And so what I do is I use that story to say that in my father's wisdom, although they couldn't protect me from, from this society and what was happening to colored children and colored people in that area, he couldn't fix the society, but he could fix me. And that is the lesson that he poured into me, that I had to write my own story. And again, I didn't get it in first grade.
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: But I so--
Speaker 2: --I'm, I'm thinking that you had books in, at home, I would guess (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I had books at home which is how I knew how to read. You know, I, I, I--my parents taught me to read before I went to school, so I had books at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: --that, that seemed like a major community issue to be brought to the City of Atlanta. I mean, (unclear)--
Speaker 1: They didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) schools, they didn't have any books--
Speaker 1: They didn't care. And my parents paid the same amount of taxes as the white children's parents, but that is how things operated, you know, when I was, when I was young. And so it, it was, it was a issue, but you know, the school board is all white; the mayor is all white; the city council [Atlanta City Council] is all white, you know. I mean, there was--it wasn't until there got to be more momentum in the Civil Rights Movement that these things became--you know, but I had horrible, horrible facilities and, and, and, and you know, just thrown out stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The school building wasn't so horrible, but the fa- you know, but we had to work with. But the lesson was: when you hit hard places, when you hit hard places in your life, and there are gonna be torn pages in life's book, whether it's racism or sexism or ageism, or whatever-ism, you know, poverty, whatever it is, that's when you have to write your own story, that's when you have to dig deep and not continue to function as a victim, but how do you figure out how you're gonna be victorious. And that is a valuable gift that my father gave me. And in honor of him, when I was a commencement speaker--what year was that? I'll have to think of that in a minute--at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], I told that class that story because I said that that was such a special gift from my father, because see, I was told I could do anything. I did not grow up believing that being a little colored girl in the Deep South was a curse, 'cause my daddy told me; my mama told--you know, I heard positive reinforcement from my teachers and people at church [Providence Missionary Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and my neighbors, and you know, and so I grew up believing that, that I could do anything, you know. And that is the message that I think that people have to hear from my dad's story, my dad's gift, my life lesson, is that we have to write our own stories--
Speaker 2: Sure. Did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and why I'm so honored to be interviewed by HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers], because you're preserving--
Speaker 2: Well, it's--the honor is ours (laughter).
Speaker 1: --our stories.
Story_ID: 661655
Speaker 1: Was church important when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And I don't know where Dixie Hills [Atlanta, Georgia] is. I'm not from Atlanta [Georgia], but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --is that near the, where Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] grew up and Auburn Avenue or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. It's, it's further out, further out. Like, if you drew a line of what's MLK [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] now, you would pass all of that. And it's, it's the--out now kind of where--how can I make you know where it is? I'll show you a map before you leave. But it is--in fact, we can look out my office window. I can kind of give you a sense of it, which is always very soothing to me. I can look out my office window and look over to AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], draw an imaginary line--
Speaker 1: The AU Center is like north of downtown, right?
Speaker 2: It is actually west.
Speaker 1: West, okay.
Speaker 2: West of downtown. In fact, we can look out my office window and I could show it to you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] is south and--
Speaker 2: Airport's south.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: AU Center is west.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. And the Buckhead area [Atlanta, Georgia], which is probably the more affluent area, is north.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, so what church did your parents attend?
Speaker 2: So my mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] was Methodist when she was in South Carolina. And you know, they visited different churches on that summer when they were, when they were I guess beginning to date. But my father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] asked her first, because he was Baptist, and so they joined--she said, "Glenda [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett]," and my father even said, he said you know, "had your mother asked me first, I did, I--as long as we worshipped as a family, I wasn't really caught up on the denomination." But he asked her first, and she said yes, that she then became Baptist, and they joined Providence Missionary Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], where my mother is still a staunch member. I think she calls herself a trustee emeritus there too (laughter). I think she gives herself these titles. But at ninety-four I guess you can do whatever you want to do. And my father was on the deacon board. My mother's a trustee. Church is very important, very, very important in my life. And I tell people I grew up hearing my father pray, you know, and understanding that God doesn't have any grandchildren, that I had to know God for myself. And, and my father's faith was very influential in, in my development, as, as is my mother's still. But church was very important. I remember, because my church sat right in the AU Center. In fact, when I was a little girl, Reverend Lucius Tobin [Lucius M. Tobin], brilliant man, Ph.D., theologian, was the professor of, of theology at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. So it was a church with, you know, a really interesting makeup. In fact, Dr. Benjamin Mays and Mrs. Mays [Sadie Mays] were members of my church when I was a little girl. So you had a lot of faculty members, and you had a lot of students who would come from the AU Center to my church. And my dad was on the finance committee, and I would stay after church with him, you know, while he counted the money. And I'd play around and play on the organ or whatever. And I knew my dad didn't have money, you know, I mean, but he would pull out the last twenty dollars he'd have in his pocket. He'd get change, and he'd give five dollars to four of the students, you know. He, he, he was just like that. He was just extremely generous. He taught Vacation Bible School, even though he worked at night. He'd go to teach us some Vacation Bible School during the day, take a nap, and then go to work, very active. I did everything in the church. I mean, listen, I was on the usher board; I was choir; all the Easter plays, Christmas. I mean, you know, we were just very, very, very, very active in the church, we were.
Speaker 1: So, so it sounds like a very organized Baptist church.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you--do, do you think that your, your sense of values, you know, primarily came from church or at home, or, or both of them?
Speaker 2: I think, I think primarily from home but reinforced at church. You know, my father would always say that your word is your bond, that if you tell somebody you're gonna do something, you'd better do it, that you have to stand on what you say. And I would tell you, at my father's funeral I spoke, and I talked about some of the, the lessons that he had just really poured into us. And if my father promised you something, you could bank on it. And I'd say, "Dad, just promise me, just promise," you know, as a little kid, "daddy--." And said, "Glenda, I'm not gonna promise you until I'm certain that I can do it." And my father really is the only person, and I said this when he died, only person I've ever known in my life who never broke a promise to me, ever, ever, ever, ever. And so I think the core values really were enforced--were really came from home, reinforced at church, but really, really at home.
Story_ID: 661656
Speaker 1: Yeah, Anderson Park Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers there or a mentors there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Listen, I, listen, I can probably name you every teacher from kindergarten (laughter) through seventh grade. I--because there's no such thing as middle school then. We went seventh grade, and then eighth started high school. I just had the best teachers, I did. Ms. Handspike, though, was my, was my fourth grade teacher, and I continued a relationship with her until she passed. I would go by and see her. And you know, she called me after I finished law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia], and she said, "Glenda [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett], I've been waiting for you to finish law school, girl. You'd better come over here. I need my will done." And of course, I was just happy to do it, you know, just out of love for her. And I think she--, "So I have to pay you," and so I think we compromised on her baking me a cake or something. I wasn't gonna take money from her. I loved Ms. Lucille Handspike. And then Harvinia Hill [ph.], who went on later to get her Ph.D., was my science teacher in seventh grade, and she so believed in me. I went to the science fair, did the science fair in sixth grade, and she was my advisor, even though she was a seventh grade teacher. And then we went and we won citywide, right, and I was like (makes sound). So we then, we had this big thing where we're doing, for seventh grade, and I still remember how angry she was and how hurt I was because they didn't give me first place because they said I'd won the year before. And you know, she, although she was pretty upset about it, she sat me down and you know. But they were invited when I was sworn in as a judge. And Ms. Handspike didn't live to see me sworn in as a judge, but you know, I just, I just had good people who, you know, loved me. And Ms. Lavender [Catherine Hardy Lavender] I liked least, 'cause she was so hard on me. It's the first C I ever made. I never made a C. I never even made a B in elementary school all the way to seventh grade, and she gave me a C in spelling. 'Cause this day, to this day I still can't spell, right. And I was like, I can't take this report card home. And I sat on the curb crying. And, and she gave it to me for the quarter. She said, "But you know what, Hatchett? You study hard, you can pull it up." And I did. I pulled it up to an A, but it was stressful. It was just stressful. I said, "Ms. Lavender, I've never made a C. I've never even made a B." And so I didn't like her very much, you know, 'cause I thought she was just mean and almost evil. But, but she, you know, she, she stretched me 'cause I just--well, you always use the excuse I couldn't spell. And I didn't really have spelling tests until I got in the seventh grade, so nobody really, you know, bothered to grade me on spelling. But she was a fascinating woman. She was on the Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] 4x1 relay team that won a gold medal.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. I wish I could think of her first name, and I think Lavender is actually her maiden name [sic.].
Speaker 1: She was a Tigerbelle.
Speaker 2: Yes, she was a Tigerbelle, and she knew Wilma Rudolph. And--
Speaker 1: Which--okay, so she was--did, did she run in the '60 Olympics [1960 Summer Olympics, Rome, Italy] with Wilma Rudolph? 'Cause that, that, that's the one that, that Wilma Rudolph was in, and it was on TV, I think for the first time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--she, she had to have been [sic. 1952 Summer Olympics, Helsinki, Finland]. And she brought in the reel to reel on the old school projector in school, and we watched the relay. It had to have been.
Speaker 1: Had she been recently in, in--I mean was she young?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was young.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: She was young.
Speaker 1: Yeah, then she was--it's possible 'cause you would have--what grade is that is?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Seventh, yeah, yeah, it--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that would have been 1960.
Speaker 1: Very possible.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was probably '60 [1960] Olympics, yeah. But you know, she brought in her gold medal and got to pass it around the class. And so what I know and what I appreciate now looking back, is that I had teachers--oh, and Ms. Dawson. I can't forget Ms. Dawson. Ms. Dawson never was my teacher. She was the speech pathologist, and, but she was the dance teacher. She was the dance advisor. I didn't have any talent. I had no talent, but she let me be in the dance group anyway. And she just died recently, but I kept in touch with her. I mentored her daughter [Cari K. Dawson], who went on to law school, who I'm very proud to say is a partner in a major law firm downtown in Atlanta [Alston and Bird LLP] and then later represented my corporation [The Hatchett Firm, PC, Atlanta, Georgia] when I was setting up some stuff. But Ms. Dawson, although she wasn't my classroom teacher, had a great deal of influence on me, who I just--Rose Dawson [Rose Winfrey Dawson], who I just loved to the bone.
Story_ID: 661657
Speaker 1: Now were there other, other than dance, were there any other extracurricular activities like Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or Camp Fire Girls [Camp Fired Girls of America; Camp Fire], or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: --or any of those kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Wait! Wait! Tell you--let me tell you. I--Ms. Handspike [Lucille Handspike] was the faculty advisor for the Brownies, right. And so I got to know her even before I was in her class 'cause I was a Brownie. I cannot sell anything. To this day, when it's my leaks- Links [The Links, Incorporated] fundraiser, I buy the tickets for my--I cannot ask anybody for money. I just can't. So, I was in the Brownies, and I just hated when it was time to sell the Girl Scout cookies. I hated it, so I begged my mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] to not let me become a Girl Scout. Now, the ninetieth anniversary of the national Girl Scouts, I was one of ten women nationally that they honored. And I'm thinking: I wonder how much they went back to dig up the fact that I was a Brownie dropout (laughter). But, no, I did, I did Brownies. I dropped out before Girl Scouts. I was in the chorus. I was in the dance group. I was in the theater group. You know, I just, I loved all of that, you know; I just loved it. But you know, again, we're talking segregated, still segregated schools in Atlanta [Georgia], not a lot of activities. Like here you hear kids taking trips and going to these different places. Our trip, our annual trip was to go down to the Coca-Cola Bottling Company or something. I mean, we just, we just didn't have those kind of outlets and resources when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] is--Atlanta is the home of Coca-Cola--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and the Candler family and all that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's, I just, for those who don't know it may be watching this, I just thought I'd say that--
Speaker 2: Right, oh, good, good, good, good, yes, good point. Can--
Speaker 1: So, so that's a big deal in Atlanta to go--I mean--
Speaker 2: It's a big, it's a big deal. And every year--
Speaker 1: Not just as a drink, but as a enterprise (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As, as a company. And so they, as I understand it, sponsored the buses every year for all public school kids to come to the bottling company. And so we'd have that field trip to the bottling company and you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 661658
Speaker 1: As you said civil right--things were segregated early on in your--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) childhood.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They started to, when the Atlanta [Georgia] group was formed. Yeah, they, you know, in, in '60 [1960], '61 [1961]--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --you were still in elementary school [Anderson Park Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] they started challenging the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --the segregation, public segregation, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and, and, and others. And so by--you were in '63 [1963] when they had the March on Washington you would have been about seven, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: No, older than that, 'cause I was born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Older than that?
Speaker 2: --in '51 [1951]. So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I would have been--would I have been in high school [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] by then?
Speaker 1: Oh, oh no. Yeah, yeah, sure, yes, that's right. You, you'd have been ten (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I finished high, I finished high school in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: You'd have been ten; you'd have been ten.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I've been--well, I wasn't in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry--
Speaker 2: But yeah, March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember watching that with--
Speaker 1: I went three the wrong way.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's, that's how I got seven. But yeah, you'd have been ten--
Speaker 2: Yes, the March on Washington. But see, I tell people and they look at me like I'm crazy, I--colored and white were among the very first words I knew how to read. I was in Sears, was called Sears and Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] then, in Florence, South Carolina, with my grandmother, my mother's mother [Hattie Barnes]. She was doing some errands, shopping. She kind of turned her back. And this was before I started school. But I knew it said white, and I knew it said colored just because that was my world. That's the reality I grew up in. And there were little steps on the side of the water fountain for kids to go up, and I popped up the steps to the white fountain because I wanted to see if the white water tasted differently. And these two boys, and I remember one vividly 'cause he had bright red hair, heavyset kid, two boys knocked me down off the water fountain. And of course, I was screaming. My grandmother rushed over, and I didn't understand why she was mad at me. You know, and, "You shouldn't have done that." But what I understand is that she was afraid for my life, 'cause I could have been pulled out the back door, never to have been seen again. And her anger, although displayed at me, wasn't really at me. It was at a system that would cause me to be put in that situation. But yeah, it was--I remember and I wish, I wish to goodness I had this coat. My parents [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett and Paul Hatchett, Sr.] were very clear, we were not crossing any picket lines anywhere, never, ever, ever. I also remember as a child growing up and there being bodies on pallets on my parents' living room floor. 'Cause the Freedom Riders would come and spend the night at our house to stage for the Freedom Riders to get on the bus going down to Mississippi, right. And so there would be these college students in my parents' living room on these pallets. And my mother would pack food for them. And in one particular time her nephew was among them. Her older sister's son was among them. And I remember her crying, because she worried so much that, that, that he might not come back alive. But my parents were like, committed, into it, we're gonna do this. So we weren't gonna get--you know, so I had outgrown my winter coat. It was a navy blue coat. My mother, who was very creative and talented, and she made a lot of my clothes anyway, took that coat, cut off the end of the sleeve, and put a red insert, and then put the blue part right here to lengthen the sleeves. So I had this red insert on the sleeves, and she did the same thing around the hem. And I'm like, I don't want to wear that coat. You know, I was just being bratty. And my parents didn't tolerate that, but I was just really being--I still remember being like, "I do not want to wear that coat. It looks like a silly coat. I don't want to wear that coat. People are gonna laugh at me." I wish I had that coat still, you know, 'cause that was my freedom coat. You know, I just didn't have enough sense and maturity to understand that that was my freedom coat, that my parents were not going to cross the picket lines. My parents were not gonna support stores that would not support our community. And you know, "So no, you're not gonna get a new Easter outfit, and yes, you're gonna wear your cousin's hand me down shoes, you know, because this is what we have to do now."
Story_ID: 661659
Speaker 1: You went to--was it Wilson High School [Florence, South Carolina]? Is that it?
Speaker 2: My, my mother did.
Speaker 1: Mother did, okay. You went to Wilson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother went to Wilson.
Speaker 1: You went to--
Speaker 2: I went to Harper High School [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Harper High School--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --okay, I'm sorry. I should have looked that up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By that time, my parents [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett and Paul Hatchett, Sr.] had built a home in Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia], and I went to a new high school, which was kind of tough, because the kids there, I had--hadn't--I was new to the neighborhood. You know, the vast majority, if not all of them, were, were from feeder schools and knew each other, so I was kind of the new kid on the block in eighth grade. But I went to Harper High School.
Speaker 1: All right and Harper was a all-black school.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. You know what? I never--and people say that's crazy--I never had a white classmate until I went to Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts]. I never did. I never had a white teacher until I went to college. My high school was all-black until, until they started doing this mandatory integration, and they started with the faculty. So what did they do? They cherry picked some of the very best teachers we had, put them in the white schools, and brought the problematic white teachers to our school who sure did not want to be there. They were problematic. That was the way their principals got rid of them. And so we really suffered through the integration process. Ms. Harvey [ph.], who I remember was our civics teacher, she was pulled out. We had a great counselor who got pulled out. I mean, it just--you know, we were left with some good people, but they, they did take some of our strongest and brought in these really just trifling teachers who weren't good in their old situations and surely didn't want to be in an all-black school.
Speaker 1: So, so what kind of activities were you going--were you involved in in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, everything, I did everything. I was in student government. I was the eighth grade class president. I was my homeroom president at first, which is kind of, you know, kind of odd 'cause I was the new kid on the block. I then got elected as the eighth grade president, which meant I was on the student body council. I was in the chorus. I was in the drama club. (Makes sound) Mrs. Allen, Georgia Allen, who was a legend in this community, was also one of the people who got pulled. I guess that would have been my senior year.
Speaker 1: Did Georgia Allen teach drama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes. She was actually technically an English teacher, but she was in charge of the drama program, the theater. But she was a, an act- actor here locally. I mean, she was in theater. She actually took a leave of absence I guess when I was in ninth grade for a few months. She was in a Broadway play. She has passed on now, but she was in Tyler Perry's--she had a brief role in Tyler Perry's 'Family Reunion' ['Madea's Family Reunion']. She was the matriarch who was sitting on the porch. But she was a legend locally, you know, and she was a legend. She did a lot of theater. For--and on the AU's center she did a lot of plays in the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. But she was, she was my English teacher too I guess in tenth grade, and she was the drama coach. And so I loved being in theater. And we went to state competition one year, and I mean, she was just amazing. I was in the, in the chorus, drama group, student government. Any time there was something going on I was doing it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So you're expressing like, leadership in, in high school, and you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're getting good grades. We know that because you go to Mount Holyoke later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had good grades--
Speaker 1: --you can't get in otherwise. So you--
Speaker 2: I had good grades (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 661660
Speaker 1: --National Honor Society or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I was National Honor Society. I was also National--what is that thing that you test for, National--I was National Honor Society, and I was national something else. Ah, I'll think of it in a minute, and still placed in that, even though I was out in the front of the school [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] protesting (laughter). And my counselor came and yanked me out. She said, "You're supposed to be taking National Achievement scholar [National Achievement Scholarship Program]"--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --whatever that's called, National Achievement scholar I think it was. And--
Speaker 1: So what were you protesting?
Speaker 2: I was protesting because a guy who I just adored was a member of the Nation of Islam, and, and clearly he was being discriminated against. The people were very prejudice. The teachers were very prejudiced. Administration was very prejudiced. So we staged this walkout, you know, 'cause he got picked on in school. And I said the next time he gets picked on we're walking out. And so we walked out, and I didn't come back in in time for the, for the test to start. So the test was probably about twenty, thirty minutes. And she realized I wasn't in there, and she came and yanked me out. And I'm like, "No, I'm not. I can't leave my, leave my protesters." But anyway, I had to sit and take the test, National Achieve--National Achievement scholar. That's what it's called.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and somehow, miraculously, I still placed even though I was late coming into the test.
Speaker 1: Well, well, tell, tell us about it. This is intriguing. The fellow's in the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: Yes. His name was Johnny X. You know, I've lost track of him, Johnny Muhammad X [ph.].
Speaker 1: The reason I'm asking, like, normally--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the members of the Nation of Islam today when I was sub [substitute teacher] like about four or five years, years ago, and the most disciplined students were, were the students from the Nation of Islam. They did their homework. They did everything, and it was the other students that were more of a problem. But they seemed to be very disciplined--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was--
Speaker 1: --so what was--yeah.
Speaker 2: He was, and he was a great--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --student. And, but he got picked on because, you know, you say what is your name? He'd say Johnny X, and he was really picked on, and sadly, you know, we're in an all-black school. But he was really, really persecuted in a way that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it--
Speaker 2: --just wasn't fair.
Speaker 1: What, was it religious based you think or?
Speaker 2: Right, because people did not understand the Nation. They thought that, you know, that, you know, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, you know, the people just had all kinds of thoughts about it. But he was a great guy. He was a good guy. He was never a troublemaker. He never talked back, and, but he would get picked on. He'd get picked on by the teachers. He'd get picked on by the kids in class. And so I said to my little group, "The next time this happens, you know, we're walking out; we're walking out. Johnny, you need to get up and--," well, I'm instigating this, "you need to get up, and we're gonna walk out with you, because this is not acceptable, all right." So we went straight to the principal's office. He didn't want to hear it, and so we went outside.
Speaker 1: So you would have been about thirteen when Malcolm X was assassinated I guess--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So then you--did justice issues trouble you when you were growing up? (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely, it did. You know, it, it, did, did. It just, it, it did. You know, I have to tell you, I didn't know enough about the principles of the Nation to be able to articulate them at that point in my life. I just knew that this was a good kid, who was my friend, who people were ostracizing. And he was getting picked on, and I just didn't think it was right. I just didn't think it was right. And so, you know, I explained to my parents [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett and Paul Hatchett, Sr.] why I had done what I had done. You know, they were gonna, you know, suspend me from school, and I, you know, I went home, and I just said to my parents, you know, this--and, and you know, they had met, 'cause I had invited Johnny to our house. You know, it just wasn't right. But it started a necessary conversation because there were teachers on the faculty who got it and understood what I was trying to say, and so things go better. People weren't as openly hostile to him as they had been before. It wasn't a perfect situation, but I think it got better--
Speaker 1: Okay, but--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: All right, so something was done about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Not, not, not as much as should have been, but you know. Plus then I was also, you know, I had influence with the student government. And I'm like, "Okay, guys, we've gotta, you know, we've gotta do better about this, right." And I don't know if there was another kid. I don't know of another kid at the time who was a member of the Nation who was in our school, you know, so he got all of it; you know, he got the brunt of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I wonder where he is now (laughter).
Story_ID: 661661
Speaker 1: Did you win any other contests or anything outside of school [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] or--
Speaker 2: Yes. I was in, I was in the Governor's Honors Program [Georgia Governor's Honors Program], which was very interesting 'cause Lester Maddox was the governor of Georgia at the time (laughter). So, you know, and--
Speaker 1: And this is Lester Maddox who was--
Speaker 2: Was the axe, the axe, the axe handle--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had a restaurant [Pickrick Cafeteria, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --at one point, and he, in order to avoid serving black people, he passed out axe handles to his employees and instructed them to whack black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --potential black customers--
Speaker 2: Same, same guy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --became the governor of the State of Georgia is a very sad commentary about our state. But he was the governor when I got--and, and that was a very, very competitive, very prestigious, statewide competition, and I, and I won one of those spots. Very few people were in it. And, and I, and I did talk to my counselor about it, and I, and I was chosen. I, I often wondered, and she and I wondered, whether they realized, with my test scores, and with my grades, and with my activities, and with my essay, whether I was black, 'cause there wasn't anybody else black there. And so I show up at the Governor's Mansion [Georgia Governor's Mansion, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter) for the, you know, for the thing. It was very interesting, very, very interesting. But you know, I'm very proud about it. I was very proud about it. I--
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: --I was--you know what it was? I was the little colored girl that did well and that the community was very proud of, so I got lifted up. You know, there was something--for instance, there were twenty black and Latino students from around the country who were tapped to go to Phillips Exeter Academy [Exeter, New Hampshire] the summer after my eighth grade year, right. I was one of those students. So I just, I, I have had wonderful opportunities because I was kind of the kid that people expected greatness from. And that started in my home 'cause my parents expected greatness from me. You know, my community expected greatness, my school counselors, so there was something to be nominated for--you know, I, I got nominated, and then I would get in the competition, I'd win. I was the first black, what we call, two timer--that's a weird title--teen board. I was a model for Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia] when I was a kid on the teen board, right. I was the first black to be asked back for the second year, ever, so that meant I supervised the new teen board members. Well, they didn't quite know how to do it, 'cause they, they couldn't grade me low, low so I couldn't get it. So what they did is that they made an extra spot. And they gave the white girl the position at the downtown Rich's, right, because everybody knew that I should have gotten it, right. So, they gave her the spot, and then they made me rotate to the other stores, which is really not fair. But, so you know, I did stuff like that, which was fun, and you know, was in Rich's ads and Rich's fashion shows, that kind of fun stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, now, now what did you look like in those days? Did you have a, did--
Speaker 2: I, I had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) did you have an Afro, or did you--
Speaker 2: No. I had super long hair. I didn't get an Afro until I went to college [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts]. Had super long hair, which is really from my mom [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett]. My mom has, you know, had it as, as a young girl. And, but they cut my hair without asking my parents' permission. I think they--
Speaker 1: Who, who did it?
Speaker 2: Rich's. They--you know, I went and sat down thinking I was getting my hair styled, and they went whack, whack, whack. And my father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] had a fit and you know, confronted Rich's.
Speaker 1: I can imagine--that's, now, now for, for women that's a, really an affront to cut any woman's hair--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you would think to even a girl, a high school girl (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And they said, "Oh, we're gonna just trim it a little bit, make a cute style," but (unclear), I didn't have any hair. I went from hair mid-back to hair that was like really short. Fortunately, my hair grows back really quickly, but that wasn't the point. It was just really terrible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a liberty that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I would think--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, my, oh, my dad con--
Speaker 1: --that would be offensive to--
Speaker 2: --my dad, oh, listen, it was not--he was not happy and as nor he, nor should he be.
Story_ID: 661662
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this and especially in light of what goes on today, what was the state of justice for youth? 'Cause you, you later become a juvenile judge. But--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what was going on when you were in high school [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia]? What were some of the issues that youth had, or did they have the same kind of issues we have today?
Speaker 2: It was different when I was in high school. You know, the biggest thing we might see is somebody might bring a knife to school, you know, might get into a fight. You might smell marijuana in the bathroom but very, very different. And I went to a school which was upper middle class neighborhood [Buckhead, Atlanta, Georgia], frankly. That's what it drew from. So I didn't see the kinds of problems that some of the other inner cities schools. My mother later become--became assistant principal at Archer High School [Samuel Howard Archer High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and that was known to have a lot of problems in that school. I didn't see a lot of that when I was in high school, I just didn't. You know, I was, I mean, I, you know--actually, I don't know that there was really smoking of marijuana in high school so much as girls in the bathroom would sneak in there and smoke cigarettes.
Speaker 1: Was there, was there, amongst the youth community, was there like a healthy respect for the police--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: --in the black community?
Speaker 2: I think so. I think so. And when I was growing up, we pretty much knew the police who were patrolling our community [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia]. You know, we kind of knew them. You know, I don't know why that's not so now, but, but we knew them. They kind of knew us. They knew what school we went to. They, you know--I, I didn't see the kind of strain that we're seeing now in the situations with community and interaction with young people and police. And if it was, I just maybe was, you know, insulated from it, 'cause my, my path was pretty, pretty narrow; from home to school, to school to church [Providence Missionary Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] to my little extracurricular activities. My parents [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett and Paul Hatchett, Sr.] made sure that my brothers and I took piano lessons. We used to take the bus up and walk down the street. My piano teacher lived diagonally across the street from Dr. and Mrs. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. and Coretta Scott King]. I would not let my children at that age get on the bus in these times, and I certainly wouldn't let them walk down that street. I mean, I just, I wouldn't, because the community is so different; things are so different. But I used to take my younger brother. My na- my brother [Kolen Hatchett] who's nine years younger didn't have to go with us. But my brother [Paul Hatchett, Jr.] who's four years younger, take him by the hand, get on the bus, ride up what was then Hunter Street [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], get down, walk down the street, take the music lessons, and come back, because my parents really wanted us to have that experience. And we took pi- piano lessons with the King children actually. Yeah, yeah, with, with--which is how I know Yoki, Yolanda [Yolanda King] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah she's into drama too right?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right, right. It was so sad when she died, so sad.
Story_ID: 661663
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduation [from Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] or even before then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you thought of college, did you--how did you choose your college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, listen, let me tell you, that summer at Phillips Exeter when I was one of twenty students from around the country that was invited to go to Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire [Exeter, New Hampshire] for a summer program, right, I--
Speaker 1: That's a traditional boys school right?
Speaker 2: Oh, it is, and it, and it, and it was year around, but that, for the summer they did have girls come in. And so there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it's coed in the summer?
Speaker 2: It was coed for the summer, and so they had, they had these twenty students who've, from around the country who they picked to come for the summer program. And actually--I'm sorry. I take that back. There were twenty-five of us, and they were from different places, so they had, there were five from Atlanta [Georgia], five from Denver [Colorado], five from Chicago [Illinois], so there were five from these various cities. And they were, all of us were African American or Latino students, so they were all minority students coming in to do this. And it was, it, it changed the trajectory of my, of my educational path because, you know, I thought I was pretty smart, and the five students from Atlanta were all smart. And we all knew each other, and we thought we were hot stuff, and then we meet all these really smart kids too. And that summer, Sandy Green [Sandra Green], who was a student, a college student at Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], an African American woman from Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio, who was six feet in her bare feet, and she said to me, "You're going to Mount Holyoke." Well, I thought Mount Holyoke meant, meant some nun's school, Catholic school. I didn't--you know, I was eighth grade. You know, I was getting ready to go to ninth grade. I was getting ready--you know, what do I know? And you know, my world was, didn't, didn't know anything about prep school. And Phillips Exter, Exeter Academy is one of the best prep schools anywhere actually in the world, I, I got to learn. So this was a huge opportunity, a huge program, I mean beneficial program for me and the twenty-four others of us. And so I looked at her like she was crazy. So we went on a field trip. I'll never forget it. We went on a field trip to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and it just opened up my world. And I came home from that summer, and I set as my personal goal that I would go to a Seven Sister college, right, because I didn't know. Back then the schools were still segregated by gender, so Harvard and Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York]. So the schools weren't, they weren't coed at the time, you know. Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] became coed I think the very next year. But my point is that I'm thinking an all-girls school in the middle of nowhere. I mean, what am I thinking? So, I did my research. I was like, if I'm gonna go to an Ivy League school, this what I--this, this is the gold bar; this is the gold standard, right, and so I should shoot to do that. So I applied to four. I applied to Radcliffe, Mount Holyoke, Barnard, and Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], right, hoping that I get into one, and I got into all four, right. And I just thought because of the prestige I would end up going to Radcliffe. Mount Holyoke was the best, was the best choice for me, and I'm glad I made that choice. But the story was that when I, I filled out the acceptance information--do all the stuff online now, but you had to go to the post office then. And I filled out all the paperwork for Radcliffe, and I filled out all the work for, for Mount Holyoke. And the African American woman who recruited me to come to Mount Holyoke from Atlanta is still one of my closest, dearest friends to this day. She was a junior when I was a freshman. She was my big sister in college, her name, Gloria Harper Lee, brilliant woman. To this day, I just still love her so. And really it was the difference between the women at Mount Holyoke and the women at Radcliffe. I just felt more of the nurturing and support of the black community there, although I had never been on campus, just them writing me and calling me, all that.
Speaker 1: Radcliffe is the com--
Speaker 2: It was a woman's college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For Harvard?
Speaker 2: --companion for Harvard. And so everybody's like, of course you're gonna go to Radcliffe (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mount Holyoke is associated--
Speaker 2: It's a--with--
Speaker 1: --more with Yale or which one?
Speaker 2: --with Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].
Speaker 1: With Dartmouth, okay.
Speaker 2: With Dartmouth.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It's the sister college for Dartmouth.
Story_ID: 661664
Speaker 1: And Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] is the oldest one of the Seven Sisters--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) colleges?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's absolutely right. And it is where, the founders of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] were Mount Holyoke grads. And so if you look at the quadrangle and the way Spelman is laid out, it's really, I mean, it's obviously smaller, but it's really kind of patterned after Mount Holyoke, and the blue and white colors, the seal. I mean, there are a lot of, lot of similarities to Spelman and Mount Holyoke. So, my father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] said you know, it would have been cheaper for me to go--I had full scholarships to lots of places, including Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] here to Spelman to Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. I had, I had gotten into Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina], to Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee]. I mean, I, I had done well. But Mount Holyoke would have been a stretch for my family, you know, even just the transportation back and forth home, even though I had scholarships and all of that. But my father told me, he said, "This has been your goal," and he said, "you should go for it." You know, because it would have been financially so much easier for me to stay at home, take a full ride at Spelman or Clark, or even Emory, Agnes Scott [Agnes Scott College, Decatur, Georgia]. So, my dad said to me, he said, "Glenda [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett], you just focus on getting into these schools. Your mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] and I will get you out." Never forgotten that. "We'll get you out; you just get in; we'll figure out how to get you out."
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had his priorities together, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, my dad didn't drive a fancy car. My mother didn't drive a fancy car. They lived very simply because they put a premium on our education. So that night before--you had to have it postmarked by midnight or whatever. And we went and my dad said, "Take both letters," 'cause I was trying to decide between Radcliffe and Mount Holyoke. He said, "Take both letters, and let's just ride around." And we rode, and we talked, and we talked, and we laughed, and we rode and rode and rode around. He said, "And when you're ready we'll go to the post office." And I put the Mount Holyoke letter in. I was waiting for him to ask me. I said, "Dad, you didn't ask me what letter I put into the mailbox." And he looked at me. He said, "I didn't have to. I know the young woman I've raised, and I trust that you have made the right decision for you."
Story_ID: 661665
Speaker 1: And so I ended up going to Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], and it did, it changed the trajectory of my life, you know, superior education. It was a cultural shock. I, you know, I hadn't seen that much snow for one but just culturally. You know, I was really this, you know, one of the smart kids, right. And I get in there, everybody's smart, and everybody, you know, a lot of the kids had gone to very prestigious prep schools. They'd gone to schools in Europe. They travel extensively all over the world. At that time I didn't even have a passport. My roommate freshman year, in a room that was really a single they converted to a double, was, was going to get $16 million in a trust fund on her twenty-first birthday, right. Now $16 million is a lot of money now, but $16 million is really a lot of money--
Speaker 2: In 1969 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-nine [1969], fall of 1969. And we were so different. And you know, I look back on it. I was like, you crazy fool. You should have been--and I tell this in my diversity lectures, that there's a difference between tolerance and acceptance. I tolerated her, but I am ashamed to say that I didn't do enough to understand her. And that was an important life lesson that I have tried to share in my lectures by telling that story, because she was extremely wealthy. She was there because of a family legacy. Her father was a very wealthy Jewish businessman who was an architect who had married this beautiful Austrian woman. But she had lived really all of her life in Spain, right, that her father's--most of his work had been in Europe, so she had been raised in Spain. And so we--there were--you know, we were just so different and so far apart (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 661666
Speaker 1: Let me just go back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when you were a junior [at Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] is assassinated.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And especially the assassination of Dr. King, being here in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --probably was, had a tremendous impact--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: --on all black students here.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, I remember vividly. I was home 'cause I had gotten mono [infectious mononucleosis]. I was home recovering from that and was watching, you know, every minute on the news. And it was, it was, you know, we just felt like how could this happen, especially because not only was he this civil rights icon, he was my friend's daddy, you know, and just how were they feeling, and how was Yoki [Yolanda King] and Marty [Martin Luther King III] feeling? I didn't know the younger two children [Dexter King and HistoryMaker Bernice Albertine King] as well, but you know, they lost their--you know, somebody killed their daddy. I mean, it was just traumatic for us as a community and all of that, but it was also for me very personally very hard because I was, kept thinking what if that happened to my daddy [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] and you know, and somebody just killed him for no reason and all of that. So that was very hard, and I was just mad that I wasn't in school so I could get in the rah rah, you know, what are we gonna do kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Your, your, your, your pastor [Lucius M. Tobin], too, was a, was a professor at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in, in theology.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he had retired by that time and, and was not well by that time. He was no longer pastoring the church [Providence Missionary Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia]. But because of the strong ties between my church and Morehouse and that relationship and because, you know, I grew up knowing Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays], who had, you know, had been the president of Morehouse--in fact, Dr. Mays performed my wedding ceremony when my husband and I got married. Right (laughter)--loved him. He and Mrs. Mays [Sadie Mays] were just always so wonderful to me. So, it was a hard time. It was a very hard time when Dr. King was killed, of course, Robert Kennedy. I mean it was just a really tough, tough time and hard to get your mind around.
Story_ID: 661667
Speaker 1: And I must add an important piece to this. Hamilton Holmes was my next door neighbor, who was the first black student, he and [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, the two first black students to integrate the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --I had gone through all of that with--Hamp was like my big brother, you know, much, much older, but still my, you know, somebody I looked up to and just deeply admired. And because I had younger brothers [Paul Hatchett, Jr. and Kolen Hatchett], it was like having all these older brothers right next door, 'cause there were like four Holmes brothers, Hamp being the oldest, and loved him to the bone. And I can still remember my father [Paul Hatchett, Sr.] rushing into the house, because literally we lived in a cul-de-sac, and they're the only two houses in the cul-de-sac. If you're facing our house, their house was to the left. And our house was kind of on an, a more of an incline, the, the, the way that, to main--the, the, the let--what do you call it?
Speaker 2: Trajectory of the land?
Speaker 1: Yeah, get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or the terrain?
Speaker 1: Terrain, the terrain of the land was kind of, it sloped down, so our house sat higher, and our house was a split level. Their house was, the main level was all on one level. So we could see the street that fed into our neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, really, there was two, there were only two streets that came into our neighborhood. It's a very small neighborhood, a cul-de-sac on one end, which is one where we lived, and a cul-de-sac at the other end, and then the main street that was parallel to our street was--I could see from my parents' bedroom window. My father ran in and said, "Clemmie [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett], they're sending them home," right. And my mother said, "You know, stay here," dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. She rushed over to see about Mrs. Holmes [Isabella Holmes]. The men in our community stood vigil, they did, because at that point you didn't know who to trust on the, trust on the police force [Atlanta Police Department] and all of that. You just didn't know how they were gonna be protected. And I remember looking out of the front bedroom window when they pulled up with Charlayne and Hamp. And the men held coats to make a tent to get them in the house, right. And just the tension, and my father told me to go and stand in their bedroom, my parents' bedroom window, so I had a clear shot of the cars coming down, "Oh no," and to let him know if I saw cars that--'cause you know, everybody knew everybody in the neighborhood--that I didn't, that I, that I didn't recognize. That's how tense that situation was. Years later, I guess two years ago now, it was my honor, I mean special privilege, to be invited by the University of Georgia to do the Holmes-Hunter Lecture series, that I did the lecture. And I stood up, and I had to get my composure, because for me it was very personal, deeply personal to have lived through that as a kid and watching, watching that happen, and understanding the courage that it took not just for Hamp and Charlayne but for the families and you know, and for the neighbors and just the, the love and support of, you know, we're here, and they did. They, you know, the community just was a very small neighborhood all stood by him, you know, very proud of him. And then, of course, he went on to be the first black to, to finish Emory medical school [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia], you know. And just, I was heartbroken when he died. He died much too early, much too soon.
Story_ID: 661668
Speaker 1: --Without a doubt (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I was not in the best of moods when I went to Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], you know. Like, I really didn't have a lot of, a lot of tolerance for these rich white kids who I--you know, who were, who from my perspective were rich and privileged and thought that they should be privileged and you know, hadn't gone through what I had gone through and didn't understand the Civil Rights Movement. And I had one student who I, I, I don't think she was malicious, but it didn't sit well with me. And she said, "Oh, Glenda [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett], it must be terrible to be black," you know. But, but I think that that was her way of trying to empathize. Look, I'm a freshman in college. I'm young. We just seen all these things happening in this country, you know, and you know, it was, for me it was patronizing. It was like, you know, how dare she say this to me. So I didn't have much tolerance for my roommate, you know. And I look back on it now, and I say this in my diversity lectures, that I, I missed out on an opportunity to try to bridge that gap, 'cause I could have learned a lot from her in this process. She ended up dropping out of school because it was such a, for her it was such a cultural shock to be in the states. She had grown up on very prestigious schools all over Europe. And, and she was a lesbian. So I'm like, you know, I don't know nobody, you know, I mean, I read about it, but I didn't know anybody personally at that point in my life who was a lesbian, because you know, it's a different era. People are openly gay now. And, and she was, and she was struggling with her, her identity of who she was. And you know, if I hadn't been so compartmentalized here, I probably could have helped her through some of that, and maybe she would have stayed. But that's what diversity means and tolerance means, because it's not for me to tolerate her. It was really for us to try to understand each other. And I just kind of, you know, blocked her out, 'cause I was kind of like, you know, this is a black power era and you know.
Speaker 1: Was there a black student organization?
Speaker 2: Yep, and I was the, I was the presi- (laughter), I was the chair of the black students' association my junior year. I, you know, we had, we got a black house on campus, and we were lobbying for black faculty members. And why don't we have black faculty members? And so, they, they started trying to appease us by having a guy come in from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and he would commute to teach a class. And I'm like, ah, it's not good enough, and so we take over buildings (laughter). You see a trend here from high school [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] to college, you know, protesting. We'd lock ourselves in. We'd hide in the building until security, you know, comes through. We were in South Hadley, Massachusetts. I'm mean, it's not like there's super heavy security there. And then on the front page of the Springfield newspaper [The Republican], you have me out, you know, locked arms, protesting, right. My father's brother lived in Springfield, Massachusetts, so I had family nearby. So he calls my father alarmed. My father is like alarmed. I'm like, out of all the people they could've got captured in this picture, how did I end up (laughter) on the front page? And so, you know, my parents [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett and Paul Hatchett, Sr.] are like, "We really are worried about you. You know, we've raised you to be independent and express your thoughts, but what if you had gotten shot in that building," you know, and da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da. And so Vivian Malone Jones, who of course--you have to see the wall before you leave in my office. I have, which I take great pride in, we have a wall, which is my tribute to the civil rights legends. Vivian was a dear family friend and a big sister to me. She and my dad were very close, which really it was my dad's relationship that I piggybacked on, you know, that I got to know her because of her relationship with my father. She, you know, considered my dad like a father figure, big brother figure to her, and she loved him dearly. So dad has Vivian call me, and Vivian said, "Glenda, I respect what you're doing, but let me tell you, we need you to get out of college, go on and do what you're gonna do so that you can be in a position to effect change. I don't need you taking chances. I get the protesting, but some of the stuff you're doing you're just taking unnecessary chances." So we kind of laughed about that years later. But I did, fortunately, (laughter) gradate from Mount Holyoke.
Story_ID: 661669
Speaker 1: I was very active in the black students' association, became chair of the black students' association my junior year, made sure that we got this black house to meet. We had regular meetings. We brought in speakers. We were--
Speaker 2: Who came in?
Speaker 1: --very--[HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni; we had Alvin Ailey come and perform on campus one year; we had--oh, my god, I'm trying to think of who we had to come. Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], interestingly enough, was over at Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] at the time that--although I didn't know her at the time, she was there. Bill Cosby was working on his advanced degree in education. So--at the University of Massachusetts. So you had a rich kind of network among the five colleges, so it was Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], Amherst, which is this very independent, new age, very small college, University of Massachusetts in Amherst [Massachusetts], Amherst College in Amherst, and then Smith over in Northampton [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts]. And so you could take classes at any of the schools that you wanted to in the five college area, which was great.
Speaker 2: I was asked by Don Roman [Don M. Roman], who was at the event last night, and he, and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was he?
Speaker 2: --he said ask her about the dances (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, we used to have dances. We'd have, we called them mixers. And yes, Don was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] when I was at Mount Holyoke. And, and so the guys would come--you know, we'd be strategic about it now. You'd have to get, you get the guys up from Yale, you know, 'cause there were so few black students in the area, so we had to kind of make our own social atmosphere. So we'd host a mixer, and we'd have the guys up from Yale. Next weekend we'd have the guys down from, from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]. We'd have the guys over from Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts]. He'd have the guys in from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So one time though a guy I was dating--I was (laughter), I was dating actually two guys. I was dating a guy at Yale, and I was dating a guy at Dartmouth, and they both show up on campus that weekend. So I checked myself into the infirmary (laughter). I know, gotta do what you gotta do.
Speaker 2: Was that a, was that a, a solution that was, was practiced a lot? I mean was it--
Speaker 1: No. Everybody said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a known solution--
Speaker 1: --"Glenda [HistoryMaker Glenda Hatchett] are you cra- ," no.
Speaker 2: It was a unique idea of yours?
Speaker 1: Yeah, mine was unique. I took the--you know, it was the old school thermometers, the, you know, the glass thermometer, took it, rubbed it on the--stick it back (laughter) in my mouth, you know. And I just, I was there just long enough until they left, and then I--and then, you know, but no, that was, I think that was unique to me. I had to think of something quick, and that's what I came up with. Sorry.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 661670
Speaker 1: Now you were majoring in, in--
Speaker 2: Political science--
Speaker 1: Political science (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and history.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's good prelaw. Had, had you identified--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --yourself as a lawyer, or did--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I hadn't, I really hadn't. I just--let me back up a couple of steps. When I was in high school [Charles Lincoln Harper High School, Atlanta, Georgia] I actually thought I was gonna be an aeronautical engineer, right. And the guy who was sometimes my boyfriend, sometimes not my boyfriend was going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. That was his goal. He was going to MIT. And so Chip [ph.] told me, he said, "You know, it's too bad we can't be together in college, 'cause you won't be able to get in." I'm like, what, what (laughter), what? I'll get in before you get in. So it became an ego thing and like I gotta prove him wrong. So you know, my sole mission in life is I had to get into MIT. You know, I had gotten this thing about I had to go to a, one of the Seven Sisters, but now I had to, I had to go to MIT. And then I did, I did get accepted to MIT, and then I thought, this is crazy, you know. Are you going because you're just trying to prove the point? And you know, I think the liberal arts education was really, really better suited for me. And it certainly has turned out to be the best choice for me, given my, my life's path. But no, I didn't, I didn't go, and I didn't go right to law school. I worked for a year because I was trying to figure out what I was gonna do. And my mother [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett] was terribly disappointed.
Speaker 1: Let me, let me just interrupt for a minute and just ask you about--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --some of the influences at Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts]. I mean who were some of the professors or teachers that, that influenced you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or fellow students?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Vicky Schuck [Victoria Schuck] was my advisor in political science. Professor Schultz had a huge influence and pushed me, really, really pushed me. And she was the department chair, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of political science?
Speaker 2: Political science--as part of being accepted to, to, to write an honors thesis you had to be a part of a trip that she took her students to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. And she was very, very influential. Just, she could walk into any senator's office, and they would go, "Professor Schuck." I mean, she was just kind of a legend and really respected highly in academic circles but also in political circles in Washington. And you know, I mean, I had been to D.C. before, but not like that. And she pulled me aside, and she said, "I just really need you to notch it up. You know, you--I want you to stretch further than you're reaching right now." And, and I remember that, like you--and I'm like, "I don't know what I want to do, Professor Schuck." "I don't know," and she said, "but I need you to stretch. I need you to do this. I need you to do that." And so she just, you know, she just really pushed me, and she pushed me hard. Ivanhoe Donaldson, I, I took classes from over at the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], who was very, very demanding. And I--
Speaker 1: He was a noted figure in SNCC, the Student--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and the number one aide for [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when he became mayor in D.C.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ivanhoe Donaldson.
Speaker 2: Ivanhoe Donaldson was my professor at the University of Massachusetts when I get, you know, 'cause I can take classes anywhere. And Ivanhoe Donaldson, Professor Donaldson had us do this twenty-five page paper. He was teaching African American history. And (laughter) he gave it back to us and said I want this paper--after I killed myself, you know, writing this twenty-five page term paper. He gave it back to, to us, and he said, "I want it in five." I'm like, huh? You know, I done killed myself. You know, I've fudged with the margins to get to twenty-five (laughter), and you want a five page paper. So, but it was such discipline. I'll never forget it. And it was great discipline, which I didn't appreciate then for me for later in life. Then I turned that paper in, and then he gives it back and says, "I want it on one page. I want this in one page." And I thought, this is just dang gone ridiculous. I saw him years later in Washington. I was speaking in Washington, and he came. And I hadn't seen him in a thousand years. And I thanked him. I said, "You know, I was so mad at you, was so angry. I thought it was the most ridiculous thing to have me do that, but it was amazing discipline, amazing discipline."
Story_ID: 661671
Speaker 1: I took a class with Max Roach, (makes sound) the legendary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --jazz drummer, Max Roach. And the class was the choir. And we did as our final project for the class, we did the freedom suite, and we performed it at the University of Massachusetts [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts]. I am telling you that was one of the most remarkable experiences I have ever had, to be a college student--and, and, and he was rough in class. I mean he was very demanding. But the culmination of the class is that, was the performance. We had to do all these rehearsals (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the 'Freedom Now'--
Speaker 1: Yes, the 'Freedom Now Suite' ['We Insist! Max Roach's Freedom Now Suite'] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The 'Freedom Now Suite.' Yeah.
Speaker 1: The 'Freedom Now Suite.' We performed it.
Speaker 2: Was Abbey Lincoln involved?
Speaker 1: And Abbey Lincoln came and did the lead. Take me out. I was beside myself, right. We were all dressed in, you know, beautiful African garb, and we were all there. And she--man, I don't even have the words. I don't have the words to tell you how, first of all, how brilliant--now you figure now, I'm a young college kid, to get, to just to be in the presence of a Max Roach and an Abbey Lincoln. Lest more be the backup chorus for the 'Freedom Now Suite.' It was, it was just, it was just remarkable.
Speaker 2: Do you think that the students would have had that kind of experience had they not had a black student organization (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, of course not, oh, of course not--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --absolutely not, absolutely not. And I am so grateful that I ended up in what we called the valley, with the five colleges, because experience of taking something at UMass was very different from being at Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] or, or taking a class at Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts], blah, blah, blah. But this is what I really appreciated, is that it was such a microcosm of black America, because you had me, whose parents [Clemmie Barnes Hatchett and Paul Hatchett, Sr.] didn't have money, but were wealthy in ways that you can't measure, and then you had black students, every black student there was not (laughter), you know, needed a scholarship. I mean, we had students whose fathers, mothers would drive them up in their huge Mercedes-Benz, and they lived in penthouses in New York [New York]. And they had flown all over the world and you know, spoke various languages. So it was a microcosm for me. The basketball player, not--played in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Wilt Chamberlain?
Speaker 1: Not Wilt.
Speaker 2: Hal Greer. I don't know. Dr. J--
Speaker 1: Dr. J.
Speaker 2: Oh, was, was he at UMass?
Speaker 1: Julius [Julius Erving], he was at UMass--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 1: --as was Natalie Cole. Man, we used to laugh at Natalie Cole. We'd go by the student center, and she'd be over there with these white boys performing, and we'd look at her like, you know. And we're going, huh? But Natalie Cole was at UMass. Dr. J was playing. He was a big star at UMass. And that's what I'm saying: It was this amazing microcosm of black students from various backgrounds with various talents. And I just feel very blessed to have been a part of that, you know.
