Story_ID: 638520
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Artis Gail Hampshire-Cowan: A-R-T-I-S, G-A-I-L, H-A-M-P-S-H-I-R-E, hyphen, C-O-W-A-N [HistoryMaker Artis Hampshire-Cowan].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 5, 1955, Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is attorney and university administrator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Sunday, June 27, 2010.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Mitchellville, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638521
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: --take a short period of time to answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  My favorite food is collard greens.
Speaker 1: Collard greens, okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love all the seasons, but summer because I'm a beach person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, the gulf near Alabama.  Gulf Shores [Alabama], Orange Beach [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Your word is your bond.
Story_ID: 638522
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Hampshire, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Clara Torrance Hampshire: C-L-A-R-A; Torrance, T-O-R-R-A-N-C-E; Hampshire, H-A-M-P-S-H-I-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Marengo County, Alabama, June 20, 1921.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell Marengo County?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-E-N-G-O, County.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace her side of the family and what were they doing way back?
Speaker 2: Well, what I know is that my, I know of my mother's grandmother, whose name was Florence Eaton.  And Florence Eaton had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell it, I'm sorry (unclear).
Speaker 2: F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E, Florence, Eaton, E-A-T-O-N, married name.  Her maiden name was Booze [ph.], Booze, I believe, and my grandmother was named Carri and Carri had a sister who was named Annie Eaton [ph.], we called her Aunt Haga [ph.], and another sister named Aunt Belle [ph.] who lived in Dayton, Ohio.  That's what I remember, and a brother [Son Eaton (ph.)] who my mother actually came to Mobile [Alabama] to live with.  That's what I recall on mother's side.  Her father was Pump Torrance, and I don't know much about his family, but I know that he had lots of brothers because his children I know today, and they participate in our family reunion.  So, my mother's parents were Pump Torrance and Carri Eaton [Carri Eaton Torrance].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, now Florence Eaton is--
Speaker 2: Is my mother's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that's the one as far back as I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother talked about her a lot and she had pictures of her because she said that her grandmother was the one who always made her feel special.  She was the oldest of thirteen children, so I get the sense that her life was hard but a lot of work, you know, having a lot of children and they were farmers and I know that she didn't get to go to school because, you know, when it was time to farm the--her father made them stay home to farm and he didn't really believe in educating girls, so she always talked about her grandmother in a fond way, saying her grandmother was the one who always made her feel special.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was happy that she had a chance to go to school and to do some--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 638523
Speaker 1: Are any stories passed down to give us a sense of what life was like in--this is all around Mobile [Alabama], right in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, actually this is in Marengo County [Alabama] because the whole family--
Speaker 1: Is Marengo County near Mobile?
Speaker 2: It's about two hours north of Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, really in the Sun Belt, Cotton Belt, so there was a lot of cotton picked in my mother's area where she grew up and she had lots of siblings, too, boys--brothers and sisters, and, of course, they all had to work.  She'd talk about working in the fields.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's a story, I guess, about the family moving to the gulf at some point, in Mobile?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I'm not really sure.  I know that--my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] told a story of Uncle Son [ph.], her mother's [Carri Eaton Torrance] brother, coming up to visit and she wanted to go to Mobile, you know, to get out of the country to better her life, and, of course, you know her father [Pump Torrance] was totally against her leaving home; like maybe if she was leaving to get married it would be one thing, but just to be a single girl to leave to go to Alabama--.  So, she said she actually slipped off from home; that while I guess the family was gathering or whatever, she slipped through the woods and went down to the road and, and got in Uncle Son's car and went to Mobile with him and got a job there working as a domestic and lived with him and his wife.  And it's interesting, she tells a story that she--and that was in Crichton, Alabama, which is a community in Mobile--that the Uncle Son's wife had a sister who lived there with them too, and she said it was great except that this young lady started taking her clothes and wearing her clothes, (laughter) and she didn't particularly like that.
Speaker 1: This is Uncle Son's wife?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), her sister who was about my mother's age, and she just felt she wasn't treated fair in that sense, and so that gave her an incentive.  She thought that she needed to move on.  And she said my father [John Hampshire, Sr.] she met, who was living with his uncle in Crichton, who was industrious and, and very nice and she decided--he asked her to marry him and she decided to marry.  And when I asked her, "Why did you get married?"  She said, "Well, I loved him," she said, "but I knew I couldn't just move out on my own and get a place on my own because that wasn't acceptable."  Nice girls didn't go off on their own and just live in that time, because, you know, her father was very upset that she left with her uncle and thought that she was, was like she was a woman of the street or something, and so certainly she didn't think she could leave her uncle's house and then just go live alone someplace.  So that incentivized her to marry early.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said your mother had, had a chance to go to school some?
Speaker 2: No.  My mother left Marengo County with the hope of going to school, but she was never able to complete her education but had a love of education and really instilled that in all of her children, and--well, not just her children, I mean any child that ever came around her she would talk about, you know, education.  And one of the things she was really known for was graduations.  She loved graduations, whether it was kindergarten, elementary school, college, whatever (laughter).  And, she always gave children presents for graduation and I think it was just a reflection of her love for education and something she never got to achieve on herself.  She was sort of self educated.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, give us, can you give us your--well, let me--before we leave your mother's side of the family, so there aren't any stories of the slavery period, or Civil War, or the Reconstruction, or any kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm not aware of any of those stories.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--did your mother have any stories about the Civil Rights Movement or days down there at all?
Speaker 1: Well, I think what, what I've heard my mother talk about was, you know, coming to Mobile and the very strict segregation experience there.  I did have experiences with my father around those issues, though.
Story_ID: 638524
Speaker 1: Let me get your father's full name.
Speaker 2: His name was John Hampshire: J-O-H-N, Hampshire, H-A-M-P-S-H-I-R-E [John Hampshire, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 16, 1917 in Carlton, Alabama, the City of Jackson [Alabama] but the county [sic.] of Carlton, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Carlton, Alabama.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's about an hour and a-half north of Mobile [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, my father, more on my father's mother's side, they, they were, her name was Julia French [Julia French Hampshire] and Julia French had siblings and her siblings were Malachi [ph.], Mary [ph.], Jim [ph.], there was one other, and I can't remember now.  But, their parents were John French and Martha [Martha French (ph.)].  They, too, were farmers and the--guess the most vivid story I recall about them was the name French, and they were actually enslaved in Virginia and at the time that the Civil War ended, and they were told by this Union general that they were free and they could go wherever they wanted and they could pick a name, and they were asked, I guess this would have been a great-great-great-grandfather, asked, you know, "Well, what's your name?"  And he was General French, and so they took the name French, and that's how my mother's [sic.] side of the family are that name.  Now they came, traveled south because they'd had a child who had been sold into slavery into New Orleans [Louisiana], and so they traveled south in search of her.  As the story goes, they ended up in Mobile along the gulf because there was a cost to get the ferry over to New Orleans.  And now when I drive to New Orleans, there's this long bridge.  But anyway, they didn't have the resources to get across the bridge and so they essentially ended up in the area my family settled in, but I, you know, we do have family in New Orleans, or we did.  I'm not in touch with them now, but as a child, I remember visiting family who were Frenches in New Orleans at the time.
Speaker 1: So, they were trying to reunite with a daughter who had been sold to New Orleans.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And travelled all that way.  That's a long way.
Speaker 2: From Virginia.  That's a long way.  You think about, I just think about how did they even get there? Were they walking or what (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The, the journey is a story, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I had an Aunt Clara French [ph.] who was married to my Uncle Mel [ph.], who shared that story with me.  She married into our family but she always had great admiration for our family, I guess our family values or whatever, and so she was much older and, I guess, learned these stories from my forefathers and was kind enough to share it with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.  So, I take it they never reunited with their daughter.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It would be unlikely anyway, even if they were in Louisiana to--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's true, that's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) be able to find her.  But--
Story_ID: 638525
Speaker 1: So, did they basically do agricultural work, farm work, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Farm work, principally.
Speaker 1: Did, did they ever own any land?
Speaker 2: Yes, actually the, the--our family homestead is in Carlton, Alabama.  Actually, it's sort of a sad story, something I'm going through now.  My father [John Hampshire, Sr.] and his brother owned property, about ten acres, and then thirty acres were owned by my Uncle Mel [ph.], but I believe at some point, and I've done research on the records, the first title I saw were to John [Hampshire-Cowan's paternal great-grandfather, John French] and Martha French [ph.], but it was a total of forty acres; that was the family homestead.  And unfortunately at Uncle Mel's passing, I sought to buy the property to keep it in our family.  We could not get the title cleared and subsequently family members sold their interest to a speculator and so, right now, my siblings and I are in litigation over this property because we are really seeking to keep it in the family and now it's going to be sold at public auction and it's our intent to bid on it to see if we can hold on to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 638526
Speaker 1: Did your father [John Hampshire, Sr.] have a chance to go to school at all?
Speaker 2: No, my father did not.  He grew up in rural Carlton, Alabama.  His father, too, farmed, who was Ben Hampshire.  He came to Mobile [Alabama] and I'm not sure at what age, but I think he was pretty young, maybe eighteen or so, and he came to Mobile and lived with Uncle Mel [ph.] who had his own business, which I also found fascinating.  He was a mechanic, one of the best mechanics in Mobile.  In fact, most of his clients were Caucasians, which was interesting, you know as segregated as Mobile was, even as I grew up, but my father learned to be a mechanic working with my uncle and then he was also very successful in getting on to work at the railroad, because you know, in the South and the African American community, the very best jobs were railroad jobs, so my father worked at the railroad.  That was his full time job, and then he also worked as a mechanic with my uncles every weekend, and this was Aunt Clara's husband, so I spent a lot of time--I spent a lot of time with my father as a kid.  And so he would go out there on Saturday mornings and I would go with him and I would be in the house with Aunt Clara [Clara French (ph.)], working.  In fact, my--I always say my first job was housekeeping because she taught me how to clean up and she'd give me five dollars a day for helping her do housework.  But, anyway, my father worked both of those jobs until I finished school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, okay, now is there any stories that your father tells about growing up in Mobile that?
Speaker 2: Well, my father grew up in Carlton, but he, you know, he doesn't really talk about, he never really talked about his years growing up.  I mean, he told fond stories of his mother [Julia French Hampshire], you know, loving mother kind of thing.  He told funny stories about his brother, Ben [Ben Hampshire].  They were one year and one day apart in age which, Uncle Ben was always the one getting into trouble and picking fights with people and my father was always the one who had to protect him, and my father was the younger brother (laughter).  But he does talk about his early days in Mobile, you know, trying to come and make a living in what was a city and he was very focused on, you know, having a good life and having a family.  And, you know, my father just believed in work and God and family, and that's his whole life is what I remember, but it was very difficult, just from the stories you know he told of he and his brother and even just the living circumstances of finding a place to live.  I guess rooming houses were big back then and taking a room and what you had to pay and having to share that with--not just with your brother but with other people, so apparently housing was very limited, and then at one point being able to build a room adjacent to his sister's house, and--which was odd to me, that then when you move then you tear it down and you rebuild it somewhere else.  It just seems a little strange, but I guess resources were limited back then, so I just got a sense that it was very difficult for him, you know, in, in getting started in, in the city.
Story_ID: 638527
Speaker 1: Now, does he tell a story, or do your parents [Clara Torrance Hampshire and John Hampshire, Sr.] tell the story about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, they don't.  All I know is that it was in Crichton [Mobile, Alabama] because she was living with Uncle Son [ph.] and he was you know working with Uncle Mel [ph.], so I don't know whether their paths crossed, but I never heard that story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I do, I have two brothers, John, Jr. [John Hampshire, Jr.], who is the oldest, and Allen LaParker [Allen Hampshire].  Then I have three sisters: Levada [Levada Hampshire Matthews], Avon Delores [Avon Hampshire], and Anita [Anita Hampshire].
Speaker 1: And where are you in there?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest of six (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 638528
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their gifts and their dispositions, and--who do you--and what they look like, even--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I've always been told, and I know I look like my father [John Hampshire, Sr.].  I'm a male--female version of my father and I was the baby girl and I spent lots of time with him and he was very close to his brother, Ben [Ben Hampshire], and so kind of one of the running jokes was, you know, I went everywhere with him and I, I recall stories they shared with me of places and situations I was.  I would cry to go with him and my father would take me, of course my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] didn't like it, but I got to go, but I think that very much had an impact on who I am.  I'm, I'm completely comfortable with men, and I've always been comfortable with men in business settings.  I find that especially in serious business situations, I think men forget that I'm in the room and so a lot of work gets done (laughter) that otherwise wouldn't get done.  So, generally I would say my father, but as I've gotten older and the things that I do now are very much my mother, so I think I'm a mix.  Let me just give an example of what I mean.  I remember when I was in college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] and law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and whatever, and I would speak to my mother every Saturday and she would always talk about whose funeral she'd gone to, or who she had gone to visit, and I always thought, gee, what a depressing life that, you know, the highlight of her week was having gone to a funeral or gone to visit someone who was sick--I mean, that was like her life.  Well, it came to me when I moved here in Mitchellville [Maryland] in 1991, our neighbors up the street, which we were the only people on this block and they moved in, and the twin sister was ill and eventually she passed, and so I went to the store and I cooked a meal and we took it down the street, and their family was from Kentucky and they, you know, really were surprised that, you know, I cooked a meal and brought to them and just sat and talked with them and I said to them, well, you know, I didn't really think about it.  You know, the way I grew up that's what you do.  And so now, I find myself doing the things my mother did, so, I mean, I, I had a lot of responsibility at work and civically, but when somebody's in distress or something's happening, I feel I'm supposed to make it easier or show concern, or--and that was my mother.  I mean, that's what she did, so I think I'm a mix of both of my parents; my father in being bold and aggressive and community oriented, and being civically involved and my mother in the love and caring and caring about people.  Making me a little--
Speaker 1: Take your time.  You need anything, or?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just thinking about my mother.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She passed two years ago.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And I also think my love of education and my love of children and promoting them in education comes from my mother.
Story_ID: 638529
Speaker 1: You were mentioning--we were mentioning off camera that your father [John Hampshire, Sr.] liked baseball.  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) would often take you to the baseball games on Sundays?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about--Birmingham is like--I mean--
Speaker 2: Mobile [Alabama].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Mobile, Mobile is like a center for black baseball.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, what I remember and I think what I was sharing with you is I guess maybe twenty years ago when we started to--twenty, thirty years ago when African Americans really started to look at our history, and there was a lot written about black baseball league, I guess when 'Traveling All Stars' ['The Bingo Long Traveling All Stars and Motor Kings'] that movie came out with--who was it?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones and Richard Pryor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, James Earl, Richard Pryor, exactly, yeah, and those memories came back for me because a major outing for us on Sunday afternoon was to go to the baseball games and they were not, it wasn't my recollect- recollection that it was a team, you know, like we had the Wizards that we went to all the time; it was like occasionally a Sunday afternoon and maybe when it was one of the other teams travelling through or whatever.  But, I mean, we would go dressed up just like we were coming from church and the whole family would go and we'd watch the game and then my father would bring us back home, and, and this is one of those times where I remember that he and my uncle would go back out and I would want to go with them (laughter) kind of thing.  But even in his later years baseball always brought him a lot of joy and he would listen to the baseball games with the Braves [Atlanta Braves] and then, of course, he watched it on TV so he always got--Braves were, you know, his team especially you know in the later years for him.
Speaker 1: Because of [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron and, and the connection with Mobile (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 638530
Speaker 1: Now, was your mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] involved in clubs and activities or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: My mother's activities really focused around the church [Greater Mt. Hebron Missionary Baptist Church; Mt. Hebron Church Ministries, Mobile, Alabama].  She was very, what do, what do I want to say, faithful in her church engagement.  One of my most vivid memories of my mother was always the fundraisers for the Women's Day and the teas.  So, I have teas now.  Actually, I have Girl Scouts who come over each April and I--they have to have an address and they have to have on gloves.  And I have my hats out; I have them put on hats.  And these were fundraisers for the church, and it would be competition on who had the prettiest table and my mother always won that because she put a lot of time in the crocheted tablecloths and making the sandwiches and the teacakes and that kind of thing.  That was to raise money for the church.  She was also very involved in the mission work of the church and, you know, you--how you don't think about how that connects with her inclination even in her later years when she was elderly and couldn't do--to go and help people.  So, church was big.  In terms of her non-church activities, it was always around us, so she was very active in PTA [Parent Teacher Association]; never missed a PTA meeting.  And she also was president of the band booster club, because my sister [Anita Hampshire] and I were in the high school band and you had to raise money to band uniforms or pay for transportation for the bus because, you know, Mobile Mardi Gras was big, and so that was sort of the highlight of the year for us.  Football season in the fall and then Mardi Gras parades in February, and so the band booster club had to be active in order to have money for us to get transported around to location.  We also participated in competitive classical music competitions statewide, which was really unusual for African American high school bands at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You mentioned a number of things here.  Now what's the band booster club, now what's that?
Speaker 2: Well, this was an organization of parents whose children were in the band.
Speaker 1: Oh the band, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  The high school band.  It was Trinity Gardens High School band, and my mother was very active in that and at one point served as president, and their purpose was to help raise money, pretty much to handle uniforms and transportation.
Story_ID: 638531
Speaker 1: Mardi Gras--now did you all, was Mardi Gras big with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mardi Gras was huge (laughter) in Mobile.  People always think it's New Orleans [Louisiana] that's the--Mardi Gras in America, but the birthplace of Mardi Gras is Mobile, Alabama, my hometown, and that was a time, oh I have wonderful stories of Mardi Gras because not just, you know, when I was in high school and in the band, but even as a little girl because Mardi Gras was a time that we would all go to my aunt's house, Aunt Leslie [ph.], who lived off of Davis Avenue, which, you know, every city had a major downtown for the black community.  Ours was Davis Avenue.  Of course, now it's called Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue], but my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] and all of her siblings and all of their children would spend, you know, like Monday and Tuesday of Mardi Gras there and in my grandmother's [Carri Eaton Torrance] later years she had moved there too, so that was like a family gathering around Mardi Gras, but Mardi Gras goes on, you know, for a number of weeks and so in high school there would be parades at night and then Mardi Gras ends, you know, the Monday and Tuesday before Ash Wednesday, and so that's the culmination of the celebration.
Speaker 1: So it'd last a number of weeks?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought Mardi Gras was just one thing (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No.  Mardi Gras probably goes on about six weeks, and so go- moving up to Mardi Gras, up that six week period, there are one or two parades each night, you know, for, like five to six weeks, and then on the weekend, of course, like that Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, the last five days are the huge celebration that a lot of people from out of town come in to town for.
Story_ID: 638532
Speaker 1: About Mardi Gras again, now is Mardi Gras like--do, do you all have the same kind of groups they have in New Orleans [Louisiana], like the Indians [Wild Tchoupitoulas] and the Zulus [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, they are--well of course, as I was growing up and it's still today, there was the black Mardi Gras association and the white Mardi Gras association, and they have different names and their clubs and organizations and they also have balls.  A lot of people don't know that Mardi Gras is not just a parade, but they have balls and they actually elect, or select a king and queen to reign over the Mardi Gras each year, typically young professionals who are natives of Mobile [Alabama], and there is also an arrival of the king and queen court on Sunday, and they actually arrive by boat.  They come into (laughter) the, the, the harbor there in Mobile and there's a parade and a luncheon, so I mean it's a whole bunch of activities that go on in the Mardi Gras association.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are, are there any names that you remember of some of the, the krew- do they have krewes like in the--in New Orleans (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the--I remember the Maid of the Mist [sic. Maids of Mirth], the, the Maid of the Mist, god, I can see the pictures but I can't think of the names.  But krewe was definitely in the names.  And there's also always a Mardi Gras marshal, and that's like an honored role, you know being the marshal of the parade, and I remember when I first was offered the position at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I was coming here, my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] said to me, "Well, you know there's, there's a guy up there.  He was Mardi Gras marshal, who works at Howard, the Bell [ph.] family," and sure enough I sought him out and we've been good friends and created a network of support for kids from Alabama, yeah, out of that.  So, there was a strong network of folks from Mobile in Mardi Gras for sure.
Story_ID: 638533
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't ask you about the--now you mentioned the church, but I didn't ask you what church you all attended.  Which church was it?
Speaker 2: Okay, now we had a very interesting church experience.  My mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] was a member of Mt. Hebron Missionary Baptist Church [Greater Mt. Hebron Missionary Baptist Church; Mt. Hebron Church Ministries, Mobile, Alabama], which was right down the street from where we lived, maybe five houses down the street.  My father [John Hampshire, Sr.] attended Mt. Olive Baptist Church [Mobile, Alabama], which was closer to where he first lived when he came to Mobile [Alabama], so he stayed there.  And then we attended Trinity Lutheran schools, and if you attended the school you had to attend the church and so our typical Sunday was going to Trinity Lutheran [Trinity Lutheran Church, Mobile, Alabama], singing in the choir, and then leaving there and then going to either my mother's church or my father's church.  After church we'd come home and have dinner as a family and then after dinner we would sit in the living room.  My mother didn't allow us in the living room except on Sundays and we would actually sit in the living room after dinner and have conversations and we had to look through Ebony magazine, and Look magazine, all of which we hated.
Speaker 1: So, but, they made you do that?  You had to do it.
Speaker 2: That was a routine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it really was not until very recently that that came together for me.  At Howard University [Washington, D.C.] we honored [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson late in his years, naming the school of communication the John H. Johnson School of Communications, and as senior vice president and secretary I'm responsible for special convocations, so I was doing research, and in one of the articles, Mr. Johnson talks about how important it was in creating Ebony because he wanted African Americans to have images, positive images, and to see life beyond wherever their circumstances were, and then it came back to me and I actually told him this when I greeted him.  I said, "Mr. Johnson, my mother would make us flip through Ebony and Look and we hated it, but now we know--," I mean, we couldn't figure out what it was about.  I mean, it was like a ritual, right?  What she was doing was doing exactly the intent of Mr. Johnson's publication, to show us a life beyond Victory Avenue in Mobile, and then after that, we went to what was called BTU, which was Baptist Training Union.  This was the teenage group that you go back on--in the afternoon on Sundays, so that was our Sunday.  So, when you talk about, you know, church, I kind of say you know I spent most of my day at church (laughter) growing up, but I think it very much influenced who we all became.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I've--I've interviewed quite a few people, I'm so surprised to find out that their mother is a member of one church and the father the other.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That didn't--it seemed like when I was growing up, they--you know most families were members of one church--
Speaker 2: Well, it was unusual.  I mean, we thought it was unusual too, but they were both faithful members of their individual churches and they would visit each other's church, but my mother joined Mt. Hebron, I guess when we moved to that area, but my father kept his membership at the church, you know, he, he'd been a member of since coming to Mobile.
Story_ID: 638534
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know I realize I had a wonderful childhood (laughter) and I often say that I didn't really know we were poor until I went to college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).  But, so you know when I think about growing up the first sight and sound that comes to me is just that the street I lived on was Victory Avenue [Mobile, Alabama], and my father [John Hampshire, Sr.] lived on one corner and my uncle lived down the street, so my uncle had twelve kids and my father had six, so we dominated the street basically.  And being the youngest, when I was young, believe it or not, I was kind of a terror.  I would pick on people.  I had a cousin, Connery [ph.], and we, in the summertime, we would just roam the street.  It was like, you know, it was our world because we were the young children of the Hampshire clan and so we had no fear of anything or anybody, basically, but we played, I mean, all day long.  We'd come home for lunch.  And there was this rural area near where we lived and we'd really set up like a camp kind of thing, but, you know, so my memory is just not having any limits about what I could do and what I could say and, and I realized it was a false sense of the world because one day all of my brothers [John Hampshire, Jr. and Allen Hampshire] and sisters [Levada Hampshire Matthews, Avon Hampshire and Anita Hampshire] were away, I don't know where they were, and these kids down the street came by and they had always told me they were gonna get me, right, and they threw a little rock.  I got a little (unclear) here on my head, and, and actually from that experience I realized that, you know, you have to treat people nice.  You can't be a bully (laughter) just because you're the baby of a clan that kind of dominates the neighborhood.  But it wasn't like we did fancy things.  I mean, the big thing in the summertime was going to the beach.  My father always took us to the beach and, on Friday nights when he would get off work, because he worked like the four to midnight shift at the railroad, he and my uncle and friends, they would take their families down to Bayou La Batre [Alabama], which is on the water, and they would catch fish and the l- the women would fry it right there on the beach, and the kids--you know at night on the beach.  That was a wonderful thing.  So we did lots of things but it was never like going to an amusement park or--
Speaker 1: Now, now how do you spell Bayou La Batre?
Speaker 2: I think it's Ba- B-A-R-T-R-E [sic.], Batre.  Ba- B-A-L-A [sic.], I think, and then it's two words, Bayou La Batre.  But it's near Dauphin Island [Alabama] and Mobile [Alabama], on the gulf.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, I was talking about Uncle Mel [ph.] and Aunt Clara [Clara French (ph.)], each year they had a family picnic down to Mon Louis Island [Alabama].  Of course, there are lots of islands and water places around Mobile, but they would gather up the whole family on my father's side and--because they were kind of like the wealthy, they were like grandparents, because they were older people who lived in Mobile, because our [paternal] grandparents [Julia French Hampshire and Ben Hampshire] lived up the country, but they would get a bus and put all of us on a bus and take us there for a family picnic, everything my aunt had cooked or had someone cook for us, so that was like a highlight.
Speaker 1: Now, this was going to where, to where (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was called Mon Louis Island.
Speaker 1: Mon Louis Island.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  It's an island near Mobile, too.  And back then they had, you know, at a beach everything was segregated, so they had (Unclear) Beach and Faustina Beach, these were family names that were right--located right there on the gulf.
Story_ID: 638535
Speaker 1: And, of course, you know the sights and sounds of growing up, too, was, you know was around church--your social life was around church and school.  And when I think about school, you know, being the youngest, I had teachers who had taught my older brothers [John Hampshire, Jr. and Allen Hampshire] and sisters [Levada Hampshire Matthews, Avon Hampshire and Anita Hampshire], or cousins, you know, you show up at a school, it's the kind of thing where you show up at a class and people would look at you and say, "Oh, you one of those Hampshires.  Which one are you?  John [John Hampshire, Sr.] or Ben's [Ben Hampshire]--?"  (Laughter) You know, that kind of thing.  So, that kind of kept you on the straight and narrow, because you know there were expectations of what a Hampshire did and did not do.  It was kind of like the teachers knew you had to do your homework and they could call your parents if you did anything wrong kind of thing.  So, that was a really great thing for me.
Speaker 2: So, where did you start school?
Speaker 1: Well, let me tell you about my, my very first school experience.  It was Ms. Packer, P-A-C-K-E-R, and Ms. Packer had a little one room schoolhouse in our neighborhood [in Mobile, Alabama].  All of my siblings attended Ms. Packer, and most of the kids in the neighborhood you know whose family could afford for them to go to kindergarten and whatnot, and what's amazing to me about Ms. Packer was that it was just one teacher and it would be over fifty kids and we were all in one room.  And we all had, we got the attention we needed, the reading, writing, and arithmetic, but--
Speaker 2: So this was kindergarten.
Speaker 1: This was kindergarten, yes.
Speaker 2: And Ms. Packer, she dealt with fifty children?
Speaker 1: At least fifty children (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her, herself with no aide?
Speaker 1: Just one person.  I was telling somebody this the other day, you know, with all the challenges in education now, and Ms. Packer would--of course 'cause when you arrived at school you played out in the yard and her school was right behind her house, but it was a big yard between her house and the school, so you arrived, you played, and whatever.  And then she would walk out on the s- on the porch of the school and ring a bell and when she would bell, we would just get in line.  Right?  I mean, we were very structured.  And then, she had a piano in the school and she would play the piano and we marched in by music like this, like (laughter) I mean we were very regimented.  But I guess those were early lessons around structure and direction and discipline.  We came in, we sat down, and we started our work.
Story_ID: 638536
Speaker 1: And then, at the end of the day Ms. Packer would take us to the corner of the street 'cause it was a main street, First Avenue [Mobile, Alabama], and she would stop the traffic and all the kids crossed the street and we--our instructions were, "Run until you get home, and don't stop running and don't talk to anyone all the way home."  I guess that was the safety thing, and that's exactly what we did, so all these little kids would cross the street and we'd run, and we did not stop until we got home.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was it a dangerous neighborhood?  I mean, or could things--what things could happen to you?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess when you think about today, people were molesting children even back then, though we knew nothing about that, but I guess the fact that, you know, we were four and five year olds travelling alone and, you know, our parents didn't come to school to get us or whatever.  We actually walked to school on our own and we walked back home on our own and I guess her way of security was just telling us to run home and don't stop until you get home.  And don't--I mean, we couldn't even talk to each other.  That was the rule, just, you know--but you know what, I think it's amazing now when I look back and reflect on the discipline that we had and how effective it was for one teacher to teach that many kids.  But I also remember Ms. Packer had a little strap.  It was a leather strap.  It was about that wide and about that long, and I never saw her use it but it was on the front of her desk and that was kind of like, you know, 'cause you could get a whooping if you did bad things (laughter) back then, but it was a wonderful ex- so that's what I think I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, so do you think it was home training that provided that--that allowed her to have such discipline in school, 'cause I couldn't imagine doing this in Chicago [Illinois] now, having, fi- first of all it'd be too dangerous to come by themselves--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and then--or to go home by themselves.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know and, you know and my expectation is that they wouldn't get in line (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I know I mean that's--I mean I think it's the same thing that we need now that we had then, which is a partnership between home and school.  For a child to be successful academically, the two have to be working together and back then it was the norm.  But also I think back then, particularly in African American communities, we--and in the South, because I find that people in the North, it's a little different, even my age, because I think our parents knew the only way we were gonna have a better life was education, so education was really, really, really, that was like the big thing.  Get an education, get an education, get an education, go to school.  And I'm kind of reminded of a conversation between my brother and mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] and sister.  My mother saved--unbeknownst to us, we joke about how frugal she was, because she was homemaker; she never worked outside of the home after we were married--after she was married.  And she saved money, so when my brother got to be a senior in high school, he went and joined the [U.S.] Army and my mother was very upset.  She cried and everything and he said no, he wanted to go to the Army, and my sister, Levada [Levada Hampshire Matthews], told my mother, "Don't worry, Ma Dear.  I'm gonna go," because she had socialized him to go to college.  Well, in later years we were talking about it, my brother said he went on to the Army because he didn't think my parents could afford to send him to college and there were so many of us and he felt like he needed to get out and, you know, start to help.  But I think the education thing was--well, I remember my father [John Hampshire, Sr.] telling my brother, Allen [Allen Hampshire] once, who loved cars and motor bikes, we called him Marl Man, Marl- Marlboro cigarettes, guy loved horses, you know, he was--he wasn't the traditional one about school.  I remember my dad saying, "Well, you can go to school or you can die, it's up to you," (laughter).  So, our parents were very focused in terms of their expectation that we get an education.
Story_ID: 638537
Speaker 1: So, you had a preschool experience--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in--
Speaker 2: And then I went to Trinity Garden [ph.], which was the local, you know at the time, elementary school that later became a high school [Trinity Gardens High School, Mobile, Alabama].  But the interesting story there of the way we ended up in Lutheran schools was because the school burned down, and the Mobile County school system [Mobile County Public School System] decided to transport all the kids in our neighborhood to Ella Grant [Ella Grant Elementary School, Prichard, Alabama], which was the other black elementary school.  And so they had what was called double sessions, meaning the kids from Trinity Garden where I grew up went for half a day and the other kids went for a half a day, so basically they were getting half of a full education.  Well, my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] was outraged by this and so she looked around and she found this school, a Lutheran school that was near where we lived [Trinity Evangelical Lutheran School, Mobile, Alabama], and sort of worked out an arrangement because certainly, you know, to pay tuition for four kids wasn't within the realm; somehow my parents did it, and so we attended Lutheran schools as a result of that until high school and then high school we went back into the public high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the public elementary school burned down and created a crisis?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, you know, it was just to think that the way to solve a problem was to reduce these kids, you know black kids' education by half day--
Speaker 1: And cram 'em all into the same, one school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you, well, did you get a--did you have any sense when you were at the Lutheran school how compared to the public high schools that white students are going to?  Or, or was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that was an interesting, I think, experience too for us because there were white administrators at the Lutheran school in the black community, and that was extraordinary (laughter) where, where we grew up.  And so, there were also youth activities that would happen with the Lutheran churches, so occasionally we would interact and be in the presence of Caucasian, and that was really unusual and I suspect it probably--well not it probably, it did impact my views in terms of race relations because it was in a religious setting, my interactions with white people was you know in a religious setting.  When I was transferred to Blount High School [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama] in 1970--it was 1970 when Mobile County finally got around to really integrating schools based on Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  It was turmoil, complete turmoil.  I mean, there would be fights at school, school would be let out early because the races had really not, you know, mixed.  I think for me it was kind of traumatic to see the anger and meanness.  I mean, I think about when schools were integrated in Boston [Massachusetts] and watching on the news you know adults shaking buses with little kids on it.  Oh, that was really unnerving to me because the white people I've had interaction with were nice people (laughter) and so you know it--by the time I finished high school, I was a militant.  I was anti-white, I remember my sophomore--freshman year in college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] going to this interview for a summer internship, and it was an African American woman interviewing me with Mobil Oil [Mobil Oil Corporation; Exxon Mobil Corporation], I wish I could find her now, but anyway I was you know just really hostile, right?  And I called her a Spook Who Sat by the Door, I had my [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis Afro and everything.  (Laughter) I was certain she wasn't gonna pick me for the internship because I wasn't gonna be a house nigger, you know, kind of attitude, anyway.  Anyway, I was selected and so I ended up, they brought us all to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], this was at a time they were recruiting, I guess African American kids out of HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] and I walked up to her at the welcome reception and I said, "This is not gonna change me," you know.  And of course, by the end of the summer I had changed because, I guess I had gone full circle from having positive feelings about whites to negative feelings about whites, to back to it's the individual, it's not the color of a person's skin, it's the totality of their experiences.
Story_ID: 638538
Speaker 1: And so when I think about Lutheran schools, it really did have an impact on me.  But, I also recall at Grace Lutheran Church [Mobile, Alabama], which was the wealthiest community in Mobile [Alabama], I remember my brothers [John Hampshire, Jr. and Allen Hampshire] and sisters [Levada Hampshire Matthews, Avon Hampshire and Anita Hampshire] along with me and a number of people going to visit that church one Sunday and the pastor there calling our pastor to say that we had come and visited their church.  Well, I didn't realize 'cause I was younger that my older siblings were really making a statement (laughter) because this--their thing was you know the benevolence is fine of the wealthier Lutheran churches but they were kind of testing the, the integration issue, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay so this was a white church?
Speaker 1: Yes, all white.  And so, we showed up there Sunday morning, it was, you know of course it was reported back to our pastor that we had gone over there.  Another experience I recall that, that really touched me in terms of race issues when I was with my father [John Hampshire, Sr.] and we were in the J.C. Penney's [J.C. Penney Company] in Prichard [Alabama], and I wanted some water and when my father took me to get the water, there were two water fountains, one colored and one white, and I remember asking which one, and my dad told me whichever one you want.  And when I think about that now, that what the implications of that were for him to tell me that.  I mean, he grows taller and bigger and greater every day in my mind because, I mean, he was really pushing the envelope.  And, of course, a woman did say something to us about it.  But, I think, you know, it was a conscious choice on his part to do that.  And, I think it had an impression on me, it--you know, to have had an impact.
Story_ID: 638539
Speaker 1: My father pushed the envelope a lot around police brutality in a situation with my uncle once.  But he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell us about that--
Speaker 1: --he was kind of fearless
Speaker 2: Well tell us about that, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, Uncle Ben [Ben Hampshire], as I told you, he was the jokester of the family, but anyway Uncle Ben would drink and drive, too.  That was the other thing.  So it was a Friday night and, and somebody's knocking on the door, you know, "Mr. John, Mr. John [John Hampshire, Sr.], they're beating up Mr. Ben."  So my father gets dressed, rushes up to the main highway, which is maybe two city blocks, and the police are beating my uncle up.  I mean he actually ended up with a plate in his head from this, but my father actually got in the fight (laughter), stopping them from beating his brother.  Now, when I think about that, you know, as I was older, I mean he could have been killed.  My uncle could have been killed, but it didn't phase him, I guess.  I don't know.  And, of course, there ended up being a complaint filed about it but it was dismissed, so there were no repercussions from these police officers beating my uncle to the point where he had to have a plate put in his head.  But I just think it's amazing that my father was fearless (laughter) in, in those kinds of situation, so it just causes you to stand up and, and you know fight for what's right and be involved and make a difference.
Story_ID: 638540
Speaker 1: From the perspective of somebody that grew up down there, and not, not that you spent a lot of time downtown, or you know, but, but we've--I heard stories before of people who basically defied the water fountain rule.  Now--I mean, especially that one.  I think the restroom and the lunch counter and stuff is different, but the water fountain, people--I've a lot of people just drink out of the fountain and then there may be an argument later but they don't seem to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that common down there you think?  Was it something that kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I just remembered this vividly, that experience, just me and my father [John Hampshire, Sr.], right?  Because--I guess it's also interesting how these things impact children.  Clearly, I, I mean I'm--'cause my thing was why did I ask which one?
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Probably six.  I was pretty young.  I was pretty young, six, seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was 1961, I guess, this is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Civil Rights Movement just kind of got started, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, I mean, would--here's the thing and I try, but I told somebody you know, the first time I was called nigger to my face, I was a DA [district attorney] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I grew up in Alabama.  So, I was always think give me the South any day.  But when I reflect, I realize that there were black worlds and white worlds and so we really didn't go in that other world a lot.  I guess our parents protected us from that.  But you did bump into it in, in different circumstances.  When I came to Washington [D.C.] I was active with the Junior League [Junior League of Washington], because we started a daycare center for homeless children, Bright Beginnings [Washington, D.C.], and there was a woman there, Ann Brown [ph.], who is also a native of Mobile [Alabama].  We're the same age, finished high school the same year, and Ann--and she's a lawyer too, and we would have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's, she's white?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we would have these conversations, you know, when you're meeting over a period of time you're on a board together, and she would always bring up these things and so finally one day I said to her, I said, "Ann, we're both from Mobile," and I said, "we're in the same place now, but we grew up in two different Mobiles."  I said, "You finished Murphy [Murphy High School, Mobile, Alabama].  There were no black people at Murphy," and I said, "and my senior year in high school [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama], my class, kind of pushing the envelope, went to the Municipal Park [Langan Park, Mobile, Alabama]."  This was the city park.  The police came up and told us we had to leave, and we wouldn't leave, but all day they kept telling us we had to leave.  This was 1972, 1972 in a public park because a group of black kids out there having a picnic.  So, I think at the time I didn't really realize the oppression and issues around segregation, but you know, as you step away and you look back and you say wow, you know, my hometown is--was not where it should have been.  Though Mobile--and my father often talked about this, my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] too--that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came to Mobile, but there was sort of an understanding with the white establishment there and the black leadership there that they didn't want the kind of consternation that was happening in Montgomery [Alabama] and Birmingham [Alabama], and so it, it just, it didn't spill into the streets in the way, you know, that it did in the '60s [1960s].  But in the '70s [1970s], there was kind of more of a movement around economic empowerment.  There was a local guy, Bibbs [ph.], I don't remember his first name, neighborhood organizing association kind of thing, and it was kind of like a community action focused activity that dealt with, you know, civil rights, human rights, poverty, and social services kinds of things, so.  But Mobile never got the full blown kind of transformation that happened in Birmingham and Montgomery.  And I think a result of that it is only in recent years that Mobile has started to progress, because it was very controlled by, you know, certain families.  There were family names that controlled, you know, everything in Mobile, but they were also, I guess, community guardians you know kind of thing.
Story_ID: 638541
Speaker 1: Did your friend Ann Brown [ph.], what was--did she have any idea that you could be you know removed from a public park in 1972?
Speaker 2: She was shocked.  She was truly shocked.  And it was interesting because from that, we started to have more substantive conversations about our varied experiences growing up and she came to me one day and she said, "Artis [HistoryMaker Artis Hampshire-Cowan], I have this idea.  I want you to be one of the judges for the Azalea Trail [Azalea Trail Maids]."  Well, Azalea Trail's a big deal in Mobile [Alabama].  It was young, high school girls dressed up in antebellum dresses.  They were like the ambassadors for Mobile, and Mobile is known for its azalea, the flower azaleas, and, and when they bloom we have the Azalea Trails, so it's a big tourist attraction and whatnot.  But, anyway, its run by the chamber [Mobile Area Chamber of Commerce LLC] and they invite people to come back to serve as judges who are natives of Mobile but who now live away and so she got her cousin, who was president of the chamber to invite me and I did, and that experience sort of took me back to my early days in Mobile, because it was difficult for me to process why an African American girl would want to be in the Azalea Trail.  I just I mean, of course, by now it's the '90s [1990s] (laughter), and I think the first one came along like in '76 [1976], three or four years after I finished high school [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama], and it was interesting the varied answers that the girls gave and they were very uncomfortable that I asked the question--everybody was uncomfortable that I would ask that question of the African American applicants, you know, why would you want to be in the Azalea Trail given the symbolism of being in the antebellum dress?  And, and it was interesting.  Some of the girls gave answers just like the Caucasian girls, but one or two would talk about the history and that they saw it as an accomplishment and they thought it was important to show the diversity now in this day and time of the range of, you know, people who could represent Mobile.  And I wasn't invited back to judge again, but, I have to say, that year we had Native Americans, because we have loads of Native Americans around Mobile, native--indigenous to Alabama.  We had Vietnamese because a lot of immigrants came in with the Vietnam War around the water and, of course, African Americans, so that year we had the most diverse Azalea Trail in Mobile's history (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well one that would, perhaps, given the vapors to the (unclear) antebellum Azalea Trail.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Right, that's--
Speaker 2: But anyway, I wasn't invited back after that (laughter).
Speaker 1: What, what Native American group is there then?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are Chickasaw and Cherokees all around Mobile.  There--and there are actually geographical communities named for them.
Story_ID: 638542
Speaker 1: And it's been said that the Gulf Coast is more liberal than the hinterland of Alabama, and, and same for Louisiana and Mississippi and, you know, too.  Is that--do you think that's really true growing up down there?
Speaker 2: I do think that's true because Mobile [Alabama], like New Orleans [Louisiana], has a strong French and Spanish influence you know historically, though it was very structured.  You know, segregation was very structured, but this is one of the observations I would say is that my father [John Hampshire, Sr.] was respected in Mobile, so if you were a man of your word and were respected, race mattered, but it didn't matter, right?  And so what I mean by that, I remember going to Merchants National Bank [Merchants National Bank of Mobile, Mobile, Alabama] for an educational loan and the loan was granted my father because he was a man of his word.  So there was, there were, in the South there is something above race. It's honor (laughter).  There's honor and race, and may, may be equal, but, so there was a dis- I saw a distinction, though.  Clearly racism, discrimination, it was there, structured and everything, but there was sort of an understanding between the community leaders, you know, when there were issues of concern you know they would be dealt with and I think because Mobile wanted to keep Mobile Mobile, there were some minor accommodations you know made.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638543
Speaker 1: You went to grade school at the Lutheran school [Trinity Evangelical Lutheran School, Mobile, Alabama].  Now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Talking (laughter).  If you ever look at my report cards, I got Ds and Fs in pre- in conduct, but I had all A's in my subject matter, so (laughter).  I was always very social and you know sometimes I wonder you know what would have happened if that was gone--allowed to go on without some discipline around that.  But I, I loved school.  I absolutely loved school.  Now my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] said my first day at Ms. Packer I cried.  I did not want to go to school.  But, she said, of all of her children I went to school longer than--I was the only one who didn't want to go when I began, and then, of course, I ended up going much longer than the rest of 'em (laughter).  Yeah.  But I went to high school at Trinity Gardens [Trinity Gardens High School, Mobile, Alabama], and then in 1970, when they were finally getting around to integrating schools, I was transferred to Blount High School [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama], and Trinity Gardens became a junior high school [Trinity Gardens Middle School, Mobile, Alabama], so that happened a lot too.  The, the major black high schools either were closed or became junior high schools.
Speaker 1: So Blount High School, now how old were you when you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I was in the tenth grade when I was transferred to Blount.  And I was transferred, can you imagine this, being transferred in March (laughter), so it wasn't even at a semester break.  It was just March 1970 is when we were required to go there, and basically it was musical chairs, so they took the kids from Trinity Garden and sent them to Blount.  They sent the kids from Blount to Vigor [Vigor High School, Prichard, Alabama], which was the white school.  The kids from Vigor, they sent to Baker [Baker High School, Mobile, Alabama], so it was like outward migration.  That was supposed to be the integration of public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Blount High School had been previously all white.
Speaker 2: Had been all black.
Speaker 1: All black.
Speaker 2: Black.  So, so it was black to black, then black to white, and then white to white and white to--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Blount High School, I thought you were being transferred there because of edu- integration (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, exactly (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was, but not, not to go to school with whites then as such?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, there may be one or two whites in my group, but we did have white teachers at Blount, which we had not had before, but I would also say that the white teachers we had tended to be young and were not particularly great teachers.  'Cause see, one of the things that was true in the segregated South, in segregated schools, our schools were poor, buildings were poor, books used, but we had phenomenal teachers.  I mean, we had teachers who had Ph.D.'s.  We had principals who had Ph.D.'s.  And so, the quality of the learning we got in the segregated schools, I mean, clearly based on the instruction was superior and they were motivational in expectations, and if you were a good student, you know, they would talk to you about Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama], or Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama], or Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], you know, that kind of thing, so I think that too made a difference for kids who were going to segregated schools.
Story_ID: 638544
Speaker 1: Okay, so at, at Blount, now were you involved--now you like to talk, so you were--were you involved in a lot of social activities?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was a major- I was actually the first female drum majorette at Blount High School [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama] (laughter).  I showed the kids about that last night when I went back and we had a social service club, of course, and then sort of subject matter clubs as well, too.
Speaker 1: Now, did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  I--you know, that's interesting that I didn't do that, but the honor society was a big deal to me.  I guess it was interesting because a lot of the popular kids weren't smart kids, and so I was smart and popular, which was, I guess I was hip maybe (laughter) I guess for back then.  So, I mean I had a great social life but I did not run for elected office when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you--did you make the honor society?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was--
Speaker 1: This--
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, every year.
Speaker 1: --National Honor Society there?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was an honor student from kindergarten until law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I did not finish law school with honors, but I finished undergraduate school [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] with honors.
Story_ID: 638545
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were in--you went to Blount [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama] in 1970.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So I graduated from Blount in '72 [1972] and decided that I wanted to go to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] because one of the things going to Blount High School did for me was to expose me to--it was a, it was a better school physically.  They had, you know, really nice chemistry labs and, as a result, I went to Morris Brown in the summer of my junior year to take some--science program.  The National Science Foundation was running these programs for kids, exposed them to math and science and I, I went to Atlanta [Georgia] and the principal at my high school, Samuel Byrd [ph.] was a Morris Brown graduate so I decided that's where I wanted to go.  But that was a big deal because, you know, most of the kids in Alabama, in Mobile [Alabama], at least, we went to Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] or Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] or A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama] and if you were exotic you went to Dillard [Dillard University] or Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana], but nobody went to Atlanta (laughter).  And so it was kind of a thing even in my family, it was considered, Atlanta was a big city that was a long way away, but my parents allowed me to go and that was a great experience too, because when I did those summer science programs, what I learned then is that there were loads of smart black kids from all over America.
Speaker 1: Now had, had you travelled any before?  Before then very much?
Speaker 2: Limited travel.  My father [John Hampshire, Sr.] worked for the railroad, so we would get to get on trips in the summertime, but principally to Dayton [Ohio] where I had an aunt, or to Buffalo, New York, where my mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] had family.  Those-that's the only travel I've done outside of Alabama prior to that time.  The other thing that was interesting in those summer science programs is that there were Caucasian kids in those programs.  I remember a kid from Minnesota and Wisconsin, and--but a lot of them tended to be children of college professors or whatever, and so that was, you know, I started to broaden my horizon, I guess, by my junior year in high school by going to Atlanta because I, I--you know, it was just very different than Mobile, or even the schools in Alabama, because it was more diverse.
Story_ID: 638546
Speaker 1: So I finished Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1976.
Speaker 2: Well we--
Speaker 1: I went there on academic scholarship.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't want you to finish too fast.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have to ask you about (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --Morris Brown (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But, so what was your major at Morris Brown?
Speaker 1: I majored in business, but I started out based on those summer science programs [through the National Science Foundation], I expected to be a physician.  And I was in lab one day in the springtime dissecting a frog and it dawned on me that I couldn't stand the sight of blood, I hated the smell of formaldehyde, and it was kind of like a breakthrough.  'Cause you know how you get socialized?  You know, if you're smart and you can do math and science, then you ought to be a doctor, or whatever.  And I changed my--went to the biology department, changed my major, and I majored in business management. At that point I knew I wanted to go to law school, but I got good advice.  I was told if you major in political science and you don't go to law school, there's not much you can do with a degree in political science, so what else do you think you'd like?  And I looked around, so I majored in business management and absolutely loved it.  Yeah, so I graduated with the degree in, in management.
Story_ID: 638547
Speaker 1: Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], when you're there--when you're at Morris Brown, you're at the Atlanta University complex [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --basically, with Spelman [Spelman College] and Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University], Morehouse [Morehouse College], Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University], yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Morehouse, and Clark and ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center].  Yep.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was wonderful.  I mean it was absolutely some of my best times in life was in college in Atlanta [Georgia], and I think it was--it's a time of growth, when you come into who you really are, separate from expectations present every day, you know, around your parents.  But it's also a time when you sort of figure out what's really in you (laughter) you know because you have choices to make.  Because you know, one of my things was, you know, I'm not going to church every Sunday, right?  When I was at Morris Brown I went to church every Sunday (laughter) because Sunday morning would come and I'd be like, I should be in church (laughter) and I did.  You know, at the same time, you know, I went out on Saturday night and partied and, of course, I drank because my father [John Hampshire, Sr.] taught us how to drink before we went away.  That's interesting.  I didn't mention that.
Speaker 1: How did he do that?
Speaker 2: You say, how does he do that?  Well, usually when you were about twelve or thirteen, at Christmas you got to have a drink of Manischewitz wine.  That was sort of a ritual.  And then, when you were a senior in high school, my father would literally sit us down and tell us, "This is bourbon.  This is Scotch.  This is--," right?  "And people drink this, and when they drink in excess, it makes them crazy, they act stupid, they make dumb decisions.  I don't want you to ever feel that you have to go in the street to have a drink of any of this.  And, I want you to taste it so you'll know what it tastes like."  I mean it's like--it's interesting now.  I've actually done that with my kids [Carri Cowan and Ernest Cowan, Jr.] now because what it does, it demystifies it.  Then, there's not somebody in the street teaching you about something that your parents have told you no, you can't do.  And so, for me and my siblings, I mean drinking is--that's--most of us don't drink now and it was never a thing.  And one of the funniest stories in college was my cousin--well, best friend, we call each other cousins, these upperclassmen--or freshmen come in early, right?  And the football players, upperclassmen, them band guys, they're there, so they took us out, these Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and I'm sure they did what their traditional thing was: they take freshmen girls out drinking.  We had to drive them home.  (Laughter) So, we were prepared.  (Laughter) It wasn't about, you know, having too much to drink and then things getting out of hand that kind of thing, so, my father was interesting--you know retrospect, you just think now how did he have the wisdom to do that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like you came out of a very structured family you know atmosphere, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a lot things were thought about before they were done.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 638548
Speaker 1: So, you joined the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.] there?  Was that?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  My sophomore year I was a Delteen, when I was in high school, the Mobile County Alumnae Chapter of Delta.  My--I had a cousin who was a member there and they sponsored girls in their senior year and I got exposed to the work of Deltas and I think what so impressed me was that these women were very focused on scholarship and service.  And then, of course, when I got to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] my freshman year, you know, you look at the Deltas and they were the hippest, I wasn't really focused on the fact that they did scholarship and service at college, but they were the most popular and involved in a lot of leadership roles.  I was very involved in student government at Morris Brown.  Was involved in a protest while at Morris Brown.  We wanted to have visitation on Sunday afternoon; we wanted boys to be able to come upstairs, not in our rooms but in the lounge area on each floor on Sunday afternoon from three to six [o'clock] and, of course, the president and everybody said no, no, no.  We had a protest.  Anyway, we got it approved and the president was very disappointed that I would support such a thing.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a time when on white college campuses they had coed dorms.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And--but at, at Morris Brown--
Speaker 2: Which is tied to the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 1: It could be--could the male students sit in the lounge for a certain set of hours on a Sunday.
Speaker 2: On a Sunday afternoon, and they said no.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's a different--
Speaker 2: It was very tight.  You, I mean you had to sign in and out going out of the dorm, anytime you left the dorm other than for classes.  You had to sign in and out.  We had a dorm mother who was there at the desk.  But you know there were also some good things because I remember Ms. Jefferson [ph.], who was the dorm mother, main dorm mother in my dorm and this guy I'd gone out with a couple times, and one day I was going to class and she called me over.  She said, "Artis Gail [HistoryMaker Artis Hampshire-Cowan], you don't need to be going out with him.  He's nothing but trouble."  You know how older people--and I think it's true and one of the wonderful things about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], because I think you have that at Howard.  You have people there who are looking at you not as just a kid there, but looking at you like you're a child, a grandchild, and having greater insight about whether this is the type of person you should be spending time with, and it was great.  She was right.  I mean, he ended up with a drug problem, so.  There were very good things about being in that small A.M.E. focused school that was I think very helpful to me.
Story_ID: 638549
Speaker 1: Now you said at the time you were a--you considered yourself a militant, and you had a big Afro.  And a lot of people had a big Afro, but I noticed that you still have a natural hairdo now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And is there a commitment, a reason why you continue to have natural hair?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you one--by the time I came out of law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I had relaxed my hair, but when I started to interviews, that last year of law school I started to do interviews and I wore my hair relaxed, I would say, probably until jheri curls came out, right?  And then I went to the jheri, 'cause I kind of liked that curly you know natural look, and then I would say probably ten years ago I cut my hair and it was, it was a conscious decision of this is who I am (laughter).  This is the, the natural beauty I have and it's just ever since, I've just not considered it and, you know, my da- I have a daughter [Carri Cowan] who's, you know, very pretty and very attractive and into looks and she keeps saying, "Mom, you should try something different."  And I said, "Why?"  (Laughter) You know, and this phenomena now with all of the tracks and the weave and the--I mean, to me it was like a throwback.  It's like what happened?  You know so, I like it because it is, at the essence I think it's who I am, but also having a career and having children and a husband [Ernest Cowan, Sr.] and wanting to do well at all of that, I mean just the time and drama around going and sitting in a salon and the expense, it just, it just didn't make sense.  It just didn't calculate for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought I'd ask about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause so many people change after they, you know, and I just wondered you know at the time period there was so much talk about you know being proud of who you are and that sort of thing, and it seems like it's faded you know over time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 638550
Speaker 1: Were you interested at all in what, what the black studies people were doing on campus in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, interesting, believe it or not, at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], I got very little in African American studies.  The f- my first exposure to African American history was in high school with a biology professor, Raleigh Steele [ph.], who finished Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], who taught us black history in a biology class, and we didn't like the idea that we were graded on the black history equal to the biology.  (Laughter) He did.  I mean, if you failed the black history part and got an A in biology, you didn't get an A; it was averaged out.  That was my first exposure to black history.  When I came to Morris Brown, there was nothing in the curricula that told me anything about black history.  We learned the history of A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, but nothing in terms of black history, but that was not, I guess unusual for a lot of black colleges [HBCUs] because, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in the student movement in '68 [1968], which actually closed down Howard, one of the demands was that African American history and Afrocentric history be included in the curricula at Howard and that was '68 [1968], so that was just four years before, you know, I was at Morris Brown and Howard was much more progressive, you know, than Morris Brown College.
Speaker 1: At least people would say that or they would think that.  But at Atlanta U [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], then--I know ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], you had the black theologians, you know, rewriting like the paradigm for black theology and, and center for the black world [Institute of the Black World, Atlanta, Georgia] there with--I know [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson was over there, and some of the others.  You know, so I just wondered.
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe at ITC, but at Morris Brown, no.  It was very traditional, very traditional, the A.M.E. church, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding was there at Atlanta U, I think, or ITC one, you know.  Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered what they were doing.
Story_ID: 638551
Speaker 1: Now, Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], so, so you majored in business at Morris Brown, but you knew you were going to law school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how did you choose Temple [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my summer internships was with Mobil Oil [Mobil Oil Corporation; Exxon Mobil Corporation] where I worked in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, and so I was exposed to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I also had an internship in Bloomington, Illinois with State Farm insurance.  That was quite an experience because there was actually nothing in Bloomington other than State Farm and the university, and if you were African American and you came to Bloomington, people knew you were from out of town.  It was a very interesting experience to me.  But I liked Philadelphia a lot.  It was a little scary for me because it was the big city.  It truly was the big city, but that's when I was exposed to Temple and the University of Pennsylvania and all those schools.  And, so when I began to law schools, I did apply to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and Texas Southern [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] and Temple and University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and truth of the matter is, I got some financial aid support from Temple and, and went there.  We were, we were the largest African American class admitted to Temple, my class in 1976.  There was a very progressive dean there, Peter Liacouras, who later became president of the university who was really working at trying to increase the number of minorities at the law school.  And [HistoryMaker] Carl Singley, who was a graduate of Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama] and Temple, was a professor and Carl said to Peter, "Let me go south and recruit kids out of HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].  I bet they will make it," (laughter).  And so, there was this major recruitment effort.  There were thirty-five African Americans admitted in the class and thirty-two of us graduated, and most of us were from HBCUs.  And we're still an intact group today.  Now, unfortunately, our reunion was last year, nineteen seventy--I mean 2009, and we're still the largest class of African Americans out of Temple thirty years later, thirty-two in any one class, and the average you know class size is upwards of five hundred.
Story_ID: 638552
Speaker 1: Let me back track a minute, like who was at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] with you?  Then tell me who was at Temple [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Some of the students then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the majority of students from Morris Brown were principally from Georgia.  A lot of them were rural Georgia, but all over the State of Georgia; Florida; few from Tennessee; and interestingly enough, there were a lot of kids from California and New Jersey and New York, but that was also the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church connection.  My best friend today, Eunice Morris [ph.], from--who is from Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I met in the summer science programs [through the National Science Foundation] at Morris Brown.  She, her mother was a biology teacher and she, she did major in pre-med, at Val State [Valdosta State College; Valdosta State University, Valdosta, Georgia] in pre-med and so we've been friends since we met that summer at Morris Brown, and we were roommates in college and have been lifelong friends.  Morris Brown, too, was an experience to meet African American kids from up north who were clearly the children of college graduates and grandparents was--I didn't know any African Americans whose grandparents were college graduates before I went to Morris Brown.  That just, in Alabama, that was, you know--there were very few people who were college graduates, I mean teachers, and, who lived in the neighborhood and whatnot, but I didn't know who--any grandparents who were college graduates, so that was a different kind of paradigm too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at Temple, who was in law school with you when you were there?
Speaker 2: At Temple the majority were African Americans but there was also a large number who were--that first generation who had attended majority schools, and so that was a different kind of experience too in that you began to see how, how perspectives were different for people who had attended majority schools because what I saw is that they tended to really be militant (laughter).  There were two extremes.  They were really militant, or they were--let me see how to say this.  They looked African American, but their thinking were Euro- was Eurocentric.  It was extremes.
Story_ID: 638553
Speaker 1: We were talking about the kinds of students and what they were thinking and some of the dynamics of--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) black students at a maj- you know mostly--.  How many white students were in Temple law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was predominantly white, predominantly white, and Jewish, because the, sort of nickname was Jew U.  It was a public school, public university.  It was closed for all Jewish holidays and that was a little confusing for me coming from the South, because I really didn't understand.  We weren't closed for Dr. King's birthday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], which didn't exist at that time officially, but we had all of these holidays that, you know, weren't Christmas or (laughter) you know, that kind of thing.  So, culturally that was also a growth period for me in terms of understanding Jewish culture, you know, having Jewish friends, and then also understanding the dynamic and the racism between Jews and non-Jews.  That was quite an experience.  In terms of the African American students there, what I have observed was that depending on their undergraduate experience at majority institutions, there would be two extremes.  There would be blacks who would really work at not acknowledging, or being around other blacks, I mean totally assimilating with whites; or they would be a tight knit sort of activist group and they talked about their experiences of a hostile experience, you know, as undergraduates and being one of the few in those institutions.  But it made for interesting group, but I think the black law student association [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association] was really a haven for us because we networked, we did preparatory work for students the week before they actually started law school about how to brief cases, how to take notes, sharing study guides, and we really worked to help the other African American students, you know, succeed in law school.
Story_ID: 638554
Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors or special professors or anything at (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, [HistoryMaker] Carl Singley who I mentioned who was, was involved in recruiting a number of us, he was a graduate of Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], so I had an affinity, you know, with the Alabama connection; definitely a favorite professor who would give me good council and advice.  I had a professor, Dr.--professor Dolly Sloviter [Dolores K. Sloviter] who ended up on the second circuit court [sic. U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit], phenomenal legal scholar who, I took this class in, in civil procedure and it was confusing to me.  I couldn't figure out what it was really about because law school, you read all these cases, it's not like in undergraduate when you read a subject matter and you're understanding the subject matter.  In law school you read all these cases, it doesn't name it as a particular rule, but through analyzing the case, you learn the rule of law that applies, so it was confusing to me.  I went to her and she said to me, "Ms. Hampshire [HistoryMaker Artis Hampshire-Cowan], law school is about changing the way you think," and, of course, I immediately reacted because she was Caucasian and to have a Caucasian tell me they wanted to change the way I thought, from my background, I was like never.  I'll never let that happen (laughter).  But over time, she was a great teacher and mentor and what she was saying is as a lawyer you're trained to think in a systematic way.  It's a logical, consistent way of thinking and analyzing issues.  It wasn't changing my philosophy; it was changing my process of thinking and problem solving, and so she was a teacher that I, you know, really think about a lot.  Patrick Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert], who was not one of my professors, but was deputy dean of the law school, African American, who later became president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and I worked very closely with him for over thirteen years was a role model of sort in that he was not the professor, like Singley that you would go to, to sort of hang out in his office and get advice.  But Swygert was the African American in the power structure who made sure that there was a level playing field for African American students to compete you know within the law school and he hosted us at his home each year.  So he, too, I think helped create an environment for a number of us to be successful there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  So you knew Patrick Swygert before you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a contracts professor.  I did not, I was not in his section and it's funny because when he became president at Howard, he would joke and say, "Yeah, Artis, how did you, how did you manage not to take me for (unclear)?"  (Laughter) And just, just didn't.  But I had a wonderful work experience with him at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay so, anybody else at How- Temple [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you remember?
Speaker 2: Those were the principal ones.  There were others that were helpful at different points but I would say, in terms of those who really had an impact now, there was a student at Temple, Charisse Lillie [HistoryMaker Charisse R. Lillie], who is now senior VP of Comcast [Comcast Corporation] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], she was president of BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association] when I came to interview for admissions to law school and, of course, being nervous and not sure of myself she sat in the BALSA office with me, sort of coached me, prepared me for my interview and so throughout my law school career she was always--and she was a start student.  She finished with honors.  She was always a role model for me and still is today.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, we interviewed her in 2002.
Speaker 2: Did you?  She's phenomenal.
Speaker 1: And did her mother in 2008 (laughter).
Speaker 2: She's phenomenal too, you know, she's Ruth Simmons' mentor.  Ruth Simmons talks about this elementary teacher who turned a light on for her in terms of education and accomplishment.  It was [HistoryMaker] Vernell Lillie, her teacher in Houston, Texas, who is Charisse's mother.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Ruth--
Speaker 2: Simmons, the president of Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Simmons, okay.  Simmons the president, okay, president of Brown, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So there's a close connection there.
Story_ID: 638555
Speaker 1: There was--something that you told me when we came in.  We were talking about Ghana, because yesterday Ghana defeated the United States in a soccer game, and I was, and the elephants and other things had us talk- talking about Ghana, but you took a trip to Ghana as a law student, right?  Black law student--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is Temple [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] had an exchange program-- and still today, at the University of Ghana [Accra, Ghana], and a number of my classmates went on that trip my first year, my freshman year.  And I did not, I worked that summer, you know, saving money or whatever for school, and I then saved so that I could go the next year and it turns out that was the year of the coup with Jerry Rawlings who was a military leader, actually took over the government and that trip was thwarted based on that coup, so that is a country I've always wanted to visit and I feel I'm still owed a trip to Ghana because I never got to do that.  Also, present (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you never got, got off the plane.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then the story is you got there, right?  And you were (unclear)--got to Ghana.
Speaker 2: But never got to see Ghana, so.
Speaker 1: But never got off the airplane.
Speaker 2: Never got off the plane.  It was actually, I don't know whether it was the day of, but the coup was actually unfolding that, that day.  Yeah.  And Pat Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] was very involved in that program, in starting that program for Temple and taught at the University of Ghana's law school center too.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 638556
Speaker 1: After law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what was your, or what kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --law did you want to go into?
Speaker 2: Well, my last year of law school I took this clinical, I actually wanted the civil procedure clinical where you'd actually get to practice cases.  It was full so I ended up in the criminal case and the person who taught that class was a deputy to Ed Rendell, who is now governor of Pennsylvania (laughter).  He was then DA.  I did not apply for a job and--I think his name was Rosenblatt [ph.], I can't remember a first name now, inquired about my application that, you know, my application wasn't in the pile and I said I didn't apply.  I had no intentions of doing criminal law and he encouraged me to do so and I was selected as an ADA [assistant district attorney], and that was quite an experience.  It was the height of a drug era.  And as a young prosecutor, I had responsibilities for preliminary hearings, which were held all over the city, because in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], police precincts have court rooms, and had about eighty cases a day, and so you're standing on your feet all day long doing arraignments and really seeing the underbelly of a city, and I found that being a prosecutor started to change who I was.  I became a lot more cynical, negative, and I realized that was not the career for me.  So I looked for and sought opportunities other places and I turned to a mentor from my high school years, A.J. Cooper [HistoryMaker Algernon Johnson Cooper, Jr.], who was from Prichard, Alabama, came to my high school [Mattie T. Blount High School, Eight Mile, Alabama] when I was in the eleventh grade, that he was running for mayor of Prichard.  I became involved in elected politics, organizing you know his youth group.  Sent him a letter, his sister was here in Washington [D.C.], [HistoryMaker] Peggy Cooper Cafritz, and my resume got circulated in the first [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry administration, and as a result of that I came down, interviewed, and subsequently was selected for a position in the district government, which was exciting because it was the new home rule government, and Mayor Barry had come out of the Civil Rights Movement and real activist, so it was sort of part of that, you know, black mayors of major urban cities, you know the first I guess realm of black leadership politically, so it was an exciting time.  I got to do legislative work, congressional work at the state and federal level.
Story_ID: 638557
Speaker 1: Now what year was it when you graduated from Temple [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].  And did you start with the dis- district attorney's office the same year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  Actually, I started with the district attorney's office in January because as a, as a third year law student, you can actually practice under the supervision of other lawyers, and through this clinical I was actually doing cases and then, of course, we had to study for the bar and the bar was taken in July and after that you--.  Interestingly enough back then, I know when I tell people this story, they say what?  We were not paid as ADAs until we passed the bar.  So you take the bar in July, you start working immediately, but you're not paid until October when bar results come out.  And if you don't pass the bar, you don't get paid and you only have one other chance to take it, but I was blessed to pass the bar.  But there were eighteen ADAs in my first group, and there were three African Americans: two males and I was the only female.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about that time period that, that, that you know you haven't shared with us?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I can tell you that's the first time I really developed a sensitivity to sexism was in the district attorney's office, and I think it was because there were so few wom- few women prosecutors.  There were over 380 ADAs.  There were, I believe, like twenty-eight women and I was one of four African American women and again, it was similar, you know, few numbers in terms of males.  But that's the time where I saw gender as an issue more than race inside of the office.  My supervisor was an African American male and it was a male d- you know, criminal justice is a male dominated organiza- society, I would say, society within a society.  And the close working relationship with the police department, which is paramilitary, was interesting.
Speaker 1: Now, those are the days of Frank Rizzo, right?
Speaker 2: That--and that's exactly what I was gonna say, where they had more police per capita than anything else.  And remember I said earlier the first time I was called a nigger to my face, I was in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I was called a nigger by a Philadelphia police officer when I was an assistant district attorney.  I was assigned to greater Northeast and Roosevelt, up Roosevelt Boulevard.  I pulled into the space for the DA and I was driving a Volkswagen,  Volkswagen from college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] and he told me I couldn't park there, and I told him I could and that's when he called me a nigger.  So, I got out and went on in, and, and then of course, a few minutes later he walked in the courtroom and I'm at the ADA's table.  So you see this sheepish look that comes over his face and he comes over to me to apologize and I was like (gesture) (laughter) you know.  But I also learned--
Speaker 1: So he actually apologized for calling you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, after he realized I was an ADA (laughter).  'Cause this is the other lesson I learned, that inside criminal justice, it is a fraternity and if you're in it, you're in it.  So then race was not as much of an issue, and gender was not as much of an issue if you were inside of that (laughter) network.  So, but that was a life changing time for me, being a DA, because it was a time when I did soul--it was probably the first time I really did soul searching about, you know, it was great to have a job as an ADA and it--you know so, like you know this was great.  Why wouldn't you stay with this, you know, kind of thing.  But it was a moment of truth for me.  It was not who I was.  I was very good at it.  I got a lot of coaching from former ADAs who were judges.  I made a point to go and get a critique.  Each time I appear before a new judge, afterwards I'd go and ask, you know, give me a critique, what do I need to work--because I wanted to be good at what I did.  But I also came to realize that there's a difference between being good at something and it being your calling as something you're comfortable doing.  And, just seeing over and over African American males as defendants and African American females as victims.  I mean, elderly women who looked like my mother.  It just, it did something to me so I, I really had to get out of that.
Story_ID: 638558
Speaker 1: I think that's, that's the time--now that was before Wilson Goode [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Wilson Goode, Sr.] was mayor?  Before he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.  Yeah, in fact, when Wilson ran I was here in Washington [D.C.] and was part of a group of folks who either were from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], or had Philly connections who organized a fundraiser for him here in Washington at the Mayflower Hotel that was--.  Yeah, there was a lot of hope and excitement with Wilson being a candidate for mayor, but he candidly turned out to be a great disappointment for a lot of folks.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, the whole move thing was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was--did the--oh the, oh (pause) Abu Jamal, the, the writer, he wasn't, his case hadn't come up yet had it?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Mumia Abu Jamal, who was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't th-
Speaker 1: --(unclear) celebrated case where he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think so.  Now, the interesting thing about the MOVE that--I had a particular experience with that.  One of my good friends from law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Robin Coward [Robin Coward Knight], was from New York [New York], from Brooklyn.  We lived in the same complex in the ghetto on Allegheny Avenue, and a treat for us back then while studying would be to get in our Volkswagens, drive over to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and get some Haagen Dazs ice cream.  Haagen Dazs ice cream was unheard of in Alabama.  I had never heard of it, right (laughter)?  But, my good friend who's really--I always thought she was southern, but her grandmother raised so that's why she was very southern but she was a New Yorker, and so she exposed me to Haagen Dazs ice cream.  I thought the best ice cream in the world was Breyers.  We would go over--so, on this outing we go over to get our Haagen Dazs ice cream, rum raisin, and we pass where--the actual day of the MOVE takeover, and we thought they were shooting a movie because they had lights up like this and there was police and the, the, the MOVE folks were, I mean they were arm- they had their guns out standing on the porch and on top of the roof and we thought it was a movie.  So, we passed right--we witnessed it firsthand.  It was only that night when we saw it on the news that we realized what had happened 'cause you know it was a standoff that went on for days.  But, that was the first day of the incident, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a big test of the Wilson Goode administration.
Speaker 2: (Makes sound).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--so, did you work at all on his campaign or anything, or?
Speaker 2: No, I did fundraising for him back then.  You know, I don't know, Wilson was, not that you talk about a typical politician, but I don't think he really had great interpersonal skills or, or relating skills, and his leadership style wasn't forceful and I think direct enough for--to have a directing, like the city administrator, who was a military type.  And so, it was kind of mismatched, I would think, not having good political instincts, and then having military types in charge of day to day, running the government.  I think that's a, there are probably lessons to be learned around leadership.
Speaker 1: I know, he, he himself, when we interviewed him he talked, he said that he was subverted on a lot of that by the fire chief, other people just did what they wanted to do.  They didn't really listen.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: And so, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, but I think that too is about leadership and who you have as your key person, who's--I think it's called managing director in Philly, which is typically the city manager role.  I mean think the person he selected in that role was a military guy; at least, that was my understanding.  And military is gonna resonate with police and fire, because they're militaristic too, and so what I'm saying, and they're not being a forceful leadership personality in the elected office, you know, you can't, you can't gain control in the crisis, you have to have been in control and set a parameter you know in the beginning, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you happen to (unclear) up--you thought it was a movie (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was the wor- Robin and I laugh about that to this day.  You know, you just think about friends and things you experience together, I mean, we were driving through a dangerous situation.  We could have been killed.  I mean, you know (laughter).  But thank god.
Story_ID: 638559
Speaker 1: So, you, you really wanted to get out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at a certain point.  You thought that it was maybe the best--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think the other thing is that in one of my summer internships while in law school [Temple University Law School; Temple University Beasley School of Law, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was at the Federal Trade Commission and I met this guy named Ernest Cowan [Ernest Cowan, Sr.], who was working there as an accountant.  And he was smart and fun and, and we dated and so we had this weekend relationship and I was curious, you know, whether it was just the weekend or what, and what can I tell you, thirty years later (laughter) we're together and two kids [Carri Cowan and Ernest Cowan, Jr.] later.  So, it was, it was--clearly I did not want to be a prosecutor anymore, and Philadelphia was not a place I wanted to live.  I really do like a more southern lifestyle, single family detached homes and a place you raise your kids, so Washington [D.C.] was more the kind of city I wanted to live in and so I sought employment opportunities and was in district government for twelve years and had a phenomenal career in the Barry administration.
Speaker 1: So, so, when did you arrive in, in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1980, okay.  So, Barry [HistoryMaker Marion Barry] was elected about what?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].  He's, his--
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was fresh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: His administration was one year old when I came, and I have to tell you I met some of the brightest people ever.  I know people look at Mayor Barry now and make jokes about it but at the height of his game in the first Barry administrations, it was really a role model.  I mean, he recruited outstanding African Americans from all over the country; gave them responsible jobs and great opportunity.  I came in 1980 and did legislative work.  I eventually became part of a team with Carol Thompson Cole to redo the regulatory functions in the city, I directed compliance, became her attorney as deputy mayor and then she was city administrator.  I was her attorney and chief of staff.  When the Redskins [Washington Redskins] were at the height of their dominance in the NFL [National Football League], we needed to build a new stadium and I was given the responsibility to represent the city in negotiating a new Redskins stadium.  That was an unbelievable experience.  Dealing with Jack Kent Cooke, you know, day to day, up close.  And then when the deal did not work in D.C., because Mayor Barry left office and Sharon Pratt Kelly [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] came in, then there was talk of coming out here to Prince George's County [Maryland] and I had become politically involved and living in Prince George's County and [HistoryMaker] Wayne Curry retained me as his special counsel on negotiating the Redskins stadium deal here.  So I still got to work on the Redskins deal even though it didn't happen in--
Speaker 1: So the stadium was actually here in P.G. County?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  Yes, it's now called FedExField, it was Jack Cooke Stadium [Jack Kent Cooke Stadium, Landover, Maryland] when it was constructed.  And we had really exceptional--again, this was a Barry attribute, I believe, because I grew up professionally and the Barry administration had been involved in ensuring that there was minority participation in major deals in the District, I was able to write a similar plan here in Prince George's County that proved to be successful in the construction of the stadium in terms of job opportunities, training, apprenticeships, as well as contracting opportunities for minority business.
Story_ID: 638560
Speaker 1: In D.C. [Washington, D.C.] it's dangerous to criticize [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry.  People get upset and it's largely because, I think, correct me if I'm wrong, is of the opportunities that minorities received when he was the mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and so he was--really shone in that area.  And did you find that to be--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I think that Marion Barry did phenomenal things in terms of opportunities for minorities, but he did phenomenal things for business people, because I was also very involved in the Washington Board of Trade [Greater Washington Board of Trade, Washington, D.C.], which is the business organization in the city, and if you talked to business leaders form that era, they are very complimentary of Marion Barry, and what they say is that you could do business because you got a decision quickly.  You knew what was required and, you know, what I admired about Marion in retrospective, it wasn't that he was focused on, oh, give Artis [HistoryMaker Artis Hampshire-Cowan] a contract or give Carol [Carol Thompson Cole] a contract.  He was interested in setting in place a system and a structure that created opportunities and if minorities were gonna be in a lot of the major development deals, that it wasn't just a face; that when the, the call came for their contribution, it were people who could step up and make the--'cause it's different dynamic when it's just a face in the deal versus having equity in it and making a difference, and so I think it was a different paradigm and it was a greater expectation.  But it was a clearly articulated expectation and it was consistent with public policy and it worked.
Story_ID: 638561
Speaker 1: Now do you have any reflection about, you know, the downfall of [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry?
Speaker 2: I do, and you know I get criticized for this when I say it, 'cause I, I said it about Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Monica Lewinsky, and maybe it's because I've been a staff person and a senior staff person, but I think, you know, one of the most important decisions elected officials make is staff appointments, and staff have an important role as a leader and a follower in serving a principal.  And I believe that Marion Barry's downfall, and I'm not excusing his responsibility for it, but if you look at the history and dynamic and circumstance, he had recently lost his longtime confidential assistant, Patricia Seldon, who was a seasoned professional, who protected her principal in that she controlled the calendar and schedule and access to him, and she was mature and insightful enough to work at keeping distractions away from him.  I mean and a powerful person like that, you're always gonna have hangers on; you'll have women who are after you (laughter).  That's not to say he's not responsible for whatever decision he made, but--and this was actually something I've shared with Pat, but I do think that when you have younger, less experienced people who don't make independent judgments, then principals can get in trouble.
Speaker 1: Now, how did she come to leave?
Speaker 2: She retired.  I mean, it was time.  She retired.  It wasn't anything other than that.  I mean the--and I made reference to Clinton and Monica Lewinsky; I said something like this in the presence of a group of women, dinner dialogue group, and they said, "Well, Artis [HistoryMaker Artis Hampshire-Cowan], you're blaming her."  I said, "No." I said, "If a fire had been running up the hallway in the White House [Washington, D.C.], every staff person would have done what they could to put out that fire.  Monica Lewinsky was in there and people knew what was going on, and they didn't do something about it."  I just believe that as an executive staff person, a chief of staff, that role, a handler, confidential assistant, you have a leadership role too, not just a servant role.  You have a leadership role, and I'm not suggesting it even--it's even something you need to have a conversation with the principal about, but you're controlling the access, and I would have put myself between any danger to the principal I'm serving 'cause you're protecting the institution of the position as well as the person.  And so I think, you know--I just don't think there's enough attention paid to the roles of chief of staffs and those kind of positions in terms of even developmentally, how people are prepared to serve in those roles.  Those are leadership roles.
Speaker 1: Now that--this is interesting.  I was wondering as you were telling this, what you're saying makes sense.  Did you learn this on the job or did you have a mentor that actually showed you how this worked or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Carol Thompson Cole is the person that I eventually worked for in district government, my second job.  She was very young, but very thoughtful, very bright, native Washingtonian, majored in public administration and her ambition was to manage Washington [D.C.].  She worked in the housing department [Department of Housing and Community Development] and eventually became director of the consumer agency [Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs] and then was promoted as deputy mayor for economic development and eventually city administrator.  I worked for Carol from 1983 until the time I went to the stadium authority, and a lot of what I'm describing I learned from her of her management style.  It wasn't things we talked about.  I just saw her always being outstanding in competence, outstanding in integrity, outstanding in leadership, outstanding in courage such that it was--it was sort of a philosophy.  If you do what is right and good, and you are prepared to be fired for it, it frees you and gives you independence.  But, what I've also learned is it makes you extremely valuable because you're, you're--it's unusual that you find people who are independent and at the same time committed to being a servant of a principal.  You know, some people see that as inconsistent and, in fact, it's not.
Story_ID: 638562
Speaker 1: So, you're--what you're actually talking about is decoding the--these pow- power relationships.  And I guess you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you have to be in 'em to be able to see in 'em in the first place (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.  Well, you know, I guess the other advice that I give young people is, I've--conversations I've had with my daughter [Carri Cowan] who has just started her career in JPMorgan [JPMorgan Chase and Co.], and she called me and she said, "Mom, you know, just doing a good job is not enough, and why didn't we learn this in school and why didn't you teach me how to do this stuff?  I see other people--."  I said, "Well I wouldn't teach you that because I don't believe in that pandering, you know, kissing up kind of thing."  I said, "I do believe in doing excellent work, having integrity, but it is about relationships and you shouldn't assume that because developing--." I said, "There's a way to develop authentic relationships instead of creating a perception of--."  Her thing was, you know, people have to come up, make up things to start a conversation with the supervisor about.  She was uncomfortable with that.  I said well, what are the natural things that--you know, you can have integrity in everything you do, but you also need to understand the dynamics and relationships, and so it's important to go in and listen and understand and watch and decode and understand.  Then, I think you're able to be effective, you know, in an organization, but not just going in and not having--being self aware or understanding the relationships inside of the organization.
Story_ID: 638563
Speaker 1: Talked about some of the activities, but you've done a lot of things.  You did, did a lot of things for the city, and you worked for the, the District of Columbia f- until--from I guess 1980 until 1992?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I left the District in '92 [1992].  I did, I left the stadium authority in '92 [1992] and I came to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and--
Speaker 1: Now, before you, you came to Howard, though, you founded Bright Beginnings [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: So maybe we should talk about that.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Well, you know the '80s [1980s] was the height of homelessness in Washington and, and sort of an area that had not gotten a lot of attention was children.  Children are impacted by homelessness.
Speaker 1: Now, to tell the truth, now Washington, D.C. was home to a couple of big crises in the '80s [1980s]: the first big crack [crack cocaine]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --epidemic to hit the nation was here--
Speaker 2: Right.  That's true.
Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s] with these--
Speaker 2: It's true.
Speaker 1: --skyrocketing--
Speaker 2: It's true.
Speaker 1: --killings and, and murders, you know.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.  It was a terrible time.  And, you know drugs were many times part of the equation in homelessness as well.  But there was a woman I met in a program, Leadership Washington [Leadership Greater Washington, Washington, D.C.], Marti Kipner [ph.].  She's a lawyer at par- Patton, Boggs and Blow [Squire Patton Boggs].  She was president of the Junior League and she actually approached me about joining the Junior League because she said she really wanted to bring diversity to the Washington Junior League and--
Speaker 1: Can you describe what the Junior League is for those watching this who have no idea?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The Junior League of Washington [Washington, D.C.]--all over the country, they're all over the country.  It is an organization that is focused on getting young women, actually under forty, involved in doing volunteer work to improve the community.  But the Junior League is also thought to be the elite, the blue bloods of the Mayflower [Mayflower Society].  I mean, it's sort of their, you know, reputation.  And so when I was first approached by this, it certainly wasn't an organization I had any interest in joining or saw me spending my volunteer time in their activities, but when Marti approached me as she was coming into the presidency, about how she wanted to truly make it a diverse organization and figure out a way to attract more African American women, I also didn't see my time and energy in being a part of an organization that helped white folks understand black people; that just wasn't where I was at the time.  But we enjoyed a good relationship, and about a year and a-half later she called me and said that they were applying for a demonstration grant to start a daycare center for homeless children and needed my help with the city in terms of navigating the building permit, zoning process facilities and that's the way I became involved.  I was then asked to be a member of the founding board for Bright Beginnings, the daycare center and I had to join the Junior League to be a board member because they wanted all the board members to be Junior League members.  But as a result of that, I really got up close to understand all of the issues in homelessness because the city's policy, of course they housed them in apart- in hotel rooms, basically, but they were required to leave by nine o'clock each morning and could not return until five in the afternoon.  So basically, during the middle of the day they were just out and about, and they were out and about with their children.  Now, they were--of course, were supposed to be out looking for employment or trying to find resources, and so there was an acute need for a daycare center for homeless children and we you know established it, the demand was unbelievable.  I mean, we were, you know, the only facility at the time so there was lots of demands, lots of requirements.  And at one point I ended up being chair of the board and the executive director was in a car accident, so I actually had to take on the role of running the center, so I got up close the experience of running a service delivery nonprofit: making a payroll, delivering services based on limited contracts and reimbursement we got from the city, but basically relying on the good will of people to help support, you know, meeting an important cause and demand.
Speaker 1: So, you were the founding I think--
Speaker 2: I was on the founding board of Bright Beginnings (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were board president.  Right, okay.
Story_ID: 638564
Speaker 1: Now Prince George's community coll- I mean Prince George's County [Maryland] is one of the richest counties, I guess, that's largely African American in the country, it's one of the--or, if not, the richest, from what I understand, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, when I moved to Prince George's County and [HistoryMaker] Wayne Curry had just been elected county executive, there was a Wall Street Journal article [The Wall Street Journal], and it was just after the census, and it was the first place in America--and, and still the place in America, where the population became predominantly African American, but income and educational levels went up.  So that was a new phenomenon in America, and it was also new leadership in that, you know, Wayne Curry was the first African American elected county executive.  It created a lot of pride but also a lot of challenges and opportunities and new black leadership and a lot of the politicians having come up in the good ol' boys, Maryland style of politics, who served in elected office and Wayne really ran as an outsider.  He was a native.  He helped integrate schools.  He had gotten a great education, had successful--had practiced law.  Had worked as an assistant to a county administrator, but he was not anointed by the powers that be to run for office because he was thought to be a radical, and he did a great job as county executive, really put Prince George's in a different place and space in the regional conversations as well as a national model.
Story_ID: 638565
Speaker 1: Bright Moments was located in, in--
Speaker 2: Bright Beginnings is in D.C. (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bright Beginnings--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Bright--Bright Beginnings is in D.C.
Speaker 2: Right, it's in D.C.
Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C.  And whereabouts, Northwest or Southeast, or?
Speaker 2: Northwest Washington.
Speaker 1: Northwest Washington.
Speaker 2: At the time it was located on Rhode Island Avenue, right at 9th Street, which was in a old YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] building, but subsequently they've moved.  They were on North Capitol Street, and they are now in the Perry School [Perry School Community Services Center, Washington, D.C.], which is a redeveloped public school on New York Avenue that was renovated to house nonprofits.
Speaker 1: Well how has--I know it was highly utilized, but how do you measure the success of it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the, the success is that we have a safe place for children whose families are homeless for in the middle of the day, so safety was and continues to be an issue with children in that, in that area.  But the other thing that I think that I'm most proud of is that they are prepared academically because the success of a child's education is formulated as young as three years old, and so for us to have a place for them to learn the skills that they need to have to be successful later, so they're not--not only a safe environment but a learning environment, so that they are not disadvantaged when their family is stabilized.  There are efforts underway now to open another facility in the Southeast quadrant of the city, because a number of the clients come from Northeast.  Of course, at the time they came from all over, but you know there are still a continuing demand, and now with this challenge we've had in foreclosures, homelessness is back up again, but it is not nearly as visible as it was in the '80s [1980s].  And Mitch Snyder, you know they brought a lot of attention to issues of homelessness in, it terms of homelessness advocates and whatnot.  It's a different kind of homelessness.  Now, it's middle class homelessness that, and especially in a suburb area like Prince George's County [Maryland], it's not visible, like people roaming the street downtown.  I mean, we've had foreclosures here in Woodmore [Mitchellville, Maryland], which is a private gated community where, you know, you look up one morning and your neighbor's gone, everything's gone.  You know it, it's a very sad situation.
Speaker 1: What, what typically was the situation in D.C. in those days for the-- what, I guess how were they--was there anything that typified the homeless people in those--in the--
Speaker 2: It was really, I believe, driven by the drug epidemic more than anything else.  I mean people you know get unemployed and what not, but the drugs, there was always an issue of drugs with one of the parents typically in those situations.  You know, one of the things we started that wasn't part of our mission but we found was helpful was, now these were women living in a hotel, homeless facility the city's provided, bringing their kids to Bright Beginnings, and they didn't know each other or talk to each other.  And so one of the things we began to do is one day a week, we would keep the kids later, have the parents, mothers come, and we taught them how to network, the things we take for granted, right?  So, if you find out about a job lead over in Southeast, then you can share that with them and you find out there's a benefit that you can apply for that may help you maybe get eyeglasses for your child then you--.  So, and so we also, I think, one of the things I'm proud of is we also helped the mothers learn to network and be resourceful and create community (laughter) right?  But that happened at the daycare center.  It didn't happen naturally where they were all living in the same place.  You know, because people are just surviving.  They are thinking I'm on my own and I gotta make it and really banding together and sharing resources and ideas, you know, help to deal--build a different kind of community, and one of the mothers, in fact we ended up hiring as an employee at Bright Beginnings, which was you know a great story.
Story_ID: 638566
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992] you came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--okay, now what happened--what--that you ended up at Howard?
Speaker 2: Well, I, the stadium deal was falling apart in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry left office, Sharon Kelly [HistoryMaker Sharon Pratt] came in, Mayor Kelly and Mr. Cooke [Jack Kent Cooke] were like oil and water, deal was going nowhere, and Mr. Cooke was, you know, an old school guy.  The relationship mattered to him, who he was getting a deal with as much as the deal.  So, it was clear it wasn't gonna happen in the District of Columbia, and so I was looking for other opportunities.  I was called by this headhunter about a position at Howard, who called me many times before but usually, you know, sourcing, you know recommending people because I was--I didn't want to leave my job.  But when she mentioned this position at Howard University in a role working with developing a board for Howard's future and Howard's ambitious plans under a new president, I was intrigued, and so I came for the interview, eventually was hired.
Speaker 1: And was for what job was it?
Speaker 2: The job title was secretary of the university and secretary of the board, which was basically the, as I tell people, just like a corporate secretary in a Fortune 500 company.  Howard's budget is almost a billion dollars and it's the same duties and responsibilities to corporate governance--it's the business side of the university.
Speaker 1: So was it a vice president?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't vice president at the time.  The vice president title came to me, actually in '94 [1994], when I was named vice president for human resources.  And at that time, the university was experiencing financial challenges and we had to implement a reduction in force, and it was also during a transition in the presidency.  And I had responsibility for basically em- eliminating almost four hundred jobs and, at the same time, trying to build a work force for the university's future so it meant investing in training opportunities for employees.  I found it interesting--excuse me--that a university with responsibility and a mission of educating didn't train its employees in the way private sector corporations did.  So, I put a major focus on training and performance evaluation and merit pay, you know, all the things to make for a better kind of work environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you came on in '92 [1992] as secretary of the--
Speaker 2: University and the board.
Speaker 1: --of the university--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And in '94 [1994] vice president for human resources was added to my title and I held that title five years into Pat Swygert's [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] administration because, you know, he did recognize the need for us to make improvements in the human capital aspect of the university.  Then, when we were ready to launch a capital campaign, Howard's first major capital campaign, I was relieved of the HR [human resources] responsibilities because the thinking was you used your board and their contacts to help you raise big money for a university, and so my attention was then focused on how did I mine and exploit the relationships and contacts of board members to help raise money for the university, so we did a lot in terms of the capital campaign.
Story_ID: 638567
Speaker 1: Now who was president when you came in?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Franklyn Jenifer was president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had replaced Dr. James Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek], who left in 1989, and so Dr. Jenifer served after Dr. Cheek up until 1994.  Joyce Lad- Dr. Joyce Ladner [HistoryMaker Joyce Ladner], who was vice president for academic affairs, served as interim president and that was a phenomenal year.  She provided phenomenal leadership during a very difficult period in the university's history.  At the same time, we were running a search for the permanent president, and that search resulted in this election of Patrick Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert], who was a graduate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and had been president at State University of New York at Albany [Albany, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was brought in at what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-five [1995].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995].
Speaker 2: Yeah, June '95 [1995] is when he came in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Dr. Ladner was just there a year--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess?  Okay.  But I know we interviewed her and she was talking about all the, you know, the belt tightening that had to be done at Howard in those days.
Speaker 2: She did it.  I mean, we averted a $6 million deficit through reorganizing the university.  That's almost four hundred positions and also we sold some very valuable real estate to generate.  Joyce was a phenomenal leader.  For her not to have been a seasoned manager; I mean, she was a seasoned, revered scholar and had been vice president for academic affairs I think about four years.  She had not been an experienced manager of a large organization.  The job she did that, that year was phenomenal.  She really did.  I mean, I believe it positioned Howard for the success it enjoyed under Swygert's leadership, because when you avert a deficit and you take almost $10 million of cost out, in the out years, that triples and it creates resources to invest in recruiting the best and bright students, building new buildings, better equipment; you know she really did a great service to Howard University, I believe.  And, of course, she is my soror [in Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], you do know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 638568
Speaker 1: So you also served as Prince George's County executive--let's see, well let's see, I'm sorry, what does it say.  Served as Prince George's County executive 1993 appointee on the superintendent selection committee.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've been very involved civically in Prince George's [Prince George's County, Maryland] early on, focusing on how we improved education, and so selecting the right superintendent--because Prince George's also was in a transition in selection of superintendents and a superintendent who was of African American descent to run a school district [Prince George's County Public Schools] that was predominantly of Africa American descent.  So the first African American superintendent was Superintendent Clark [Jerome Clark], who came out of that search.  I was subsequently appointed by the governor and [HistoryMaker] Wayne Curry on a management oversight panel to improve public schools.  That was quite an experience because what I--I learned a lot of things from that experience.  One, that elected officials were not focusing on and having conversations about issues that matter, like education; that everything was paroch- everything was politically driven, and if there were differences in political positions in terms of who they supported, that also impacted in a negative way education and other important things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you also co-chaired the Prince George's community county executive education transition committee--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a couple times, I think?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  Education, I guess, as I talked about the influence of my mother (laughter) and my parents [Clara Torrance Hampshire and John Hampshire, Sr.] in education, I just thought we [Hampshire-Cowan and her husband, Ernest Cowan, Sr.] made a conscious decision to move from Montgomery County [Maryland] to Prince George's County [Maryland] when our kids [Carri Cowan and Ernest Cowan, Jr.] were young, because we wanted them to grow up in a diverse community.  And our neighbors you know warned us about, we were leaving one of the best school districts in the country, leaving Montgomery County and moving here, and so I knew that I was gonna be involved in helping to improve you know public education, and so you know when there were issues, whether it was the state, state level or local level, I tended to be called upon, you know, to serve in some civic role to work on improving education.
Story_ID: 638569
Speaker 1: Back at Howard one of your major functions from what I understand is that you supervised commencement and a lot of ceremonial events when dignitaries visit the school and that sort of thing, and the pictures here tell big story about all that.  We'll shoot the pictures later and have you describe 'em.  But what has that been like and is that something that you had to--did you already know how to do that when you came in?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I didn't know I was quite the organizer that I am.  I certainly learned that and obviously, you know, it's organization and then it's Washington [D.C.], international scale special events, it's basically what it is and that's truly an executive function and I didn't, at first, I was like, planning events?  You know, I'm a lawyer.  I don't do that.  But then the scale of the events, you just start to understand.  I have to tell you that as I reflect on my time at Howard, it was an honor to come work at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], growing up in Alabama and knowing that Howard was our university, it was a place where in the State of Alabama during segregation, if you wanted to go to law school or medical school, the State of Alabama would pay for you to go to Howard, because you could not go to University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  So, it really is a national university.  It has made a tremendous contribution to America, the world, its role in Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].   So just to work there, it's hallowed ground; I mean, one of the lawyers who was on the Brown brief, James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.], who became president of Howard, was secretary of the university in the very position that I serve in so it was revered and it was humbling to be in this role.  It afforded me an opportunity to impact future African American leaders.  The kids are bright and energetic and knowledgeable and so that was a wonderful experience.  But it also positioned me at the pinnacle--at the pinnacle of African American leadership because I was also responsible for recruiting to the board and supporting the board, comprised of people like Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] and Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and [HistoryMaker] Richard Parsons and [HistoryMaker] Frank Savage and Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] and [HistoryMaker] Dennis Hightower.  I mean, the titans of success in African American leadership, in business, and politics and sitting in the room and hearing them analyze and make decisions about how to move the institution forward, and I would say the third peg is the fact that I have met the greatest leaders of the world.  They, they--as somebody said to me, all the great ones come to Howard.  And in my responsibility, having three convocations each year, there was always somebody coming for an official visit, whether it was Nelson Mandela, I certainly count, in his first visit to the United States Howard was a stop, but because of Howard's role and stature and Howard's role in ending apartheid, to greet Nelson Mandela, to be in his presence was quite a spiritual experience.  When we, when President Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] took a delegation to South Africa, he invited us.  I was invited into his office and you know sat there through the meeting with President Swygert.  So, I know that it's a blessing, the experiences that I've had, and I'm sure in my old age, I will look at my pictures and explain to my grandkids, yes, you know grandmommy met you know Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know--
Speaker 1: Kofi Annan and--
Speaker 2: All of them.  Yeah.  Actually--
Speaker 1: Colin Powell.
Speaker 2: Colin Powell; all of them.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It, it is a very special, a very special honor to serve at Howard University.
Story_ID: 638570
Speaker 1: Is there any particular challenges in setting these big events up in terms of making sure the students have some access and to make sure that the person is safe, and the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, yeah, there are innumerable details.  One of the things I am most proud of is that in this role I convened meetings across--I convened meetings that involve people across the campus because, you know, you call on volunteers to help pull off a production like this, right, and I would convene the meeting and we would go through the plan and I would ask people to input.  Well, you know what I found over time is that people tend to stay in their box if the organization--if the organization has them in a box below the line, they stay there.  But, if you create opportunities to pull them out of that and you say, "I don't have the answers, tell me what it is you know that you think we need to pay attention to," people come alive, become engaged.  So, out of that, we now have a structured special events taskforce, but I did that out of necessity.  It wasn't some grand scheme that I thought this was a way to unleash the talent.  It was a necessity because I was new to the organization and it was important that I understood all the issues but the impact is then people were talking to each other, and they were cross fertilizing each other's thinking, and so I think one of the things we do best is special events.  The [U.S.] Secret Service gives us very high marks.  I recall meeting with Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] chief of security who came in a week before, wanted to review everything.  He was sitting in my office and he sat back in his chair.  He said, "Oh, I didn't need to come visit you 'cause you know--."  Well you've hosted heads of state, you understand Secret Service protocols, you understand the orchestration that's required.  It's a lot of detail and it's also big view.  So you have to think about the visit from the time they arrive to campus to the time they leave.  The other issue is people figure, if you don't really know what you're doing, it's not gonna be well managed, they're gonna get off schedule, they won't get out on time; all of those things can be managed to the T.  And I believe in over preparation because there's always gonna be an unexpected something that happens and you have to plan for it.  You have to pay attention to detail.  When Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] for Dr. King's birthday celebration [Martin Luther King Jr. Day], this was a few days before he was being inaugurated.  We had specifications, I gave them to food service: there was to be no international water.  They wanted water, bottled water, but no international water, right?  Well when I walked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't unders- I don't understand that, international water?  What do you mean?
Speaker 2: Evian?
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  No water from another country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I walk in and this is the other thing: I always check myself.  I walk around.  I do a walk through, always (laughter), and what did they have?  Evian water, and the president's arriving and he had locked down the campus Secret Service, and I looked at the chef and I said, "I need water, U.S. water.  I don't care how you get it, but it better be here when I come back," (laughter).  And I mean it's just that, you know that's a little example of some of the things.  Other things can go wrong.  You can have a student protest, which we had as well, about vending, but the details of briefing your principal, making the Secret Service comfortable, dealing with the principal staff; all of those things require orchestration.
Story_ID: 638571
Speaker 1: Now you started--when did, when did you start your career as a motivational speaker?
Speaker 2: Well, it's something I just sort of happened into, and I guess I have to go back to a good friend of mine, Norma Jenkins Stewart, who I met, a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.], when I came as a young lawyer in district government and she invited me to become involved in an organization called the Continentals that works with children, and I declined her invitation, I guess similar to Junior League [Junior League of Washington, Washington, D.C.] because it was called the Continental Societies [Continental Societies, Inc.], and that kind of had a negative resonance for me, you know, a child of the '70s [1970s], who was you know sort of a radical and militant and, and she explained to me no, these are about helping children.  I mean that's just the name, it was founded in the '50s [1950s].  The long and short of is that I told her I was committed to volunteering but I saw my role as providing bro--pro bono legal services to social service organizations and she said to me, "You have to do more than that," she said, "you are an example that children in Southeast Washington [D.C.] need to see.  You gotta get your hands dirty.  You gotta go in the community and interact with these children so that they can see who they can become."  And that was really life changing for me, because I thought doing good was just doing good.  I never thought about myself as a model that kids needed to see to have aspirations for achievement, and so it was really out of that work and doing volunteer projects with kids, and I found that I was effective in connecting and relating with them.  And then fast forward as I grew in my career and particularly after I came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I then transitioned to organizations actually because I realized working with the kind of people who are on my board and what I've learned from them are important lessons and strategies to help for other successful organizations dealing with transitions in leadership from presidents to--from one president to the next, and presidents and boards, what is the dynamics of working for a board; the, the shared leadership role between boards and new presidents; and transition, change management; all of those things are important lessons for continuity and success in organizations.  So, it's really a combination of my work, my professional work and volunteerism that I started to speak on these topics and there was more demand for me to come and speak on the topics and I started doing workshops, so eventually I actually started a consulting company called Leverage Leadership Group [Leverage Leadership Group, LLC] and in that firm I do most of my speaking and training work principally with nonprofit, but also with any organization going through transformation and executive transition and change.
Speaker 1: Now when did you start Leverage Leadership?
Speaker 2: I started Leverage Leadership actually, I have to think about that because it was when I became special counsel to [HistoryMaker] Wayne Curry for the new stadium [Jack Kent Cooke Stadium; FedExField, Landover, Maryland] here in Prince George [Landover, Maryland] as I realized I needed a vehicle to--
Speaker 1: Was that back in the late '80s [1980s] then?
Speaker 2: It would have been the '90s [1990s], would have been the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Nineties [1990s]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when the Redskins [Washington Redskins] stadium was built here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm not sure when Redskins sta- I know they were still, weren't they still using RFK [Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium, Washington, D.C.] in '95 [1995]?  I was here for the Million Man March and they was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was probably, their stadium probably opened in the late '90s [1990s], I think, probably '98 [1998], maybe, late '90s [1990s].  But you know the focus I have around motivational speaking particularly for young people is really around encouraging them to have a personal vision for their lives, to actually visualize it and to write it down.  That helps you to make decisions of who you spend time with and what you do and where you go.  I told them it simplifies your life when you're clear about where you're headed.  And I also have a very strong message around having a spiritual grounding and understand that we are human beings.  I mean, this is just the physical manifestation.  It is really about your soul and the essence of who you are, to know yourself, to, to be comfortable with yourself.  It's hard to have good relationships when you don't have a good relationship with yourself.  You know, those, those kind--sort of basic what it takes to be successful in life without regard to a particular career.  And so, I believe that you know with hard work and God, everything's possible, everything's possible (laughter).
Story_ID: 638572
Speaker 1: It says here that you are a member of the department of state 2006--or you were a member--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of the 2006 Foreign Service Selection Board.  Now what, what is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've actually done two things in federal government, human, human resource related.  At the state department [U.S. Department of State], they invite in senior executives to conduct, basically performance evaluations to determine promotions for the ambassadorial level, the career ambassadorial level, the senior executives in the state department.  That was an exciting experience to, first to read and understand the careers of senior Foreign Service officers, but also to understand the workings of the state department and all the various departments that go into what is the diplomatic corps.  I also had another interesting experience during the Carter ye- Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] years with the Presidential Rank Review Board.  Across the government, individuals are nominated for the highest performance awards and I was invited to serve in that role as well.
Story_ID: 638573
Speaker 1: You are, have been recognized as one of the Power 150, I don't know, one of the hundred most powerful women in the D.C. area [Washington, D.C.] by Washington magazine [sic. Washingtonian].  Who's Who of Prince George's County, you're in the top 100 of that.  I mean it's a lot of recognition, and people have a lot of good things to say about you.  When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the--my role as president of Prince George's community foundation [Community Foundation, Landover, Maryland], when I came into it I joined a board shortly after moving here and I focused on trying to do good in terms of supporting social service nonprofits that I knew needed resources to deliver services.  But it wasn't until I moved into the leadership role that I started to think about the role of the foundation in bringing the community together.  Because what I realized is that growing up in Mobile [Alabama], the community, basically were my parents [Clara Torrance Hampshire and John Hampshire, Sr.] and people like my parents who just sort of looked out and people talked to each other and worked through issues.  When you move to an area like Prince George's County [Maryland] and other metropolitan areas, you don't necessarily have community guardians; you know, particular people that everybody looks to, to keep communities together the way we used to.  And so I started to talk about the role of the foundation as the community guardian and inviting all citizens to be interested in and take responsibility for the wellness and the wholeness of the community, that we are equally responsible for the least among us.  How can we be proud that we are the most affluent African American community, yet we have homelessness, we--I mean, we have issues and we have to, we are responsible for addressing those issues.  So I guess in a re- in a regret if I had to do it again, I probably would have brought that consciousness from the beginning of my tenure in the foundation and to also talk about black/white issues.  There were a lot of dynamics with Prince George's, with blacks taking over leadership and, you know, I found very anti-white comments said by African Americans, and whites who had been here for long periods of time, anti-things about blacks who were coming and I think I was probably in the middle, because my view was I moved from Montgomery County [Maryland] because I wanted my children [Carri Cowan and Ernest Cowan, Jr.] to live in a diverse community.  I didn't move to Prince George's because I wanted them to live in a black community, and people say, "Well what do you mean by that?"  I said, so, you know a lot of the conversation I hear around Prince George's is black power, black power, black power, and I said being pro-black doesn't mean anti-white.  I can't get with the anti--I can't get with the anti-anything (laughter) you know, in terms of ethnic differences.  I think the gift of Prince George's for America is that the American dream can be realized in a non-Caucasian or Jewish community, and that it is diverse and people are equally respected and revered key stakeholders and players, and that's the promise I think of Prince George's.
Speaker 1: Isn't it different in the sense that everybody here has a professional degree or a Ph.D. or something?  I mean it's just not the same in other black communities.
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's true but I think that is even more reason why we have a responsibility be--of our heritage.  It's always been about looking back and pulling somebody up.  I mean, that's, that's the culture of our community and I think we've lost some of that.  I think the other thing that I've seen emerge here is, is not always race, it's class.  I've seen class issues that have created a clash across racial lines.  A lot of the natives to Prince George's were not particularly focused on world class schools.  This was a farming community.  They owned land.  They had resources.  And then, you had African Americans coming who were very focused on good schools and status and car- and so it was also class-ish.  You also see class issues within the African American community now.  So, I, I think, you know Prince George's presents a laboratory for a lot of issues in America, and I think if we get it right here we can serve as a role model in lots of other places.
Story_ID: 638574
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African Amer- American community today?
Speaker 2: It is our, our children and passing along the lessons that advanced our race.  It is, I'm reminded of a speech for Mordecai Wyatt Johnson [Mordecai Johnson], who was the first African American president at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in 1928, addressing a freshman class, and he spoke of the Howard education and that it wasn't for everyone; and if they had come to Howard for self advancement, they were in the wrong place because Howard was a place where we were to be trained and to go back to our communities and uplift the race, and I think we've lost that.  I mean, as integration has happened and opportunities have happened, it seems we've assimilated just to the me and mine; not focused on helping that other child, or--.  I mean, one of the biggest challenges here in the county [Prince George's County, Maryland], we have a cap on taxes that relate to funding public education, and I worked to get it repealed.  It would mean about a hundred dollars difference in your tax bill and people were very anti about it and called me an elitist because you know I was purporting for it and saying that, on the other side, a lot of my neighbors were saying, "Well, you know, I'm not gonna do that.  My kids are in private school."  Like, so your child is in private school.  You don't care about the kids who are in public school?  I mean, aren't they our children too?  So, in terms of our community I want us to go back in terms of our values to that which brought us forward, because it seems we've lost our values and, and not stayed true to our culture and the important values in our culture that I think has us lost now in terms of moving forward.
Story_ID: 638575
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I tried to be a blessing to everyone I met; that's actually my personal mission statement.  And awareness about, I think, this life's--this life we live is a journey and I think it's important to understand purpose, and I believe my purpose is to help people along the way.  I think that's, that's what we're all here for: to help each other along the way.  So I would hope that my legacy is that I helped someone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638576
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  Now, you moved to D.C. and got married--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 1: --and I know you've got a daughter and a son, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  We--I moved to Washington [D.C.] from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I lived with my cousin, who was actually doing her residency at Walter Reed [Walter Reed Army Medical Center; Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Washington, D.C.].  She was in the [U.S.] military.  And then I lived in an apartment, then purchased my first town home.  I was very proud of it, 1984, and then subsequently married in '86 [1986].  Lived in Silver Spring [Maryland] for, up until 1991, and we then built the home we live in now.  My daughter, Carri [Carri Cowan], is twenty-three years old now.  She was born in January '87 [1987]; and my son, Ernest [Ernest Cowan, Jr.] was born July 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They are both--Carri is graduated from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and Ernest is now rising senior.
Speaker 1: Your son is named for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My husband [Ernest Cowan, Sr.].
Speaker 1: --and your daughter is named for your [maternal] grandmother [Carri Eaton Torrance], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she is.  You picked that up.  Yeah.  Actually Carri has an interesting name.  My husband's grandmother, his mother's mother, was also named Carri [ph.], so it was obvious what her name was to be.  She has a very special name.  Of course, in her age group it was considered an old traditional name, but you know it just means so much and she certainly has an appreciation for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 638577
Speaker 1: Do you have any--what are your plans for the future now?  Are you, are you--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm really at a point, I'm fifty-five now, and actually since I turned fifty I've been thinking a lot about the second half of my life, and sort of in a reflective mood and prayerful mood--mood, actually, praying to God and reading scripture, Jeremiah 29, about the plans for me [Jeremiah 29:11].  I, I know I can't live the second half the way I've lived the first half.  The first half has been physically and mentally exhausting.  I do--I multitask all the time.  I know that's not gonna work for the second half, so I've gotta figure out a new rhythm to bring balance to my life that I do things that matter, that make a difference, but that I don't overextend myself.  And so it's my hope that I will be able to continue to do the motivational work I do, training work around change and organizations and whatnot, human capacity building, but on a time table that's more consistent with a balanced life, quality of life.  Somewhere near the water because I find water to be very calming for me, the ocean, not, not a pool but an ocean, or gulf or something like that.
Story_ID: 638578
Speaker 1: I know you mentioned earlier that your mother [Clara Torrance Hampshire] had passed away.  But is your father [John Hampshire, Sr.] still alive?
Speaker 2: No, my father passed actually two weeks after I came to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they proud of you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely.  You know, I always say, and it's kind of tough to be a daddy's girl because you just never meet that guy that's like daddy.  And all I remember as long as I can remember, whenever I entered a room where my father was, he had a smile that was so affirming that it just made my day.  And I--it reminds me of a story when I was in junior high and I was performing with the band and I had a solo and I stopped, I just panicked, I guess, and my father stood up and did this (gesture), right?  And I started over and it was perfect (laughter).  And, you know, in every challenge I've had in life, I visualize my father doing this (gesture) and I just wonder, you know, sometimes if parents know what it means to give your children that affirmation to tell them you know this meant I'm with you, you're my champ, regardless, even as I was failing, and so it's not about success as much as about what happens to you when you fail.  Can you get yourself up and start over again?  So, that's you know when I think of my father, I (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I think of that.
Story_ID: 638579
Speaker 1: All right now, is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I don't know.  I you know I haven't said much about my husband [Ernest Cowan, Sr.] and my marriage, but this is what I would say.  I think I was kind of old when I got married, I was thirty-one (laughter).  You know, some family members thought I was old.  I thought it was pretty good, I had a few years (unclear), but I do make a point to talk to young women, especially young professional women, because I was, you know, part of that first generation, really, that tried to do career and family.  And when I came along I was told you could have it all, right?  And so we tried to have it all.  And what I say to them is you can have it all, but not at the same time, and you have to make choices and that's the tradeoff and it's important that in a partner you have a partner who accepts you for all of who you are and is prepared to work with you to achieve your hopes and dreams professionally and share with you the responsibility of parenting because otherwise it's impossible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good advice (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 638580
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  (Pause) Well, I'd like to be remembered as someone who was highly competent, high character, courage, with a heart for people and a servant leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --for spending the time with us.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Great.
Story_ID: 638581
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the convocation with secretary of agriculture, Mike Espy, and it's a picture taken with me and the staff in the office of the secretary.  I had not been at the university very long, and it was a very special photograph because Mike Espy had worked as a student in the office of the secretary while attending Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And included with me on this picture on the end is Inger Parker [ph.], who is a student worker there in the office at the time.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my children, Carri Adana Cowan [Carri Cowan] and Ernest Cowan, Jr.  They are my greatest accomplishments.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photograph with Brandon Neal, who is a former student at Howard University who was working on President Obama's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] election to become president of the United States.  He visited Howard in the fall prior to the election, so that was September.  And we're getting him dressed and ready to begin the processional and, of course, he was picking on me about why he didn't have a purple robe since he was a lawyer too.  Lawyers' colors and academics are purple, and he said he liked my robe a lot more than his plain black one.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.
Speaker 1: This is commencement at Howard University 2009, when we honored Laurence Fishburne, actor and director for the phenomenal career he's had.  He's been a very successful dramatic and film actor, but our honor of him focused principally on the images of African Americans, in particular 'Akeelah and the Bee' movie that he did regarding children and education.
Speaker 2: I took my mom to see that.
Speaker 1: This is me with Earl G. Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], founder of Black Enterprise and trustee of Howard University.  I've worked with Mr. Graves since I came to Howard University and he is an outstanding individual, truly committed.  I found that who he is in his private life is who he is in his public life.  That's not always the case.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was commencement 2009 where [HistoryMaker] Gwen Ifill, the managing editor of 'Washington Week' was the commencement speaker and she is the sort of epitome of talking heads in Washington [D.C.] circles in terms of political analysis, the first African American to be in such a role.
Speaker 2: This is a picture, I'm not sure of which Christmas, maybe 2005, at my college roommate, Valerie's home, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], celebrating Kwanzaa.  And in the photograph is her mother, Julia Moore [ph.]; Valerie [ph.]; my mother, Clara Hampshire [Clara Torrance Hampshire] in the middle; my sister Avon [Avon Hampshire], who was the one who took me around as a little girl, exposed me to lots of things when she was a teenager; and my daughter, Carri.  So we have three generations of me, my daughter and mother, and my best friend and her mother.
Speaker 1: This is a commencement at Howard University, where we honored Mark Dean, who was in IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] at the time and was noted as one of the fifty top idea people in IBM's history.  He is credited with holding the patent for the design of peripheries that are added to computers that allow for printing and otherwise.
Speaker 2: This is the highlight of my career, when President Nelson Mandela visited Howard University in 1994.  He invited the university to come to South Africa and help him on strategies around higher education and this is me with President Mandela and President H. Patrick Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] in President Mandela's office.
Speaker 1: This is commencement morning 2009, where Howard University honored Irene Pollin [Irene Kerchek Pollin], who is known as a major philanthropist here in Washington, owners of the Washington Wizards and the Verizon Center [Capital One Arena, Washington, D.C.], but is a major health advocate in women's health and heart disease.
Speaker 2: This is a commencement morning where the university honored Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, who is a physician and did extensive health missions throughout Africa.  At the time, he was the majority leader of the [U.S.] Senate.
Speaker 1: This was commencement morning greeting Oprah Winfrey, the big O.  It was quite a day at Howard University with people traveling from all over the United States just to be in her presence.  We had to open up the football field and allow people to have a festival style, just to watch the commencement.  They were not in the arena but they wanted to be there to see Oprah.
Speaker 2: This is a commencement dinner where Venus Williams was honored.  This was shortly after she won Wimbledon [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England], and it was a commencement dinner where she was commended for her outstanding accomplishments.
Speaker 1: The Honorable Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith], federal judge, civil rights lawyer, on the occasion of the celebration of the death of Thurgood Marshall at Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is The Honorable A. Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], who was on the circuit court, federal circuit court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit], on the occasion commemorating the legacy and contribution of Thurgood Marshall, graduate of Howard University and first African American [U.S.] Supreme Court justice.
Speaker 2: This was very early in my career at Howard University where we greeted [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun, first African American female senator elected, senator from Illinois.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a meeting with [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis, who was a councilwoman in the District of Columbia, the daughter of the renowned surgeon Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew].  She was a candidate for mayor.  I was meeting with her in my capacity with the Junior League [Junior League of Washington, Washington, D.C.], focusing on issues relating to homelessness and the impact on children.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph with Arthur Ashe who came to speak at the time I was president of Leadership Washington [Leadership Greater Washington, Washington, D.C.], a regional leadership organization, and he was promoting academics and tennis with young people in the District of Columbia and all around the country.  See, that's when I was wearing my hair straight (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Ron Brown, who was secretary of commerce in the Car- Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  Ron's parents [Gloria Osborne Carter and William Brown] were Howard graduates and he was the commencement speaker at Howard University I believe in 1995 [sic. 1993].
Speaker 2: This is a photograph with the honorable A. Leon Higginbotham, again on the occasion commemorating the life and contribution of Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me with my husband, Ernest Cowan, Sr.  The occasion was a family vacation when we cruised the Caribbean with our children.
