Story_ID: 8113
Speaker 1: My name is Hermene Demaris Hartman, "H-E-R-M-E-N-E."  Demaris is "D-E-M-A-R-I-S."  Hartman is "H-A-R-T-M-A-N."  I was born September 24th--do I have to say the year--1947.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: And today is April 4th, 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And your profession?
Speaker 1: Media, publisher.
Speaker 2: Okay and for--and also I'd like to say that we're at the office of 'N'Digo' [magazine] which is at 401 North Wabash [Chicago, Illinois] Suite--is it 534?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 8114
Speaker 1: Okay, I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is shrimp.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Lilac, purple.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, "Just do it."
Story_ID: 8115
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna get started and I want to start with your father. And I'd like you to tell us his name and tell us what you know about his family.
Speaker 2: My dad's name's Herman D. Hartman.  He's deceased. Born in Houma, Louisiana, came to Chicago [Illinois] when he was about twelve years old.  He called it "the great escape."  The South wasn't so good at that time, and he came, came here.  Six brothers and sisters--oldest brother's name was Southern and then Agnes, and Edward, and Helen, and John. And they came here--I can't give you the year.  I don't, I don't know that.  I don't--I can't--I got to figure all of that out. But came here, he was twelve years old, you know, went to--went to school and lived on 51st Street [Chicago, Illinois], I do believe, and my father eventually became the first African American Pepsi-Cola distributor.  Pepsi was a brand new product at that time and he became the first African American Pepsi-Cola distributor.
Story_ID: 8116
Speaker 1: Well, first of all, I want to ask now, this--the origin of the name.  Do you know?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Hartman?  Hartman is a German-Jewish name.  As far as I know, I think my great grandfather was German-Jewish.  My grandfather--paternal grandfather--was very, very light and he came north, but I had an uncle and some--my great aunts who stayed in New Orleans [Louisiana] and I know some of them passed for white.  I had a uncle, Clarence Hartman, who stayed in Houma, Louisiana and really became quite wealthy via land.  He bought land, for I understand, every week for a quarter an acre and I think some of them passed.  My grandmother, whom I never knew, her name was Louise, was very dark. So we got both sides on that family: dark and light.
Story_ID: 8117
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about the time that he spent in New Orleans [Louisiana], and, you know, did he share with you any stories growing up?  Whether in New Orleans or in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not in New Orleans.  I think that was a bad experience for my father [Herman Hartman].  I think that life was very bad.  I think life was very poor.  And I--I  know my dad was glad to, you know, kind of 'get the hell on out of Dodge' [City, Kansas, western movie dialogue cliché]. And as I said, all my life that's been referred to as "the escape."  Now what we did do--what my dad did do--because once he left New Orleans, he left New Orleans.  There were no visits back and forth and all of that.  There are cousins, who I can recall, came here for visits and--dinner, family conversations, you heard about New Orleans, but my father was pretty much done with New Orleans once he got out of there. But what we did, my cousin Diane and my dad and another elder cousin of my dad, peer with my dad, we went back to New Orleans.  He wanted us to see.  He wanted to show us some things and we went to places that he played as a child.  They played ball.  We went and saw some major trees.  I can remember there were some trees that were important.  We went to the bayou country, so to speak, but we did do that probably about seven or eight years before he died and it's one of the best trips that we ever took, and I'm very, very happy that we did it.  I met all of my aunts and probably within a year, Julie [interviewer Julieanna Richardson], all of those people were gone, so it was--I almost look at that as kind of God saying, "Do this now," and we did and I'm glad we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Hermene, wha--what did he talk about growing up here in Chicago [Illinois] though?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He talked about growing up in Chicago, and this was I guess the, the migration and life was, was better.  One of the things my father says is that life was better because he, he could work. There was always some odd jobs or something that he could do whereby he could make some money.  So my father was a real entrepreneurial-type spirit, and that--that was probably important to him--grocery stores, but he could always do something where he could make a buck.
Story_ID: 8118
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother, Mildred [Hartman].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My mom was born in Apex, North Carolina--does not recall it at all.  She's been in Chicago [Illinois] since she was eighteen months old; lived on 36th [Street] and Giles [Avenue]  My mother's parents--her biological parents both died, at a very, very early age and a woman named Carrie Bouton raised her on 36th and Giles. And she had a--at the age of eleven, Miss Carrie died, and so my mother kind of had a rough time there for a while.  She was glad to get grown.  In Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], we--she's lived on the South Side of Chicago most of her life, worked at what was then called the Rhumboogie Cafe [night club].  I'm sure you--you've heard about that.  There're some interviews.  I've heard about those stories all my life and people like Dinah Washington [singer] and Billy Eckstine [singer] and Joe Williams [singer] and Joe Louis [boxer]--the celebrities of the day.  I guess the Rhumboogie was the equivalent of our Cotton Club [Harlem, New York nightclub]--Chicago's Cotton Club.  She was a cashier there.  And so she worked there for many years, and then when I was born, she stayed home for a while and worked at Cook County Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] a health care provider until she retired.
Story_ID: 8119
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Herman and Mildred Hartman] meet?
Speaker 2: I think--that's a good question.  Hot Springs, Arkansas is where they--I understand that was a hot spot, kind of a spa resort that of, of their day that people went to and I think they met there in Hot Springs.
Speaker 1: But they were both living in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In Chicago.
Speaker 1: Isn't that something?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --But I think they met there.
Story_ID: 8120
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Herman Hartman].  What kind of person--I know you said he was an entrepreneur, but what--what, you know.  What kind of person was he?
Speaker 2: My father was a staunch businessman.  Everything eventually had a bottom line.  A very sincere person.  A very jovial person, my father was always telling jokes and getting under people's skin with, with some of his humor.  He was--kind of had a dry kind of humor.  Hard working, a very deliberate, focused individual.  Father was very debonair.  I can count the times that I saw my father without a shirt and tie.  I believed a man put on a shirt and tie and dressed every single day and he did--did that--grew up with that.  And he was a charmer.  He negotiated very well, had all the attributes and skills of a terrific salesperson.  Sometimes he could be quite stern.  So you saw the stern side I guess when he was in his, his business mode and then we saw--he was in my family, Uncle Herman with my cousins, a very jovial kind of person, loved kids, always had a gang of kids.  And I think in, in--I found out some things in my father's death that I didn't know.  My father was always taking boys and just trying to strengthen them into becoming men.  When he died, we went to church.  A lot of young men came up to me and said, "Mr. Hartman did this or Mr.  Hartman told me this or Mr. Hartman helped me with this, that or the other." And some of these were people that I did not know.
Story_ID: 8121
Speaker 1: And your mother [Mildred Hartman].  What kind of person is she would you say?
Speaker 2: She's sassy, strong--been very, very strong--fun, loves to cook, loves to entertain her family.  Christmas dinner is a big day at our house where family and friends come and we enjoy being with each other, and enjoy the, the meals.  Funny, she shops--she's a shopper.  She's a shopper's shopper.  If there's a sale on, she knows exactly where it is, has a great sense of style, encouraging--Mom's very, very encouraging on moving forward.  My mother's very progressive.  She's probably been about twenty years ahead of her time most of her life, including now.
Story_ID: 8122
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your growing up, you know.  Can you give us, you know, four or five memories of, you know, growing up and being young?  And I'm talking about the early years.
Speaker 2: I grew up--South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  We lived at 5943 South Indiana [Avenue].  I remember a big house.  I was a tomboy.  I remember church.  I went to The Church of The Good Shepherd and we--I wanted a Girl Scouts there.  We had Brownies and I wanted a Girl Scout--think I belonged to--and I started it, 'cause we had to--I remember organizing that, because we didn't have a Girl Scout and I couldn't get to the next level and I was anxious to get to the next level.  And eventually went--and I tried to join the Boy Scouts because they looked like they did more things than the girls, and was protesting kind of early without realizing it on why I couldn't join the Boy Scouts, because I liked what the boys did better than what the girls did.  Took ballet, started dancing lessons about two, three years old.  Took ballet at church.  I think my mother [Mildred Hartman] was trying to get the tomboy out of me.  Went to church every Sunday.  And I had a good childhood, I had a wonderful childhood.  I went to Betsy Ross [Elementary] School [Chicago,Illinois] which was down the street from where we lived, not far from where we lived, and just had a nice, happy childhood--and rode your bike, and jumped rope outside and played with the kids in the neighborhood without fear or danger, and had dinner at six o'clock at night and went to bed at eight o'clock [P.M.] and got up and started all over the next day.
Speaker 1: Now as an only child, were you like only children when you're lonely?  You know, when you want to have other kids around or things like that?  Or was it--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I had a lot of playmates, but I'm a reader, and I guess I've--maybe as an only child, maybe that's where that comes from.  My mother wouldn't allow the boredom that might set in with an only child, so it was always, "Read a book."  And when I was a little girl, I had to read a book every week.  So I was--I read a lot, and that probably took care of boredom.  But it was a lot of playmates.  I had friends upstairs.  I had friends next door that I played with all the time.  The people next door were a little older than me and those upstairs were a little younger than me.  But reading became a nice pastime for me, and dancing lessons and Girl Scouts.  There wasn't a lot of time to get bored.
Speaker 1: And what, what--what type of things did you like to read back then?
Speaker 2: I read Shakespeare.  I started reading Shakespeare very early.  I think I was about eleven years old when I first started reading Shakespeare and the Classics.  But whatever those little children's books were.  I had an aunt who read a lot, and she read novels a lot and 'Exodus' [by Leon Uris] I remember, and I was always trying to read what she read--not that I always understood it, but I was at least trying to, to read it, and I was encouraged to do so.  I wasn't discouraged to do it.  I was in--in school, I got bored.  We--I can remember reading 'Reader's Digest' [periodical], and you remember the vocabulary things after 'Reader's Digest.'  And I got bored with that one day and I don't know did something in school, acting up.  And the principal challenged me to write something.  And it was my philosophy of life that she challenged me to write, and I took it very seriously.  I didn't just write it, I sat down and really did some thinking and wrote it and it took me a couple of days to write it.  And when I gave it to her, I can remember her saying, "My goodness you can write.  You're a writer.  You can really write." And it was an assignment to say, "Now, stop acting up in class" and she said, "You're bored, aren't you?" And I said, "Yes, I am."  And she says, "Well, write." And so reading and writing became my friends.  It became, "You won't get bored if you can read.  You'll never be bored if you can write."
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So you said, you went to--It said--Betsy--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Betsy Ross.  That's for--.
Speaker 1: Ross, that's elementary.
Speaker 2: Eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seven years, eight years.  I graduated from there.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay, and then you went where?  And then you went from there to high school?
Speaker 2: Then we moved.  We moved to Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois], 3440 Cottage Grove [Avenue] and I went to [Wendell] Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois].  We moved actually when I was still in eighth grade 'cause I traveled back.  My mother didn't want me to come out of that school.  She wanted me to complete schooling there and I went to [Wendell] Phillips [High School] for about a year and a half.  And then, I went to Jones Commercial High School [Chicago, Illinois, now Jones College Prep].
Speaker 1: Now are there other memories before I get to Jones [Commercial High School]?  Are there other memories that you--you know, just some of your favorite memories that you would like to share?  You know, either with friends or family, or trips, or--?
Speaker 2: We traveled.  Some real fond things I remember about growing up is the skating rink.  We skated at St. Anselm's and I liked that very much.  I was in some skating shows and I enjoyed that very, very much.  We traveled.  My uncle, Johnny Hartman, was a singer and lived in New York [New York], and I can remember going to New York.  I think my first trip to New York was right before school.  I was about five--I was about five years old, because he actually tried to say, "You don't want to go home.  You really want just to stay here with me."  And my mother was like, "No, she's got to come home.  It's time for school."  And then my--I remember my mom and dad [Herman Hartman] and I--we went to New York again when I was about  seven years old.  But I guess we'd--I guess I was traveling and didn't realize it at the time.  But really became--traveling became a pastime.  Something I like to do.
Story_ID: 8123
Speaker 1: Your father [Herman Hartman]--at what point--how old were you when he started--got his Pepsi-Cola distributorship?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, a while before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh really?
Speaker 2: So it's always all my life
Speaker 1: Can you tell that story?
Speaker 2: About what?
Speaker 1: How he got it?
Speaker 2: Well the--the story that I've heard--the legend, so to speak, is that he sold his overcoat to buy his first cases of pop and I think the way that was done in those days is you paid up front for your--for your load of pop, and then you came back after you'd sold that, and you got some more and my father's route--his trips were in the beginning, was all over Chicago [Illinois].  You can imagine with a new product, I think you sold it where you could.  And later on, in later years you began to get routes, you began to get districts.  My--my dad's office was at 54th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  He used to be, I understand, right across from--this was before I was born, right before--right across from DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] which is now the Charlie [Charles] Hayes [Family Investment] Center.  My mother [Mildred Hartman]--I just found this out the other day--my father owned that and the mayor wanted to use it for the soldiers, and asked my father to sell it and said, "I promise you wherever you want to relocate, I'll help you do it."  And I--I think that happened.  But he was a pioneer entrepreneur and the legend is that he sold his overcoat to get his first cases of pop and went back and got some more and went back and got some more and went back and got some more.  And he sold 47th Street, 43rd Street, 51st Street, pretty much the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Did your mother help in the business at all?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No.  Before my father started business, he and my mom weren't together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Did you--?
Speaker 2: But the answer to your question--everybody helped my father sell pop (laughs).
Speaker 1: (simultaneously)  Oh, okay, that's what I was gonna--okay.
Speaker 2: Including me.
Story_ID: 8124
Speaker 1: So you grew up.  Were you--were you aware that you were growing up in, you know, in a business--you know, in entrepreneurial-type family?  Was that aware--or a middle-class family essentially?
Speaker 2: It was just your family.  No, I mean the church I went to was the church.  I mean I can remember [boxer] Joe Louis's  kids went to that church.  I remember them.  No, I had no consciousness of poor, middle, rich--I always thought we were rich, 'cause you could have anything you wanted and my cousins had--we just--you just told your daddy what you wanted and you just told your mom what you wanted, you got it.  So I had no consciousness of, of poor.  I can remember one--there was a little girl at school who didn't have an Easter dress, and I usually got a lot of things.  My uncle [singer Johnny Hartman] didn't have children until late and so I was his little girl.  And I always got a box from Japan or a box something from Germany, or, my dad [Herman Hartman] went to New York [New York], I got a box of clothes or something.  And I can remember this child didn't have a dress and I brought her home and I told my mom [Mildred Hartman].  I said, "She doesn't have a dress for Easter, and so I thought I would give her one of mine."  And my mother thought that was okay.  She says, "Well, that's fine.  You can--you can choose which dress you'd like to give her."  And I started bringing people home and I guess I--I didn't know they were poor, I didn't think of it as being poor.  It was just like, "Well, you can come on home with me and we can share."  And eventually my mother kind of stopped that but, it's like, "You can't bring everybody home."  I can remember that.
Story_ID: 8125
Speaker 1: Now your uncle, did you have a lot of exposure to Johnny Hartman [singer]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you talk about him?
Speaker 2: My uncle was a wonderful, just a fabulous guy.  Being in show business it was--we always loved when he came home, and he had nice things and nice stories and experiences to tell us.  My uncle was very much a family man.  When he would come home, part of the joy of him coming home is that he cooked.  My uncle was a gourmet cook.  And we were--on Sundays, that was family dinner day.  So we were always going to get not only a great dinner but probably something that we hadn't had before.  What my uncle did is, as he traveled around the world, and he would go to restaurants, he would always go back in the kitchen and meet and talk to the chef and find out, you know, "What was that?" and, you know, "How do you make it?"  And so, when he came home, we became the guinea pigs.  He was always making something--always bringing somebody to dinner.  As you--show biz people--we think they have a glamorous life but they have a hard life on the road 'cause you're always eating out and sometimes you just really want that home-cooked meal.
Story_ID: 8126
Speaker 1: I remember one Sunday afternoon we had Bill Cosby over for dinner.  My uncle [singer Johnny Hartman]--my mother [Mildred Hartman] was cooking that day and he called to say, "Got a friend and he's--he's been on the road for about six weeks now and he's really kind of tired of the road and his name was Bill Cosby."  And my mom says, "Sure, sure you can bring him." And we didn't know who Bill Cosby was.  He was not Bill Cosby at that time, right, he was just Uncle John's friend.  And he and his wife Camille [Cosby] had just gotten married.  I think they'd been married about two or three months, and he was playing at Mr. Kelly's [night club].  And Cosby and Camille came over and they were very quiet, but boy, did they eat.  And my father just really teased them and Camille was, was expecting, and they told us that her father did not really want them to get married because, "This guy--trying to be a comedian."  You know, "What kind of life is my daughter going to have?" And so my father said, "Well, tell us a joke.  Let's, let's, let's hear how good you are." And Cosby started talking and we--he warmed up.  And he probably did his whole show for us and we just had a great time.  I remember that, that evening as a particular, particular time.  But my uncle was always bringing people home. We always had dinner at my Aunt Helen's house, but those were some happy, happy, happy times.
Story_ID: 8127
Speaker 1: What song of his [singer Johnny Hartman, her uncle] is your favorite?
Speaker 2: My favorite songs--probably 'September Song,' I like that.  'Lush Life' of course is his most famous song.  I do remember when he--when he did the album with John Coltrane.  And I remember it because he was particularly pleased with it, and we usually talked on Sundays.  No matter where he was in the world, he usually called home on Sundays.  And I can remember him telling me that, "I think we've really done the perfect record--we've done something really good."  And he told me about the Coltrane album and his sign of standard and his sign of acceptance and that it was really good, is that after they cut the record, they went and got Billy Strayhorn, who wrote 'Lush Life,' and they wanted him to hear it and they wanted his approval.  They wanted him to give the nod on it.  And my uncle tells me that Strayhorn said, "You all played it just like I wrote it when I heard it."  And I think for my uncle those were high marks.  That was probably the best thing that he could have said to him.
Story_ID: 8128
Speaker 1: And that was a business school [Jones Commercial High School, now Jones College Prep, Chicago, Illinois].  That was a school to prepare, to prepare you for the business world, and you had several majors.  Secretaries majored in shorthand, and you had business machines, and that's what I majored in, was business machines.  My mother [Mildred Hartman] was concerned that--by my mother kind of growing up without, at one point, a key point in her life without parents, without support, is that you'll always be able to take care of yourself.  And if you have a basic business skill, you can always type, you can always--I--you can always go take shorthand, you can always get a job.  So it was about being employable early, no matter what, whether you had a college degree or not.  I started typing, fooling around in my dad's [Herman Hartman] office probably about seven years old, but I started taking typing when I was about eleven, twelve years old from Cortez Peters Business College [Chicago, Illinois].  Can you see me, eleven years old?  I was actually taking--taking--business courses, but my mother was determined that probably by fourteen, fifteen years old, I would be equipped if I had to--to take care of myself.  And I think that was a little fear or something that she had lingering from her childhood, but indeed it worked for me.  When I was at Jones, and these are stats I'll never forget, there were 625 students.  There were eleven blacks, there were three in my class.  Most of my classes, I was the only black student in my class.  So Jones  was an experience.  It was my first experience in I guess what was really integration at that time.  It was a hard school.  It was a no-nonsense place.  There was a dress code, we had to wear heels and hats and gloves every single day to school.  When you became a senior, part of your--it was a co-op [cooperative] work, co-op program where you went and you had to go and work for four hours a day in a place of employment.  And so Jones was, was tough.  And I kind of did--Jones was hard to get into.  It was hard to get into period, but it was really hard to get black students in.  My mother was very persistent with that and with me going there.  So I did go there.  And most of the Jones girls just left Jones and went into the world of work.  Now that was not my plight.  I left Jones and went into college.  But she had her plan and I followed it.
Story_ID: 8129
Speaker 1: I was real quiet, shy, very shy student.  Jones [Commercial High School, now Jones College Prep, Chicago, Illinois] was quite an experience for me.  I was smart but I was this kind of smart.  I did what I wanted to do.  If I didn't want to do something, I didn't do it.  If I wanted to do it, I did it.  I can remember, for example, in a history class.  And I wrote a term paper on Mr. [William] Jones [for whom Jones College Prep is named], who was black, and who the school did not know that he was black.  But upon some research that I had done--I can't think of Mr.  Jones' first name, I'm sorry--but he was, he was a black man, who donated the land to the [Chicago] Board of Education, where Jones sits today.  And I wrote a term paper on that.  And at that time you got up and you talked about your term papers, and the teacher found mine particularly interesting.  But he failed me, because he said it wasn't true and that I had, you know, gotten into a creative mode and made all this stuff up.  Well that wasn't true, I--I didn't do that.  It was true, and I brought my books to school to say, "This is--this man was black and, you know, and here's the evidence and here's the proof and so forth."  And that became quite an ordeal because my mother [Mildred Hartman] had to come up to school and we challenged the grade; and we almost had to go to the superintendent of the schools.  Well that, that 'F' became an 'A,' but I guess I learned real racism at that time, 'cause I flunked simply because I said, "This man was black," and I was telling the truth as research beared out but it was the first confrontation that I--that I had with racism.
Story_ID: 8130
Speaker 1: Had the schools, Betsy Ross [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], had it been mainly black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Betsy Ross was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was that experience--I mean what was it like?  You know, being in an environment that was, you know, primarily white?  And how did you sort of feel in that whole thing?  And--.
Speaker 2: I had great teachers.  I had great teachers at Betsy Ross, I had great teachers at [Wendell] Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois], and I had great teachers at Jones Commercial [High School, now Jones College Prep, Chicago, Illinois].  The environment was very, was very different.  It was not as nurturing and caring.  It was strictly business.  I had gone to--as I said, when I was about eleven, I was at Cortez Peters Business College [Chicago, Illinois] taking some business courses.  My hands--I'm told, I'm very, very fast.  When I got to Jones, I knew how to type.  I knew a lot of things that other students perhaps didn't know.  By my father [Herman Hartman] being--having a business, I was always hitting an adding machine, or, you know, something like that.  And I just experienced racism.  That's pretty much what it was.  We had some racial incidents, and that was all a brand new experience for me.  I hated Jones, I absolutely hated it.  It was hard.  It was hard to deal with that stuff all the time.  And so one year, I thought I was gonna get real smart and I would--and I would flunk out, you know and I would come home and say, "The school is just too difficult for me.  I just can't do this.  I'll have to go back to [Wendell] Phillips [High School]."  Well, I didn't quite flunk out, but I did let my grades get low intentionally.  And when I came home crying and I said, "Oh, look at this.  I'm just so dumb.  I can't do it.  I need to go back to my school."  My mother [Mildred Hartman] said, "Oh no." She says,  "If it's just too hard for you, you just might have to stay there a little longer to get through it all, you poor little dummy you."  So there was no sympathy.  And so she said, "Well, you might take another approach, because if you were smart, maybe you could graduate early."  Never dawned on me, right?  So, I got real smart and I did graduate early.
Story_ID: 8131
Speaker 1: Let me tell you a story.  The week when I graduated from, from Jones Commercial [High School, now Jones College Prep, Chicago, Illinois]--typing was a real big thing at Jones.  The speed--how fast you typed.  I think my speed--I was about 125 words a minute.  I was a whiz.  And they had a typing test, and upon graduation, whoever the fastest typist was, you won a typewriter.  Well clearly, I had no--I had no competition even.  And what they did, when we were supposed to have the test, is that they gave the test--and I won the test like hands down.  They gave the test again, and they sent me on an errand at the time of the test for the school, intentionally, so I would miss it.  And so when I didn't win, I was stunned.  I was so hurt.  I was crushed.  I was like, "How could I not win?  Everybody knows that I'm the fastest typist in the school."  What they wanted me to say is that I learned to type at Jones Commercial.  And I would always say, "I learned to type at Cortez Peters [Business College, Chicago, Illinois]," which I did.  I guess I wasn't doing the right thing--saying the right thing.  And so they gave the typing test three times.  Because the girls went to the principal and said, "It's not fair."  I didn't go but some of my classmates went and said, "It's not fair."  And they gave it again, but they still chose to give the--the typewriter to another student.  And the lesson in that--my mother [Mildred Hartman] said to me--'cause I cried on stage when they awarded the typewriter at graduation, I just cried because it was just so unfair--and my mother and father [Herman Hartman] afterwards said, "You can have any typewriter in the world that they make.  You can go pick your typewriter out." And when I got home, my mother had bought me a typewriter for graduation and the next day my father took me, and I wanted an IBM [International Business Machines].  And he bought me an IBM typewriter.  And the lesson was life is not always fair, and sometimes you are the best and sometimes you, you do win, but it doesn't mean you'll always get the prize.  But my father and mother both--they're--they were saying to me, "But you can get it another way.  Fortunately we can buy it for you."
Story_ID: 8132
Speaker 1: Now what about socially there?  If you were, you know--like dating and things like that?  What--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, at Jones [Commercial High School, now Jones College Prep] at that time, Jones was pretty much an all girl's school, so--you didn't classroom dating.  But let me tell you what they did and my parents objected to this for me.  I was a little younger than most of the students at Jones, and they dated the U--is it the USO [United Service Organizations] Boys?  They would bring the--the [U.S.] Navy and the soldiers in, and they would have these dances and parties like at the Hilton [Chicago] Hotel  [Chicago, Illinois] or something.  And so they would bring those boys to--those young men to the school and the girls would--that's who they dated.  So I can remember one day saying to my mom [Mildred Hartman] that I wanted to go to one.  And she was like, "Well who are these--where are these guys coming from?"  And I was telling her, "You know, from the [U.S.] Army or from the Navy."  And she was like, "Oh no! Not you.  You will not--you're not ready for that, you're not going to date any, any Army or Navy guys."  And she got pretty angry about that, 'cause she went to the school to say, "What--what's going on here?  Why are these girls going out?"  Hermene never went.  I never got to one of those parties at all.  My social life was not at Jones, and one of the things my parents said is, "You have to go to Jones to learn.  You don't have to socialize there."  But there was very little socializing at Jones.  My social life was at home with my peers in, in the neighborhood.  And I still went and participated in activities at [Wendell] Phillips High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 8133
Speaker 1: You know, I have to ask this, Hermene, 'cause I just--where does your name come from?
Speaker 2: Hermene?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There has--has there--?  Have you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My father's name was Herman [Hartman].
Speaker 1: Herman.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I'm named after my father.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.  So that--so you're named after your father?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  [unclear].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Where did this German name come from?  Right?
Story_ID: 8134
Speaker 1: Was it assumed that you were going on to college?  Or--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never a doubt.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And so what did you want to do at that point?  Did you have a sense of, you know, what you, you particularly wanted?
Speaker 2: Well again, I was a little younger than most.  I think I was about sixteen when I graduated.  And very honestly, I was confused.  I wanted to go to the University of Mexico [Mexico City, Mexico], because it was exotic and it was Mexico.  I wanted to go to Northern [Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois]--a lot of my friends went to Northern.  I wanted to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but when it came time to go, I didn't want to go.  I really did not want to leave home.  And my mother [Mildred Hartman] was saying, "Well you're going somewhere.  You gotta go somewhere.  You're not going to stay at home."  And we were reading the paper, and there was a special--some special classes at the City Colleges [of Chicago] which was then Loop [Junior College, later Harold Washington College].  And one Monday morning, she said, "This is where you're going.  Go register, and then you can decide where you want to go and transfer."  Well, I went to Loop [Junior College] and I loved it, and didn't want to transfer.  And I stayed there for about a year and a half, and then went to Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]--transferred to Roosevelt University.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you--when did you declare a major?  Or did you?
Speaker 2: At Roosevelt [University]: sociology.  I liked the behavioral sciences, so sociology and psychology. They were my majors
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And I saw--I saw--I saw that in your background, and I was wondering what attracted that--attracted you to that?
Speaker 2: Well, at Roosevelt, there was a professor named St. Clair Drake [sociologist], and I wanted to study under St. Clair Drake.  That was a big attraction for me for going to Roosevelt [University].  Dr. Drake had written 'Black Metropolis' [along with Horace R. Cayton]--wonderful research, it's still a classic--and he was an anthropologist, an urban anthropologist, and those sciences interested me a lot.  St. Clair Drake was just magic.  A wonderful lecturer.  And I went to Roosevelt [University] really because of St.Clair Drake and Dr. [Charles V.] Hamilton who is a political scientist.  Those, those, those were some principles that really, really did influence me at that time.  I thought human behavior's just absolutely fascinating.  At one point, I wanted to study art.  I wanted to study the philosophy of art, and it didn't make sense to my father [Herman Hartman] at all.  And he was like, "Art is something you buy, and it's something you do, but you--what are you going to be in art?  Forget it."  My father was also always saying to me, "There's only one course in the world, and it's called business.  So you either take it now or you learn it later.  But why don't you just go on and take it so you can learn it."  But sociology was where my heart was--and sociology and psychology and the anthropologies.  That's what I majored in.
Speaker 1: So what-what--what were your thoughts of what you wanted to do with that?  I mean I understand that you--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Write--I wanted to write books.  I wanted to do studies--conduct studies, do research and I wanted to write.  I wanted to write books.
Story_ID: 8135
Speaker 1: And when you graduated--well you know, let's talk about--were there things influencing you in--that were happening in Chicago [Illinois] at the time that were influencing you?
Speaker 2: At that time, I got involved with the Civil Rights Movement--Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] when I was still at Jones [Commercial High School, now Jones College Prep, Chicago, Illinois].  They were boycotting the schools: the Ben Willis Wagons [classrooms in trailers], you might remember.  And I can remember in school at Jones, all eleven of us, of the black students, we got our signs.  My mother [Mildred Hartman] wouldn't let me go march.  She was always afraid I would get hurt.  And so I didn't go march, but we marched at school.  Inside we marched and that was our protest with our signs.  I recall that.  And in college at Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois],  my mother was alerted in seeing Rev. [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] here,  Rev. [James] Bevel and [Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.].  My father [Herman Hartman] was a part of the original businessmen's group, kind of the round table, that met with Rev. Jackson and met with Dr. King at the Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois].  And my father would come home and talk about that, talk about the economic development and so forth, in their, in their meetings.  Being a--there was [boxer] 'Joe Louis Milk', there was Pepsi-Cola, there was a guy who had Wonder Bread [distribution].  And one of the problems that they had, commonly, was getting their products on the shelves of the stores beyond the ma and pa stores, but into the chain stores.  At that time, the stores--the large chain stores were national, and A&P [Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company grocery store] and Walgreens [pharmacy], and getting their product on those stores, and Rev.[Jesse] Jackson was going to assist and help in those efforts.  So I had heard about that for a long time at dinner.  I was shy, and my mother was kind of encouraging, "You ought to go and--go up there and volunteer."  And I didn't, because I wanted to get paid.  I wanted to be paid.  I had great secretarial skills and I thought, "I'm not volunteering.  They can pay me."  Well, when Dr. King got killed, I had the biggest guilt, because I had the opportunity to work with him and I didn't because I just wanted to get paid.  And after that, after his death, I went and--to 47th Street which is where the Operation Breadbasket office was at the time.  And I remember going everyday and I sat from nine [A.M.] to five [P.M.] every single day, in the outer office.  And one day Jesse Jackson came out, and I said, "You know, I've been sitting here.  I want to volunteer.  Nobody's asked me what I could do.  Nobody's paid attention to me, and I'm not coming back next week." And he said, "Well what can you do?"  And I told him, I said, "Well I can type and I know how to run office and I know how to do this."  And he says, "Well, you're crazy to be sitting up here for a whole week and just sitting there.  Why didn't you speak up?" Well I was that shy.  I was really that shy.  And he took me to Rev. [Willie T.] Barrow and said, "I got somebody I think that might work with you."  And that's how I got involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  And my mother was encouraging that, because I was so very, very shy.  And she says, "This--this can be good for you.  I think it will help you blossom, help you develop."
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So you were--you were--were you still in your teens, or--sixteen or seventeen?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was seventeen.  I was in--I was in college.  I was all of seventeen years old.
Story_ID: 8136
Speaker 1: So when you finished college, you were about twenty then?  Right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--so it's time for you to finish college.  What are your--what are your--it's your thoughts to get a job?  Or--?
Speaker 2: I went and worked.  I was in an executive program at Carson Pirie Scott [department store] in retail and they took--all you had to do was have a college--graduate degree.  And I went to work for Carson Pirie Scott.  I lasted all of nine months.  It was a great experience, because I did learn the retail business and the ins and outs and learned a lot of stuff.  I was--I had about forty people working for me, and learned the whole gamut of retail.  And that was the purpose of the training--it was executive training.  And we had to do inventory.  I hated inventory.  That's the worst thing you can do is--I was in children's clothing--is to count those little socks and count those little panties and count those little undershirts.  Muhammad Ali [boxer] was--was fighting then, and one of the ladies I worked with made a terrible racist remark about Ali.  Something about his big mouth.  And I took offense to it.  And we got into a real bad argument, and I threw those socks and those little undershirts and those little panties down, and I said, "I'm gone.  I'm out of here.  Who wants to do this?" And I went and enrolled in graduate school.
Story_ID: 8137
Speaker 1: So you go to graduate school.  And your thought?  You're still going in sociology.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Sociology.  Majored in sociology, was in a special program, double-degreed program where you did your masters in your discipline as well as in the philosophy of education.  And students were being trained to go into the community college system.  I think there was a shortage on community college professors, and so we were being particularly trained for the community college.  Part of the internship was to work at a community college and to teach your discipline.  And for me, I was assigned to City Colleges of Chicago.  So that internship lasted for about twenty years.
Speaker 1: I was gonna say, that's amazing
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That was--that was my--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) That's how it came about?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now the City College system.  How old is it here?  Hermene, was it--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) City College system I think in Chicago dates back to 1911.  It's an old--It's an older--one of the older systems--.
Speaker 1: So do you think there was an affiliation that the--you know.  This program had been created to help feed, you know, people into it?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's exactly what the program was to do--.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so let's talk about your whole experience with, you know, City Colleges because you worked in a whole variety of different capacities.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, even some as a consultant.
Speaker 2: I started off as a professor in sociology, and I was the only black on my staff at that time.  And so I was learning to teach and learning to communicate and learning sociology and learning the system and so forth.  I taught in a program called CAP--College Acceleration Program.  That was a program whereby we gave instruction, college instruction, to high school students.  And they really got kind of a jump start by a year into their college careers.  We went to their campuses, so--I had about four schools. [Robert] Lindblom [College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] became one of the schools that I became attached to and always insisted on going back to.  So I did that for a while.  And sociology, psychology, some history is what I taught.  And then I got tired of teaching and kind of bored.  It was always changing.  The CAP program I liked very much, but then they began to send me to other kinds of programs and sometimes I was the youngest one in the class.  And then Dr. Salvatore Rotella was a--Sal was my teacher, when I was a student.  And Sal had become the president, I think, of one of the schools.  And when--he tapped me when he went to become chancellor and said, "Would you like to--would you like to go with me, would you like to help with media?"  Well on the side, I was always doing medias.  I was always doing media relations.  I was producer at CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System]--at one point I had two jobs--but see, I loved media and I was always doing it.  Did a lot of things for Rev. [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.], did the expos ['Operation PUSH Black Expo'].  We started doing the expos one--one year.  When I was in grad school, we put the expos together, and so I was always doing something else.  Well, my work week was only twelve hours a week, so there was plenty of time to do other things.  And so I became the development communications director at City Colleges for the system, and I wanted to build campaigns, and approach education through advertising, very much like you do with a product to raise and increase enrollment.  And we did that, and eventually I became vice chancellor of external affairs.
Story_ID: 8138
Speaker 1: Now when you-I--I want to go back to the CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System, WBBM-TV in Chicago, Illinois] days.  Was that when Warner Saunders [television personality] was the host?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Warner was the host.  I was producer of Warner's show.  We actually had double jobs.  Warner was my boss on one job, I was Warner's boss on another job.  Warner was the host on CBS,  I was the producer.  And then we ran the Community Affairs Department and Warner was head of the Community Affairs Department and I was the assistant in the Community Affairs Department.  So those jobs--that was a very interesting, interesting job.
Speaker 1: So talk about that whole experience because even the whole way that that, you know, that was new.  You know that was--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That was new.
Speaker 1: It was the first type of its show.  Right?  I mean the--was it the first?  I mean I know they had--He had hosted another show.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Warner had hosted a show at ABC [American Broadcasting Channel, WLS-TV in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: With Daddy-O--with Daddy-O [Daylie disc jockey].
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) With Vernon--with Daddy-O Daylie and I think eventually Vernon Jarrett [journalist, television personality] maybe?
Speaker 1: I don't--I think Vernon was producing it.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) But Daddy-O Daylie--That's right.
Speaker 1: And Herb Kent [disc jockey] was supposed to be involved but he sort of got axed out or something. I think he was producing it.
Speaker 2: Oh.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well Warner left ABC and went to CBS and became the producer.  I was recruited by Wesler into the job.  I had no experience--didn't know whether I could do it.  I had done the expos.  And when it was presented to me I was like, "I don't know if I can do this."  And he said, "Oh yeah.  You can do it.  If you know the community and if you can put an expo together, believe me, this is easy for you."  And I fell in love with television.  Absolutely fell in love with it.  Warner was great to work with.  He's--Warner's a quick study, and very easy, easy study.  And I walked into a control room and was told, "You are now a producer.  Get your show together.  You got sixty minutes to do it."  And we bumped right up on news.  Our show was taped right before news which means there's no--absolutely no time to waste, because news is as you know is just prime, and you always do the news.  So I learned how to produce real, real quick--became very resourceful, and I loved it.  And that was my--that was my first introduction into--into media.  And I absolutely loved it.
Story_ID: 8139
Speaker 1: [Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.] , one Saturday after one of the [Operation] Breadbasket [economic advocacy organization] meetings, we were talking and he said, "You know, we need a fair.  We need to put some kind of fair together where we can showcase our business people--where we can actually see their goods and their services and their wares. And you know, what we do and we need to show it to ourselves, but we also need to show it to a larger audience."  And that Sunday morning, the next morning, went over to his house.  We had a meeting and I said, "Jesse, I think we can do a big trade fair and we can have booths and so forth." And I had heard that Mr. Claude Barnett, Etta Moten's [Barnett] husband had put something on like this years ago [in 1940].  It was called, 'The Negro Exposition,' and I did not know Mrs. Barnett but I called and asked her could I come and talk to her about it.  And she--that was the first time I met her.  And I went over and she told me about the fair and how it was organized and structured and so forth.  So I went back to Jesse and said, "What we need to put on is an expo.  It will be an exposition." And so we agreed to do it and we got the businessmen to support it and that's how it was born.  We went to the Amphitheater and the very first [Black] Expo was put together in six weeks.  We had a business component, we had a cultural component, and we had an entertainment component.  We went to Motown [Records] and to Charles Avant and got entertainment.  But that was the first Expo and it grew.  And the way I got into PR [public relations] and learned PR--is again--we were--Jesse and others, we were sitting around Richard Thomas.  We were talking and Jesse said, "What if nobody comes?" And that was probably on a Thursday.  "What if nobody comes?" And we began to say, "Well how will we let people know about it?" And someone took the schoolteachers and said, "Well we can make it a field trip." And I got the assignment of, "Well you've got to call the media."  And I did.  Well, when we opened up, I think we had about 50,000 people on our first day.  Mayor [Richard J.] Daley had called down to--asked did we have a permit?  And Jesse asked me.  He said, "Do we have a permit?" And I said, "What is a permit?" I know we did not have a permit 'cause I didn't know we had to have a permit.  And Darryl Grisham got involved in whatever permit we needed but Jesse said to [Mayor Richard J.] Daley, "Why don't you come down here and tell the people you're gonna close it." And it was about 50,000 people.  People were lined up like you just wouldn't believe.  That was the prettiest sight.  That was most wonderful sight, is when we opened those doors and people from everywhere came.  And the Expo grew as--as we got a little better at it, the entertainment grew to really be top, top drawer--top notch--probably the best entertainment of its kind in America.  The cultural component grew.  I became the cultural director and really did all of the cultural things and the actual business exposition grew.  And I think I did it for maybe about three, four years.  One year, I worked the whole year on it and went to Washington [D.C.] and other places just bringing in art and archival kind of things into the Expo.  It was filmed.  It was in a movie called 'Save The Children'.  But that became--that was my first event.
Speaker 2: Well this is--this is very significant really.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It was.
Speaker 2: When you think about it. Wow.
Speaker 1: It was.
Story_ID: 8140
Speaker 1: Describe [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity, economic/social advocacy organization] in those days.  You know, I want you to give things of context because this is just--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, it was [Operation] Breadbasket--in those days it was Breadbasket, and it was just a group of young, vibrant, energetic, focused civil rights people doing things--being creative.  [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson, Sr.] identified me early kind of as a creative person.  I was always trying to put some campaigns together, and put some issues together, and put some slogans together, and put some things together.  And so out of that,  I probably did develop into some media kind of focuses, and that's really what it was.  We had a lot of fun.  Saturday mornings we met and all day Saturday just kind of worked.  Sometimes there were protests and pickets but it was a--it was a very, very exciting time.  Breadbasket eventually went into PUSH.  The [Black] Expos began to make a lot of money and it was still--Breadbasket was still a part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  Well, this event was making more money than any of the others in the country, and the money was being sent down to Atlanta [Georgia].  And so one year--oh, I don't know what the dollars were, but we made a significant dollar to support the organization.  And we told Jesse, "Don't send this money to them.  This is our money."  And he didn't and that was the break away.  That was the real reason for the break away from SCLC.
Speaker 1: See I don't think a lot of people know that Operation Breadbasket was part of SCLC.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: There were other satellite operations around the country.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Throughout the country.  That's right.  That's right, oh yes.  That was a division of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
Story_ID: 8141
Speaker 1: You're still involved in the city college [City Colleges of Chicago] system.  But you're playing a role.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Teaching.  I started that year, '84 [1984], '83 [1983] in my full-time teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was there in your teaching, was there any area that you focused on or were intrigued, you know, with, or that was your focus from, from--I mean you were teaching you said, sociology and--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sociology and psychology.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Was there any particular area that you were sort of focused on in that way?
Speaker 2: In sociology?  No.  I did general psych and general, general sociology.  It was the introductory courses.  And then later as you grow into teaching then we began to focus.  I've done ' Marriage and The Family,' I've done 'Child Development.'  When Alex Haley came out with his book 'Roots' [published in 1976], we did a special history course, a kind of a--more of a sociology history, if you will, a kind of an anthropology history.  So my teaching began to--began to grow.
Speaker 1: What are the things that you're probably most proud of--your--of your twenty year stint there?
Speaker 2: In teaching?
Speaker 1: No, at City Colleges period.  I mean you taught and you went into development, you know, I mean you've done a lot of things there.
Speaker 2: The proudest thing in teaching--probably made a difference in some lives that meant--they--that some students really did go on to college and become--I see some students now, doctors and lawyers.  And they'll say to me, "Ms. Hartman, you made a difference."  You don't know and you don't think you're making a difference, but I gave a lot to my students, you know.  I'm pretty passionate and you do something, you do it right.  I gave my all to a lot of those kids.  Might have changed some lives, might have made sure that some people got educated, might have gave some people some confidence and some insurances that you can do it.  That, that--I feel--I feel real good and real proud about that.
Speaker 1: Now what was your father [Herman Hartman] thinking at this time?  Was he thinking that you should be in business instead, you know?
Speaker 2: No.  He was okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He was--He was fine with it.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was--he was okay.  I think my father always knew I would go into business.  I think in the back of his mind, it's like--he would, "You'll just--you know--you'll get there, you'll get there".  I always had projects.  I was always doing something and he would say little things like, "One day, one of these projects is gonna take off for you, one day."
Story_ID: 8142
Speaker 1: And when you--with--with the City Colleges [of Chicago, Illinois], I'd just like you to comment on what their importance here in the city, you know.  What you see sort of as their importance?  There's been--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The role.
Speaker 1: The role, because there's been a lot of trying to fix it, trying to fix it, trying to fix it.
Speaker 2: Well, trying to fix it--most of it is not understanding it.  City College is--the role of City College is for adults to be able to go to school.  City College has four distinct programs, and the confusion in the "fix it" is always confused within these four programs.  Everybody thinks you're supposed to go to college, you're supposed to graduate.  That's not the goal of all the programs.  There is the liberal arts portion which is, you're going for your two years and then you're going to matriculate into a senior school.  But there's the adult school and the adult college is enhancement courses.  You want to go to Paris [France], so you go and take a course at City College and you take French--so you didn't graduate.  Well you didn't intend to graduate.  Or, you go take a computer course, or you go take a flower-making course.  You're not supposed to graduate.  You're just doing enhancement kind of courses.  That's where it always gets confused because you enrolled a hundred thousand people and only twenty thousand graduated.  That's where a lot of mass confusion becomes.  The other course is the GED [General Educational Development Test] course.  A lot of people are going just to do a GED, or just to learn the language, just to get up to speed to go into the world of work.  And then of course, the last is the vocational ed [education].  It's to learn a trade, learn nursing.  City Colleges does an awful lot of training in nursing.  So when they put all these four programs together and they say, " You did not achieve your goal because out of this one hundred thousand students, only twenty thousand graduated.  Well, probably only twenty of the twenty thousand were in a course to graduate.  So, that's always the "fix it."  But the role of City College--there's a lot of students start off in City College that wouldn't have the opportunity or the wherewithal to go into the four year university had they not gone to the community college.  So I think it's a lot of confusion on the role of City College.  And in my job as--external affairs director, that was something we were always trying to straighten out.  One year, I brought the media in to workshop them on--let us understand what these different programs are, because when you guys write about this stuff, you're off--you're just offbeat.
Story_ID: 8143
Speaker 1: And is there--is there anything else that you'd like to say about that experience at City Colleges [of Chicago, Illinois]?  Any other--?  'Cause I mean you had--you--like external affairs.  That was for--they--there was a remaking, right?  Weren't they trying to make--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I redid the--I did--that's a new department.  And I think brought City College into the now.  They were functioning pretty much like it was 1940s where you just took out an ad in the '[Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper] and "Y'all come" was the approach.  As opposed to really doing some media strategies and some media tactics.  City Colleges still rassles with that, if you will.  So I think I made a real contribution in bringing them into the real--the real age, making them contemporary, making them current.  And it was successful, because our enrollment increased by about 25 percent.  So it worked.  Good experience, I had some very good days at City College.  I also had some very bad days at City College.  Got into a political--I don't know, my ease (unclear) at City College, and it was ugly for me.  I was ousted, and some people were angry because I knew what I was doing, and--and they didn't.  But that was a good experience in the long run, too, because had I not gone through that, I'd probably still be there.  And perhaps I wouldn't have started 'N'DIGO' [newspaper].
Story_ID: 8144
Speaker 1: So when you--then you sat up your own media consulting firm?
Speaker 2: I always had the Hartman [Publishing] Group, [Ltd.].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: Since '78 [1978,] because I was always doing little special projects: openings of theaters, cultural things, audience development, some research, some marketing research kind of things.  I always had something in the Hartman Group that was going on--media, radio programs--always something.
Story_ID: 8145
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the whole--how 'N'DIGO' [newspaper] actually started.  And--so I'd like you to, you know, discuss it.  I mean you talk about sitting around.  But I want to know even before you were sitting around the, you know, the table talking to friends and had brought them together.
Speaker 2: Oh, about 'N'DIGO'?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Right, right.
Speaker 2: Well the thought kind of came up--the original thought of 'N'DIGO' kind of was stimulated by looking at what the major papers did during Black History Month.  And I found it to be insulting.  It was either stupid--so stupid until it was like what is this?  Or, insulting.  Not with intent--more with ignorance--a cultural ignorance, a social ignorance.  And I went to the '[Chicago] Sun-Times' [newspaper] to say--and took one of their issues on black history to say, "This is terrible.  It has no sense, it has no content, it has no style.  It's just something that you threw together.  Would you allow me to put an issue together for you on black history that has a sense to it, that has a content to it, and that people will be proud of and will use?"  And they said, "Okay, fine."  And I said, "Don't pay me.  Just let me do this."  And I did.  I did a special Black History Month issue for the 'Sun-Times'.  They did the advertising, and I put the content together.  Well it was really kind of a test of would something like this work.  Is it an acceptable piece, how do you do a print medium?  And it was a big success.  It was in all of the papers and teachers began to call the 'Sun-Times' for it.  And the 'Sun-Times' was selling it for two dollars by itself.  It was all of eight pages--I think eight to twelve pages.  Well, you know, my lights went off.  It's like, "Wow!  This was all right.  It worked."  I realized--and it was really from the [Mayor] Harold Washington days that we didn't have a medium where we discussed ourselves to ourselves or could interpret ourselves.  And I think Harold got a lot of bad raps early on.  Well, when Harold died [1987] and I wrote a piece on what it would mean to black Chicago [Illinois] if we lost city hall.  And I had done some op-ed pieces before, and I couldn't get it printed.  And it came to the 'Sun-Times' and one of the things always in rejecting, always ask, "Why?"  Because that's your growth to learn why didn't you accept something.  And I was--and I wanted to know is this written well?  And they said, "Oh it's written very well, but it doesn't fit our format.  That's not our message."  Then I went to another paper, went to the '[Chicago] Defender' [African American newspaper] to try to get it printed and they wouldn't print it either.  And very honestly, someone pulled me aside and said, "We have to survive after the election.  We're not going to print this."  I went back and told my friends, who had encouraged me to write the piece--Paul King was the individual--and I said, "Paul, I can't get it printed."  And he said, "Go back to the 'Defender' and tell them we're gonna take out a full page ad."  They still wouldn't print it.  It was a really strong piece and I said, "It's a shame that we don't have a vehicle, but we really don't have a vehicle."  So Paul said, "Let's make a vehicle.  You know how to do that stuff.  Do it."  And he challenged me.  And that's the true story--I mean, I thought about it and thought about it and thought about it.  Well, I got ill and I was convalescing for about six weeks.  I read Mr. [John H.] Johnson's [publisher] book.  John Johnson's book three times while I was sick.  That's where 'N'DIGO' was born.  And so part of my mental therapy was everyday for about four hours I worked on the development of this publication.  I would ask people what they liked, what they didn't like, what do you want in a publication, what don't you want?  I probably got on everybody's last nerve.  When I got well enough to get up, I went out and I would go to the bus stop.  I would go the grocery store.  I would go to church, and I would pass out questionnaires so I could really--I was really doing my marketing research.  That's how 'N'DIGO' was really born.  After I got it all together on what you liked, what you didn't like, what you wanted to see, why you didn't want it, what was wrong with this, what was right with this--it gave me the pieces to put in a publication.  I called--when I really got it in my head I'm going to do this--I called some of my friends: photographers, graphic artists, writers, cartoonists.  Well they weren't working for major papers anyway and they probably weren't going to.  And I said, "Let's stop talking about what other people don't do.  Let's leave them alone.  Let's do this."  And I laid out the publication to them and I gave everybody an assignment.  On--you do this story, you do this, you do this, you do that.  And I said, "Let's stick together, I'm going to do this and I don't want anyone to ask me about money for a year--one year, give me one year.  Because I've got to go out and I've got to sell advertising every, every, every week--every month."  And I didn't know how to do that and it worked.  And after one year, Derrick [K.] Baker, who still writes for us, came to me and said, "Hermene, you're now going to pay me."  And he had an idea for a column.  He wanted to do a column and--and we started doing his column.
Speaker 1: Now you--how--with a lot of people, you know, as we often have inspirations about things, and you said, "You were doing your market research out there."  What did you learn?  Because a lot of people would've probably said, "Well we have the 'Defender.'  What could this offer that we don't?"
Speaker 2: I found people had the 'Defender,' but they didn't respect it.  It wasn't a reference that was used.  It was a paper that we were accustomed to, but it wasn't a paper that we respected.  You heard things like, "They can't get the names right, they can't get the pictures right, they can't spell right."  I got a lot of the negatives, and kind of the backside of the 'Defender' being "the offender."  We got the respect of the history and the historic value of the 'Defender,' but the 'Defender' wasn't really respected as our voice, as a profound voice, as a paper.  I got a lot of, "Well they can cover this, or they could cover that, or why did they cover this and not that?"  I got that kind of--that kind of thing from the 'Defender' about the 'Defender.'
Story_ID: 8146
Speaker 1: Now, how--what were your other holy grails?  You know, you had--in terms of what you were envisioning?  What were the things that you thought were extremely important?  I mean you have beautiful cover--you know, there--it--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I thought that was--
Speaker 1: From the beginning, it had style.
Speaker 2: It always--I thought that was--that was a missing link--is that our publications were press release papers.  They were printing press releases as opposed to writing stories--original stories.  I didn't think our papers had perspective, didn't have interviews, didn't have the quality of originality, didn't have creativity.  The cover came from, "Let's do something between a magazine and a newspaper look."  Warner Saunders [television journalist] said to me about three or four years after--after 'N'Digo' [newspaper] was on the market and developed, Warner said, "You don't realize why you put the pictures on the cover, do you?"  And I said, "Yeah, because it's pretty and it's this and it's that."  And Warner says, "Your background is television, Hermene.  You see, you see it, you see the story--not write the story."  And he was probably right, is that we are a TV generation, and we are more--a very, very visual people.  That has become very much in our society.  And so I was kind of rebelling, I guess, against all the--all the type on the front page of the paper, and said, "Let's do a pretty picture so it'll look like a magazine."  But from the research that I did, and just laying papers out, the picture you gravitated to, and the picture you picked up.
Speaker 1: Now--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And now we have pictures on all the papers (laughs).
Speaker 1: Now what--what do you--what were the other sort of ingredients, you know, that you felt were important in this whole launch?  Because it--it was successful from the first.  I mean it met with great appeal--I mean people were very receptive.  You know, it was something that was fresh, and it had a nice look to it and all of that.  So I'm just saying, you know, did you--you know, sometimes people fall into things, but it sounds like you didn't really fall into it.  That you--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was innovative.  It had a lot of creativity to it.  Keep in my mind, when we got into this business, new--computers were new.  And there were things in design that we started off doing that others had to grow into and learn how to do.  It was our initial step--it was our first step, it was not a growth for us, it was automatic for us.  The photography--I'd worked with many photographers--appreciated, respected photography and thought that this would be an art form that I wanted you to want to be on the cover of  'N'DIGO' and for it to mean something.  It was going to be a pretty picture, but it was going to be a great story.  So that was--that was a real signature, and it did become a real signature.  My page--I was writing to fill pages.  I was writing to write to say we need some social commentary.  It's not that just 'A-B-C' happened, but why can't we write about everything?  Why do--why do black reporters have to write about urban affairs exclusively?  Why can't we write about world affairs?  Why can't--we're very fashionable.  Why can't we write about fashion?  So it was kind of looking at all of what didn't happened for whatever the reasons were.  And like, we know we like this, we know this works, we know this happens.  So why not take it on, why not write about it, every single issue.  And that's what we did.  So it became a lifestyle.  It was really kind of reflection of a lifestyle with controversy, with commentary, with interpretation, with analysis, with gossip, with some substance, with some history.  My slogan was, "Style, Sense and Substance" and that was the criteria.  And if it meant style, sense and substance, then it qualified to be in 'N'DIGO.'
Story_ID: 8147
Speaker 1: I had a team in place in the beginning.  Some of the original players, Kai El'Zabar was managing editor and started off in a writer and in a creative vein.  Doyle Wicks--Doyle Wicks is a photographer and does distribution of the paper.  David Smallwood, who's just a wonderful writer, and Derrick [K.] Baker [writer] assembled as the core.  A guy named, John Pinkney, was our first person to do layout.  So there was a core of people in that pretty much is the--is the core.  I was the one doing sales, trying to sell it to people.  And then those other people were creative, photography, kind of been the creative editorial aspect of the paper.
Speaker 2: And do you think that your team building was similar to John [H.] Johnson [publisher] and his team building in many ways?  Or--see I don't know so much about--I mean I know even his book.  I don't know if he--he doesn't talk--he doesn't talk about having assembled a team.  You hear about his mother, you know, sort of doing that part.  But over the years, he's had personalities that involved with--you know, have been identified.  Right?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Like Lerone Bennett [Jr., writer] and Herb Nipson [executive editor, 'Ebony' Magazine] and so forth.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Lerone Bennett, right.
Speaker 1: There's always been a team here.  This has not been a Hermene Hartman solo project.  This has been a Hermene Hartman spearhead.  I've been the one to sell the ads and pay the bills, but there's always been input from--from a host of others.  And those have been some great people.  They've--that for whatever reason, their talents were being expressed elsewhere and we came together.  We meshed in having some very firm ideas and some very pointed direction.  Everyone had probably more experience in publishing than I.  My publishing experience actually was from City College [of Chicago, Illinois] from doing much of the printing and the newspapers and so forth at that school--putting those things together for that institution.  And it worked.  Everybody had input, everybody had an idea of how something in particular ought be done.  And I kind of did the template, if you will, and the framework of it, if you will--and hopefully tried to drive home a real standard.
Story_ID: 8148
Speaker 1: Now what would you consider, when you look over, your years of existence, what would you consider significant hallmarks?  You know, along the way or significant developments?
Speaker 2: Each frequency represents a hallmark.  We ['N'DIGO' newspaper] were a monthly.  We started off as a monthly, and then we went to bi-monthly and we were always intended to go weekly.  And then when we--we became weekly in May of '97 [1997]--each of those steps was a real benchmark.  Hiring of staff has been a benchmark.  My first staff person full-time for hire was a lady named Tracy (ph.) who came to us directly out of graduate school. And I--I said, "Tracy, I can't afford to pay you."  And she says, "Make me an offer--anything you offer is okay."  Tracy just wanted to write, get into a writing mode.  So each staff member has been a benchmark.  Each office space that we've had has been a benchmark, and it all represents a soundness and a security of stability.
Story_ID: 8149
Speaker 1: And the--and the '[Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper].  I have to say that the 'Tribune', probably the biggest hallmark of them all because the 'Tribune' taught me the newspaper business.
Speaker 2: Not the '[Chicago] Sun-Times' [newspaper]?
Speaker 1: No.  It was the 'Tribune'.
Speaker 2: Tell--tell--what--what about the affiliation?  Let's talk--'cause the affiliation with the  'Sun-Times' was first.  Right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We printed--our layout, and graphics was done at the 'Sun-Times' initially.  And at one point, we were an insert in the 'Sun-Times.'  The 'Sun-Times'--and we had a little marketing program where on Thursdays--this is when we were monthly--on Thursdays, we went on selected radio stations to say, "Make sure you pick up the 'Sun-Times' this week so you can get your 'N'DIGO' [newspaper]."  We were on [W]NUA, [W]BBM and [W]VON [Chicago, Illinois radio stations] with that message.  And people began to call the 'Sun-Times' from areas that 'N'DIGO' was not in, to say, "So why don't I have 'N'DIGO' in my paper?"  And it presented a problem.  That was one problem.  The other problem that we got that I didn't realize until years after, is that people were calling here, advertising 'N'DIGO,' but they were calling the 'Sun-Times'  to say, "How can we reach 'N'DIGO?'  We would like to advertise?"  And of course, those calls I didn't get because the 'Sun-Times' took them and turned them into their sales.  So we had a good relationship with the 'Sun-Times' for a while.  They did our covers and we did printing here and that was very satisfactory and that was very good.  But it also presented some problems.
Speaker 2: Are there things that you learned during that initial period with them?  You know, also you know--you know, with the--you know, about your audience and things like that?  The reach--It helped to have it as an insert?
Speaker 1: I went from, in one step, from 50,000 to 130,000.  That's almost a triple reach.  So that gave it a lot of legitimacy.  It did give it a lot of reach.  There was a--a growth (snaps fingers) that was just magnificent.  Every time I change the paper, I tried to change the paper.  And part of what the 'Sun-Times' change was, when we did become an insert, is that we went from black and white into color.  And so that was a very visible change.  So I learned what it meant to be an insert into a newspaper.  I learned about layout and--and--and production, but I also learned what it was to be independent.  Those were the lessons.
Story_ID: 8150
Speaker 1: Now the--the other thing.  What--why the decision to go color?  Was that just, you wanted to be more vibrant?  Or was--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More vibrant and I thought it would just give us ['N'DIGO' newspaper] a better presence and more attention, but I thought it would--would just--yeah.  It--it would--it would vibrate a lot more.  Some--there're unsung heroes in the newspaper business.  It's not the people that you see up front.  Your layout and production people are real heroes.  You wouldn't do a paper if you didn't have those guys.  And your distributors--the people who put the paper on the street are heroes.  They're--they're unsung.  We take them for granted.  You don't see them.  They're behind the scenes.  They do the nitty-gritty kind of work.  But if you didn't have those people, you wouldn't--you wouldn't function.
Story_ID: 8151
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that a little bit because what was the strategy about, you know, distribution.  How it was going to be distributed? Because that's what it's all based on, you know.  And--and you were--you were distributing--you--you went to the boxes soon, right?  Where you--.
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no) Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: No.  That's--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No.  No, the boxes came after the '[Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper] affiliation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: We did a unique distribution.  As I looked at how to distribute the papers, psychographically--it was where you work, where you pray, where you shop, where you play.  If I could get you in one of those four places, I had done my job.  So what we did that was--what was unique is we into the churches.  Everyone told me I was insane, out of my mind.  Churches will never take your papers and people do not pick up a paper at church.  Well, for my audience and for my paper, I knew that if I could get the ministers into 'N'DIGO' [newspaper], that I really had a marketing that I couldn't even buy.  To this day, I couldn't buy it.  And the ministers did distribute my paper.  Everyone told me, "It doesn't go like that.  It doesn't happen."  But I know for the black community, the people that I was trying to reach, they were in church on Sunday morning.  What better way to reach them than right there at church?  So that was--that became a real core base for us.  And then everything else became peripheral--where you live, the health club, the restaurants, the pool hall, the beauty salon.  Those became add-on places of where we distributed.  But I was--I was looking at lifestyle patterns.
Speaker 1: And okay.  Let's--what was your audience also telling you at that time?  What were they telling you?  Because you were listening to them.  They were--.
Speaker 2: The audience was saying that we like the paper.  We like the convenience of the pick up.  That it is in our natural kind of habitat, if you will. They were saying--they were responding to the articles: what they liked, what they didn't like.  My page--my publisher's page that I write, the strong positions.  They did like that, that became--that became very well received.  The gossip. People like gossip.  I don't know, why but people love gossip--the pictures.  So I was constantly doing marketing research, listening to the audience say and describe what they liked.
Speaker 1: I know--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Those were some key things.
Story_ID: 8152
Speaker 1: I know it's two different markets but there--were there ever any comparisons between you ['N'DIGO' newspaper] and 'Today's Chicago Woman' [monthly magazine], the publication?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  They compared us to absolutely everything in town--the size, 'Today's Chicago Woman.'  But 'Today's Chicago Woman' is pretty much for a North Shore [suburban Chicago, Illinois] audience.  You see few people of color in 'Today's Chicago Woman,' and it is limited to women-type issues, women professional issues or women personal issues, how-I-look.  I wanted to go way beyond how-you-look kind of issues and the North Shore wasn't necessarily my beat.
Story_ID: 8153
Speaker 1: We ['N'DIGO' newspaper] were at an [Black] Expo and the people from the '[Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper] kept coming to get an 'N'DIGO,' looking at it, and it was as though it was their first time seeing it.  And eventually, I went over to the 'Tribune' booth and said, "Why do you keep coming to get this paper?"  And they said, "Well, we'd like to talk to you."  And they said, "You should be with us."  And that's really how it started.  The next week or so we did have a meeting, and they asked me ten million questions: what are your goals?  How do you see the paper?  What do you know about the newspaper business?  Da-de-da.  Well, I actually knew more about the market, the black market, than I did the newspaper business.  They knew a lot about the newspaper business, and very little on the black market so it was a good fit.  And what that relationship rendered was some financial assistance for growth and development, and it was very, very welcomed at the time.  It meant that their sales people did some selling for us, and what it meant for me was kind of a college, if you will, for learning how to publish a newspaper.  I went to newspaper school and the 'Tribune' is the finest that you can go to, I think.  So it was a very fruitful and a very helpful relationship.  It was a mentoring relationship, and I got some good friends out of it and learned a lot from it.
Speaker 2: That's--that's fascinating in many ways, because you think of the 'Tribune' as sort of this white bastion.
Speaker 1: Well, they are a white bastion, but they have open--open arms.  And if you are business-focused, and if you--people are--people are--in--in this media business, people are always interested in the next creator.  They're always interested in the next one.  If a kid walks through these doors right now and says, "Ms. Hartman, I've got an idea that I think you ought to hear."  I'm always open to that.  I mean, can you imagine who heard the first dot-com business?  Who listened to that?  And the 'Tribune' is very good at trying to keep up with the progression, keep up with the style, keep up with the trends, but they're always looking for the next one, always looking for the new.  And so I think I represented that kind of a freshness and and innovativeness.  And it was--might have been right place, right time.
Story_ID: 8154
Speaker 1: So were there any low points when you look at it?  Where you were concerned about, you know, survivability--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: Or, you know, direction.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure.  At one point, I put a price on the paper ['N'DIGO' newspaper].  It was like, "Boy, if I could collect a dollar or fifty cents for each paper, this would be a lot easier and it wouldn't be so advertising-based."  I did that.  I set up another kind of distribution, went to Charles Levy [Circulating Company] for distribution and I almost went out of business.  We did that for a year and it was the worst year of my business.  Levy has some formulas for distribution--so many go to Skokie [Illinois], so many go to Glencoe [Illinois], so many go to the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And what I had created was really kind of a unique distribution to my market.  And what they did is they gave me some nice numbers, but immediately took me out of the very market that I had created.  So that didn't work for me, that didn't work at all.  You could find my paper in Skokie [Illinois], but you couldn't find it at the church.  And indeed people rebelled.  You heard their voices.  They called to say, "What are you doing?  I want the paper, and I want it where it's always been.  What's wrong with you?"  So for a while I tried a double distribution, and it was just a nightmare.  It was horrible.  Churches--they weren't used to paying for the paper.  So when you put the element of charge on it, and it was a whole foreign element.  So it just didn't work.  So I said, "Forget it.  It'll be free.  It will always be free, and we will enhance the core of the distribution, but I certainly won't change it."
Story_ID: 8155
Speaker 1: Over this period of time, you've become more than 'N'DIGO' [newspaper] the magapaper. And how did the term magapaper come about?
Speaker 2: A hybrid between magazine and newspaper--magapaper.
Speaker 1: I also need you to address the issue of the name?  You know, how the N--.
Speaker 2: I always forget to talk about that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We, again, from some marketing research, we had a couple of names that we were considering for the paper and "Indigo" won.  Everybody kind of liked that.  It's got a nice romance to it.  It's got a nice little spelling to it.  It's nice.  And for me it came out of 'Mood Indigo'--Duke Ellington's 'Mood Indigo.'  And after the marketing research then, 'Indigo,' we settled on that.  But first my lawyers were still checking the copyright usage and the license and so forth of 'Indigo,' to find that Richard Pryor's production company was named 'Indigo.'  And we checked that because it was a production company and not anything in publishing, maybe we could use it.  But then, we found something in New York [New York] that did that wasn't publishing that had  'Indigo.'  Well, I was very anxious to get on the street with the paper.  December '89 [1989] is when the first edition of  'N'DIGO' was done and I was--'N'DIGO' was a paper for the 90s [1990s].  That's the way I termed it, for the new multiculturist was kind of what I was looking at.  And so, I wanted to get out December of '89 [1989].  Well, I had printed my business cards.  I had printed stationery, and I had gone to press with the first issue.  The lawyer was still doing the check and he called to say, "You can't use--you can't use it because it's used."  Well, I began to cry hysterically 'cause I had about $3000 tied up in the paper.  And my mother [Mildred Hartman] said, "What's the matter?"  And I told her, and so she started doodling and she said, "Drop the 'I', use the 'N' with an apostrophe, and spell it differently, and you'll have something original, and you'll have something creative, and you'll have something of your own."  And she did it very, you know, flippant.  She just wrote it and she said, "Just spell it differently and stop that crying and spell it differently."  And she threw the paper at me and she said, "Spell it like that."  And I did, and I said, "Oh my goodness. This is it."  Well I didn't know, you know, the copyright rules and language and so forth, but if you spell it differently you can use it.  And so that, that worked for us.
Speaker 1: So that's--that's a wonderful story.
Speaker 2: Isn't that a great story?
Speaker 1: And--and the lawyer was Mark Jones.  Right?
Speaker 2: The lawyer was indeed Mark Jones.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Now, 'N'DIGO,' what I was getting ready to say--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) So we--so we register Julie, 'N'DIGO' and "magapaper" because that--Mark kept saying, "I think you got something with that magapaper."  So we registered both of those--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's nice.  That's smart.
Speaker 2: As our trademark.  To this day.
Story_ID: 8156
Speaker 1: Well, we've ['N'DIGO' newspaper] done some special events.  We've--I guess we've developed two arms.  One, the core of our business is the newspaper--the weekly newspaper.  And we also do a national--not a national, but we do a annual magazine, 'N'DIGO Profiles,' where we will theme an issue and that issue is an insert in 'Crain's Chicago Business' [magazine] and the 'Chicago Tribune' [newspaper].  This year our theme was entertainment.  And so it's a magazine, and it's a really nice, nice publication.
Speaker 2: Can I ask you, Hermene, from that--what made--what was the genesis--you know, that--how did that come about?  And what feedback are you getting from that?
Speaker 1: From the magazine?  The genesis of the magazine, true story, is I owed the 'Tribune' some money for my printing.  And I needed a big splash to get the money.  And I thought, "Suppose we do a single issue for Black History Month, where we take our primary stories and we put them together and we do this magazine.''  And I kind of as when I go and present and talk, I usually go and show something, 'cause it's much easier to show than to talk.  And so I had put--I had compiled a couple of stories together and I could take my ad rates up significantly.  And it was very special, and I said, "We can insert." So it was kind of looking at, "You all don't do Black History Month so well.  We do that very well.  You do distribution very well.  Let us come up with something that we can both have a win on."  And so that was really how 'N'DIGO Profiles' started.  And then we did it and just had a overwhelming--just an incredible response.  And then, the next year we did it.  And we've done it now for six years as 'N'DIGO Profiles.'
Story_ID: 8157
Speaker 1: We ['N'DIGO' newspaper] were getting calls in the office.  Teachers, parents, and students around August to say, "Ms. Hartman, we're going back to school.  Can you help us?"  Well, I'm not a philanthropic organization, and the answer was, "No, I can't."  And it was buy books, help with tuition, travel arrangements to get to college, that kind of thing.  But I--I began to hear it, 'cause I--it was like, "Why are you calling us for this, you know?"  And I said, "Well you know, we need to do something."  Education is still my very--I'm very close to it.  It's--it's my heart.  And I said, "These kids need some help to go to school."  So I said, "Let's have a party.  Let's have a real big function, and from the dollars that we raise, we will do some scholarships."  That's how the 'N'DIGO' Foundation came about, and that's how our event, that is now the 'N'DIGO' Gala came about.  I loved doing special events.  I always trying to tell somebody, "You ought to do this.  Don't do it like that.  Do this."  But somebody again said to me, "Why don't you just do it for yourself?"  So we did our first gala--and--six years ago at the Terra Museum [of American Art, Chicago, Illinois].  And my idea was to go to various cultural institutions and put on this fabulous wonderful party.  Well, we hit the jackpot.  We went to Orchestra Hall [Chicago, Illinois], and just had a fabulous reception with Ray Charles [singer/composer].  I wanted to do classic performances.  I wanted to do performances with entertainers that you wouldn't see everyday.  They weren't ordinary, that were special, either special because of the kind of music that they did, special because they performed rarely, or special because they in themselves were just special.  When I first started doing the gala, the entertainer I really wanted was Lena Horne [singer].  I just wanted to expose her to some people that perhaps had not been exposed to her before.  Jazz is still a--is--is my heart tug, probably because of my uncle [singer Johnny Hartman].  And I do remember some special performances.  So we put this element of classic performances into the gala, and that we would bring only the best entertainers and those that really had a unique quality to them.  So the first year, we did Ray Charles with an orchestra, at Orchestra Hall.  That was wonderful.  The next year, we did Nancy Wilson and Jerry Butler [singers].  Well, that was a treat unto itself, because of the combination.  And Jerry Butler, it was his first performance at Orchestra Hall.  This year [2001], we will do Natalie Cole [singer].  We will do an R&B [rhythm and blues] at Orchestra Hall.  So the performances have been rare.  They've been special, and they fit the classical performance.  We've grown from five scholarships--this year we will do twenty-two scholarships.  So that's grown.  And again, it's been out of listening to your readers, listening to your audience, paying attention to what people are saying, and then out of some of the creative things that--that I like to do.
Story_ID: 8158
Speaker 1: So what are your plans now for the future, for the publication?  What are your plans for--the 'N'DIGO' [newspaper] organization?
Speaker 2: Well, we like special events, and Donna Hodge is our gala coordinator and our special events coordinator, and she's just growing and developing and likes doing special events.  She's become a real expert.  So we'll probably be doing some more special events.  This February, along with WVON [Chicago, Illinois radio station], we did a business breakfast where we talked about business matters with--with entrepreneur kind of people and some executives in corporate America.  And we talked about some success--of how some businesses have been successful, what their models have been, what their growth and development has been, but what their exit strategies have been.  And that was an important discussion.  I guess, Julie [interviewer Julieanna Richardson], in a way, what we're doing--and I'm developing these entities within--is--I'm--people don't take the black community serious.  The substance they don't--they tend not to see.  And--and--and we are a great consumer.  We're probably the greatest consumers in America.  We spend more money beyond our ability to.  We're very loyal, brand-conscious kind of consumers, but sometimes we miss our own meat, if you will.  We miss our own meaning.  We miss our own substance.  So some of these things that we are doing really focus a real target--a laser beam focus, if you will, on our issues, our substance, and our essence.  The business breakfast--we keep talking about affirmative action.  Well, it may be with us and it may not be, but the truth of the matter is we're on our second and third generation of business people with affirmative action.  And thus, they have hit some heights.  Their businesses are matured and in order for them to grow to the next level, they've got to get way beyond affirmative action.  They've got to get to the quality of business, they've got to get to accessibility, they've got to get to capital.  And some of those businesses need to be looking at some exit strategies--to sell or not to sell--to pass it to the next generation, or do they want it: those kind of issues.  And that's how the business breakfast grew.  And it was just a phenomenal success.  It was amazing that people sat because everybody told us, "We're not coming that early.  People are not gonna sit to listen."  And it was absolutely phenomenal success.  People did want to hear that kind of discussion, and they took it very seriously and it was very helpful to business people no matter what stage of business that they were.  I--and I guess the other thing is that people see us as so monolithic.  We all go to the same church, we all like the same kind of food, we all like the same kind of music, we're all in the same kind of--.  That's not true--that's not true.  There are some differences and we need to recognize those differences and learn and appreciate from them.
Story_ID: 8159
Speaker 1: What do you think your father [Herman Hartman] would say if he could see you?  When did he pass away?
Speaker 2: '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: So it was before the--.
Speaker 2: No.  Wait a minute.  No, no, no.  '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  '93 [1993].  Oh, he saw 'N'DIGO' [newspaper].
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh, he saw the beginning.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he saw.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) So what did he think?
Speaker 2: Oh, he liked it.  He loved the enterprising spirit and would say, "I think you got something here.  Stick with it kid."  He'd say stuff like that.  Distribution--my father was--you know, I mean he knew how to obviously put [soda] pop out there.  And he would say, "Now, this how you distribute."  And he was very helpful in--in--in that.  But I think he would--this would feel good to him.
Story_ID: 8160
Speaker 1: My question for you is, you've interacted with a lot of people.  I mean you've were--you were with [Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.]  actually at--really at the beginning of--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Not quite the very beginning but in the beginning.
Speaker 1: But close enough.  In the beginning.  And, and you know, there are other people that you, you know--when I was reading--you know, Jacoby Dickens [entrepreneur]--you know, the people--Dr. Johnnie--Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon [civic leader], you know, that have had influence.  And I'm wondering if you could comment on those people, who you consider significant in the black experience.  And you know, and how they, you know, have influenced you.
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, it would be my parents [Herman and Mildred Hartman].  I mean clearly it would be my parents.  My uncle, a major influence on me.  He would--and--and what I learned was standard, have a standard for yourself nobody else, have a standard for yourself.  My uncle [singer Johnny Hartman] was--actually offered many, many times--sing another song, sing another style, let's do commercials.  I remember once we were--we were walking in--down Madison Avenue in New York [New York] and he had just--we were meeting for lunch.  And he had just done a Maxwell [House] coffee commercial and in the commercial, he had to do--he had to sound like a coffee cup, (imitates coffee maker), something like that and then you did this little singing.  And he was probably paid more money to do that little commercial and doing that little funny sound than any show maybe he ever did.  But he was mad about it.  And I remember when we got to lunch--and I didn't know what he was talking about--and he was like, "I'm not a damn coffee cup.  What am I doing?"  He was really having a conversation with himself.  And he was like, "I'm not doing that anymore.  It's not me and I don't feel good."  He was often offered Broadway shows.  I remember one show he was offered and he had to dance and he would say, "I'm not a dancer.  I sing and I'm going to sing my songs.  I'm going to sing what I want to sing."  Well, he was a real artist.  He really was a real artist and he knew his voice.  And he knew what he could do and he knew the coffee cup thing wasn't working for him very well, although the money might have been marvelous.  But he knew himself.  So I'm very impressed with that, and I--I think that's very key to living and to doing whatever it is that you do, is to know your standard and to have one.  And not only for you to live up to it, but to make those around you live up to your standard.  I have a standard for excellence here ['N'DIGO' newspaper].  We have fired people for misspelling words.  And very flippantly sometimes they have said, "Who do you think you are?  You can't misspell a word."  Well, with all the spell checks and dictionaries, if you're writing, you ought to be able to spell--period.  There's no reason not to.  Jesse Jackson's been very influential in my life.  What's the extract from him?  Jesse's about the boldest person I know.  He knows no limit.  Telling him that there is a limit is saying to him, "Succeed it, now go succeed it."  I remember conversations on, "I'm going to run for [U.S.] President." And when he first said it, I said, "President of what?"  And he said, "United States.  What do you think?"  And I went like, "Oh, my God.  Are you crazy?"  And he was like, "No.  Now let me show you how I can win.  Let me show you why.  Let me show you the benefit.  Let me show you what this is not only going to do for politics, let me show you what this is going to do for America."  "Politics," his quote.  He said, "Politics will never be the same if I get into this race because I'm going to raise issues that won't get heard before."  He was right.  So go for it.  Take it to the height.  Take it as high and as far as you can and be bold about it.  Don't be afraid.  Don't let people tell you what you can't do.  You always have to know what you can do.  And you don't know what you can do until you try to do it.  Johnnie Colemon's been influential.  Faith--this woman has a faith like you just wouldn't believe.  They told her that she had six months to live.  And thirty years later, she's still waiting for those six months.  But to live life to its fullest and to know that the Kingdom is yours, 'cause God wants you to have it.  I think those are some important--important principles.  My mom has a wonderful style and a wonderful sense, and that's important.  You don't, you--style is not something you learn, you acquire--I think you are either born with it or you're not.  I've been very fortunate to be exposed to some things via my mother and I--I certainly appreciate that.  The whole enterprising spirit that my dad gave me, I think is just most--most valuable.  But from every person that you meet, you should learn something from that person.  And I don't care how young the person is.  I don't care how old the person is.  A person that I just absolutely adore and consider to be my girlfriend is Etta Moten Barnett [actress/singer].  This lady's sense of style and history and travel is absolutely amazing.  And as we were talking about things that people be--in--in previous generations that went through.  This woman had a life that was absolutely incredible.  How could you?  And why did you do this?  And how could this happen at that particular time?  And so forth.  It's absolutely incredible to me sometimes to listen to her.  I think it's important to listen, 'cause we go along in life and so many people don't really listen to hear and to--to take it in.  But I think listening is--is very key.  Some of the professors that I had in school were major in my life, had some major impacts.  And I'll tell you something, Julie [interviewer Julieanna Richardson], a lot of times those professors or those teachers or those people who perhaps meant it to be hard for you or bad for you--every racist teacher I had, I appreciate now.  Because you got a greater learning experience from that person.  To get the "A" from the racism is a much better "A."  It's a much better "A."  You work harder for it.  You learn more with it.  But it's--it's a greater "A."  Every tough experience you have.  The people at City College [City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] did some awful, horrible, terrible nightmarish things to me.  I'll never thank them for it, but in the life experience, I certainly appreciate it.  It toughened me.
Story_ID: 8161
Speaker 1: You have a voice that you speak out and you've had some very--I mean you've taken some pretty controversial stands [in editorials], Hermene.  And I'm wondering how you balance your viewpoints versus, you know, the--the, I would say the obligation that comes with being a publisher of you know, a publication [of 'N'DIGO' newspaper]?
Speaker 2: Well, I do.  I read a lot.  And on some of these things--and I don't know which one or two, or three you might be talking about--but for some of those, after reading a lot about a particular topic, I then will develop my own framework and my own viewpoint.  And I think it's important in the media that we have analysis and interpretation and not just the news, because sometimes it's the interpretation and the analysis that's really more important than the news per se.  I try to speak from my heart and my brain and my sense of the sensibilities of the people that I think I represent.  I don't know.  Give me a topic.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well I mean I--You know, I think--
Speaker 2: Or give me--.
Speaker 1: Well you--Let's see.
Speaker 2: I know which one you're going to say.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Reynolds, Mel Reynolds [former U.S. Congressman from Illinois, convicted of having sex with an underage campaign worker in 1995].
Speaker 2: I knew you were going to say that.
Speaker 1: (Laughs)
Speaker 2: I just knew it.
Speaker 1: (Laughs).
Speaker 2: I wouldn't crush your (unclear).
Speaker 1: Mel Reynolds.  I disagreed with the release from jail.  I think what he did was quite major.  It was offensive.  I think it was offensive to women.  The black woman is not defended.  Historically, the black woman has not been defended or protected.  Anybody, anywhere, anytime can do anything to her and it's okay.  It's not okay.  You cannot, as a [U.S.] Congressman, go to the high school to solicit sexual behavior in the name of your country or in the name of, "Come here, little girl and I will help you go to school."  This is offensive to me.  And I--and let me tell you something about that, because that article was a controversial one and did receive a lot of--a lot of attention.  But I asked a lot of men, "If that would've been your daughter, what would you've done?"  Every last one of them said, "Oh, I would've killed him.  Just--just would've killed him."  And, "No. Not my daughter."  But the daughter that it happened to--should he not be punished for that?  Then I did something else, Julie [Julieanna Richardson, interviewer].  I asked a lot of women, "If your [U.S.] Congressman would have come to your school and would have solicited you, what would've you done?  Would you've gone with your Congressman?  Or would you've said, 'No.'  Or, would you have gone home and told your parents?"  You get a very mixed kind of reaction but most of the women said, "Yeah.  I would have gone with the Congressman."  That's the power of that office and absolutely the misuse of the office that absolutely puts me in a tirade.  I fell out with some of my friends--I criticized.  I criticized [Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.].  I criticized Reverend [James T.] Meeks for the hero's welcome.  The open arms that they gave Mel Reynolds.  Wrong, wrong, and wrong.  He is not a hero, and he does not need to be perceived as one.  Given--and we had discussion and argument, if you will, on that.  And I think it kind of comes down to a man's view and a woman's view.  But at the end of the day, if you know it's a snake, and you take the snake in and the snake bites you, then we all say, "Well, the snake acted like a snake."  Meeks challenged me with, "Don't you believe in forgiveness?"  Sure, I believe in forgiveness, but I don't believe in forgetting.  So that was controversial, but I think it represented a woman's view.  I can't tell you how many anonymous calls I got to say, "Thanks for writing that.  I appreciate it.  That was a real girlfriend.  That was a real woman's point of view."  And the black woman cannot be disrespected, disregarded, and we can't just take anything.  Now we may have to be the ones to stand up and take point and take issue on it, but so be it.
Speaker 2: So really what you're doing is, is stimulating some healthy discussion in the black community--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Absolutely.
Speaker 2: And what it's viewed always as--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Not--not only the black community, because a lot of the--I took on [columnist] John Kass at the ['Chicago] Tribune' [newspaper], Alderman [Edward M.] Burke--I didn't agree with them.  Why did they want Mel Reynolds out?  And if they wanted Mel Reynolds out, why didn't they offer Mel Reynolds a job?  Why didn't the people of Highland Park [Illinois] embrace Mel Reynolds and say, "Come into the Highland Park area and--and live?"  It's just--I think it's wrong and I spoke up about it.  So some of these things I have some real convictions about and I do speak up, and some of these things people--a lot of issues I talk about, people will call me and say, "You really need to write about this.  We really would like to see what you think.  We're waiting to hear what you have to say," So I--I listen.
Story_ID: 8162
Speaker 1: I'll ask it.  But it'll--it can be short 'cause I think you've answered it already.  But I was gonna ask you, do you see yourself as a black female first or black person first?
Speaker 2: Black person first.
Story_ID: 8163
Speaker 1: What would you like to be remembered for?  What would you want to have as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope somebody says I was a good writer.  And that I brought some passion to what I did.  And I hope I made a change.  I hope I changed some things.  I hope I did--enhanced what others have done who went before me.  But I hope that I enhanced it and perhaps took it to its logical conclusion.
Story_ID: 8164
Speaker 1: That's the first LaSalle Street project that Rev. [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] hosted here in Chicago [Ilinois] at the [Chicago] Board of Trade.
Speaker 2: That was two years ago, right?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: So 1999?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: 1999?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr. at Jackson's first LaSalle Street project at the Chicago Board of Trade, Chicago, Illinois, 1999. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8165
Speaker 1: That's Freddy Cole [singer], myself and Dr. Leon Dingle.  And we had just heard Freddy Cole play at the Jazz Showcase [jazz club, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Freddy Cole is the gentleman on the left?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: [Hermene Hartman with jazz singer Freddy Cole and Dr. Leon Dingle at the Jazz Showcase after Cole's performance; (L. to R.:) Freddy Cole, Hermene Hartman, Dr. Leon Dingle; Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8166
Speaker 1: I think I was about two years old when that was taken. I can't tell you where or when, but I was about two years old. That's about all I can tell you, I think (laughs).
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman as a toddler, location unknown, ca. 1949. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8167
Speaker 1: Well, that's my mom [Mildred Hartman] and my dad [Herman Hartman] and me, and I believe that when I came home from the hospital.
Speaker 2: That's really young.
Speaker 1: [A newborn Hermene Hartman comes home from the hospital with her parents Mildred Hartman and Herman Hartman, Chicago, Illinois, September, 1947. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8168
Speaker 1: That was--I think maybe first Christmas with Santa Claus.
Speaker 2: You don't--remember any stories, was this in a department store?
Speaker 1: It was at a department store--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Department store?
Speaker 1: Mandel's [Mandel Brothers Department Store], I believe.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman as a toddler with a Mandel's Department Store Santa Claus, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1948. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8169
Speaker 1: That's an official press picture for 'N'DIGO' [newspaper] from a photo shoot that was done recently.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman in a publicity shot for 'N'DIGO' newspaper, location unknown, ca. 2000. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8170
Speaker 1: This is at luncheon--after a luncheon that celebrated City College's [City Colleges of Chicago] 75th anniversary that I coordinated.  And that's my mom [Mildred Hartman] and my dad [Herman Hartman].
Speaker 2: Do you remember where the luncheon was held?
Speaker 1: At the Chicago Hilton Hotel.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman at the City Colleges of Chicago 75th anniversary luncheon with her parents Mildred Hartman and Herman Hartman, Hilton Hotel Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 1986. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8171
Speaker 1: That's Nancy Wilson [singer] and Dr. Wayne Watson [Chancellor of City Colleges of Chicago] and myself at Chicago's Orchestra Hall [Chicago, Illinois] last year at the N'DIGO' gala.
Speaker 2: That's 2000. What date?
Speaker 1: 2000. June--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) June.
Speaker 1: Fifteenth.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman at the 2000 'N'DIGO' Gala with singer Nancy Wilson and Chicago City Colleges chancellor Dr. Wayne Watson, Orchestra Hall, Chicago, Illinois, June 15, 2000. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8172
Speaker 1: That is Rev. Colemon--[Rev. Dr.] Johnnie Colemon, myself, Sandy Jackson, Jesse Jackson Jr., and my mom [Mildred] Hartman.  And we are in Reverend Colemon's office after church one Sunday.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with Rev. Dr. Johnnie Colemon and U.S. Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr. after one of Colemon's services at the Christ Universal Temple; (R. to L.:) Rev. Dr. Johnnie Colemon, Hermene Hartman, Sandy Jackson, U.S. Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr., Hartman's mother Mildred Hartman, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8173
Speaker 1: That's myself with [U.S.] Congressman Charles Rangel from New York and Dr. Leon Dingle [educator] at a fundraising luncheon that we put together for Rangel and the DNC [Democratic National Committee].
Speaker 2: And where was the luncheon held?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: That is at the Chicago Club [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with U.S. Congressman Charles Rangel (center) and Dr. Leon Dingle at a fundraising luncheon for the Democratic National Committee at the Chicago Club, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8174
Speaker 1: That is me along with Rev. Willie [T.] Barrow at McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] the year I received an award from Operation PUSH/Rainbow Coalition [Rainbow/PUSH Coalition].  That's about three years ago, that's about '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with Rev. Willie Barrow, receiving an award from the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, McCormick Place, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1998. From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8175
Speaker 1: That is Kai El'Zabar ['N'DIGO' newspaper managing editor], myself, and a young lady whose name escapes me--but that was at an expo.  We were participating in an exhibition.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with 'N'DIGO' managing editor Kai El'Zabar (left) and unidentified woman (right) at an expo, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8176
Speaker 1: That's me on my birthday at a facility--a social service facility on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And what we did was we painted the walls.  That was our project, was to paint.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was your project
Speaker 1: And they got me out there on my birthday to do that.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman at a social service facility on the West Side of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8177
Speaker 1: That's myself on the end, Dr. [Leon] Dingle, that lady is the African--South African consulate, [Illinois Attorney General Neil F.] Hartigan--Danny--.
Speaker 2: Neil Hartigan.
Speaker 1: Neil Hartigan, [U.S.] Congressman Danny Davis, Bill O'Connor from GTek [computer company], Dave Wilham, and Mercedy [sic, Mercedes] Lane.  And we were at a meeting regarding--.
Speaker 2: Would it be the African--she was--was she--African trade?
Speaker 1: African trade, international affairs and African trade at the World--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Trade Center, right.
Speaker 1: Trade Center in the Merchandise Mart [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.
Speaker 1: [Hermene Hartman at a meeting concerning African trade and international affairs; (L. to R.:) Hermene Hartman, Dr. Leon Dingle, unidentified consulate from South Africa, Illinois Attorney General Neil F. Hartigan, U.S. Congressman Danny Davis, Bill O'Connor, Dave Wilham, Mercedes Lane, World Trade Center, Merchandise Mart, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8178
Speaker 1: That is me presenting a book on Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--my book on Dr. King ['A Lasting Impression: A Collection of Photographs of Martin Luther King, Jr.' 1983]--to [South African President] Nelson Mandela when he visited Chicago [Illinois].  And that's Bob Bennett on the far right.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with South African President Nelson Mandela and Bob Bennett, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1983. Hartman is presenting Mandela with her photo tribute to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. titled 'A Lasting Impression: A Collection of Photographs of Martin Luther King, Jr.'  From the collection of Hermene Hartman]
Story_ID: 8179
Speaker 1: John [H.] Sengstacke [publisher of the 'Chicago Defender' newspaper], and myself and Kai El'Zabar [managing editor of 'N'DIGO' newspaper] in the background.  And that is at the very first 'N'DIGO' Gala at the Terra Museum [of Art, Chicago, Illinois] in 1996.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with 'Chicago Defender' publisher John H. Sengstacke and 'N'DIGO' managing editor Kai El'Zabar at the first 'N'DIGO' Gala, Terra Museum of Art, Chicago, Illinois, 1996. From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8180
Speaker 1: That's my mother [Mildred Hartman] and myself at Orchestra Hall [Chicago, Illinois] in the year 2000 at the 'N'DIGO' [newspaper] Gala.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with her mother, Mildred Hartman, at an 'N'DIGO' Gala, Orchestra Hall, Chicago, Illinois, 2000.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8181
Speaker 1: [Chicago] United luncheon with Pat Mikowski, Clarence Page, myself, Manny Sanchez, Carolyn Nordstrom and Andrew Young.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman at a luncheon with members of Chicago United, a business organization; (L. to R.:) Pat Mikowski, Clarence Page, Hermene Hartman, Manny Sanchez, Carolyn Nordstrom, Andrew Young, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8182
Speaker 1: [I] turned around and he [U.S. President Bill Clinton] came behind me, and he said, " I like purple."  And I was talking--.
Speaker 2: Oh my God, and it was the President (laughs)!
Speaker 1: He did. And my back was to him and he said--and I heard--and didn't hear it--and he just stood there, and he said, "I like purple."  And when I turned around, I said, "Oh!"
Speaker 2: Oh my God.
Speaker 1: That's what I did, I said, "Oh my gosh!"  And he said, "Would you like to take a picture?"  And you see my mouth, I was like, "Oh.  Okay, fine."  And he just kept saying, "I like purple"--and there was a little trio in the corner.  This was at the Wall Street Project in New York [New York] at--where they ring the bell at?
Speaker 2: Wash--oh, ring the bell, ring the bell.
Speaker 1: Where do you trade?
Speaker 2: The American Stock Exchange.
Speaker 1: At the American Stock Exchange--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Or, New York--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) New York Stock Exchange.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, it was 1998?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with U.S. President Bill Clinton at the New York Stock Exchange, New York, New York, 1998.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8183
Speaker 1: That is Donna Hodge and myself.  Donna is the coordinator of our ['N'DIGO' newspaper] special events.  It is at the Hyatt [Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], and that's at a reception where we coordinated the opening of the law office for Johnnie Cochran and Jim [James] Montgomery [attorneys].
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with 'N'DIGO' special events coordinator Donna Hodge at a reception for the law firm of Johnnie Cochran and James Montgomery, Hyatt Hotel, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 2000.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8184
Speaker 1: That's Dr. Leon Dingle [educator], myself, Rev. [Willie T.] Barrow, and the mother of--Lewis--what's the guy, Lewis? Reginald Lewis [first black owner of Sara Lee Corporation], that's his mother next to Rev. Barrow.  I don't know the guy in the back.  That's at the Wall Street Project, in New York [New York], and that's on the [New York] Stock Exchange floor.
Speaker 2: Okay. That was the first one, wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, that was the first one--was that '97 [1997]?
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman at the New York Stock Exchange as part of the first Wall Street Project; (L. to R.:) Dr. Leon Dingle, Hermene Hartman, unidentified man, Rev. Willie T. Barrow, Reginald Lewis's mother, name unknown, New York, New York, ca. 1997.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8185
Speaker 1: That's me--oh boy. I think I was still at the college.
Speaker 2: So you were--you were at--at City Colleges [of Chicago]?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) At City Colleges.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman when she worked for the City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8186
Speaker 1: That is Al Bell, and--who is president of Stax Records--[Rev.] Jesse Jackson [Sr.], and myself, and that is at a [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] meeting and we are just telling people about [Black] Expo and who the talent is for that year.  You know what year?
Speaker 2: '78 [1978], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr. and Stax Records president Al Bell at an Operation PUSH meeting, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1978.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman.]
Story_ID: 8187
Speaker 1: That is a course that I was teaching one summer somewhere.  I don't remember the where, but I know it's a sociology course.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman teaches a summer sociology course, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman].
Story_ID: 8188
Speaker 1: That's my cousin, Diane Glen, my Dad [Herman Hartman], and myself, and that's at the Park West [theater, Chicago, Illinois].  The last concert that [Hartman's uncle] Johnny Hartman [singer] did here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman with her father, Herman Hartman, and cousin Diane Glen after Hartman's uncle, jazz singer Johnny Hartman's final show at the Park West theater, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1980s]
Story_ID: 8189
Speaker 1: That's Judge Slayton, that's my my former husband, David Wallace, and myself, and I'm being sworn in for the John F. Kennedy Performing Arts Center [Advisory] Board in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Oh, when you were on the advisory board.
Speaker 1: On the advisory board.
Speaker 2: And what--also talk about the significance of that because you were the first--that was sort of a first--you were the only person from the Midwest--something, it's--.
Speaker 1: I think there were two of us from Illinois--I was the only woman from Chicago [Illinois].  It was very significant.  [President Jimmy] Carter revived that board.  It was very good to look at the cultural life of America from that level, and to see how the government might be able to help, and to get some of those performers in the nation's capital at the JFK Performing Arts Center.  It was good.  I enjoyed that.
Speaker 2: [Hermene Hartman, with Judge Slayton (left) and former husband David Wallace (middle), is sworn in for the John F. Kennedy Performing Arts Center Advisory Board, Washington, D.C., ca. 1977-1981.  From the collection of Hermene Hartman].
