Story_ID: 573070
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Emma Elizabeth Houston, E-M-M-A, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, H-O-U-S-T-O-N [HistoryMaker Emma E. Houston].
Speaker 1: And what was your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Roberson, R-O-B-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 18th, 1956, Navasota, Texas.
Speaker 1: Navasota, now how do you spell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) N-A-V-A-S-O-T-A.  Navasota, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am assistant manager for Salt Lake County Aging Services [Salt Lake County Aging and Adult Services].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Sunday, March 16th, 2008.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time (laughter)?
Speaker 2: We're in Salt Lake City, Utah and it's snowing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 573071
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that management compels me to ask of everyone.
Speaker 2: Five light- I should be able to answer those.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Short answer, okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is--they're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  My favorite food is dessert and that would be pecan pie.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple, for royalty, purple.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?  I don't have a favorite time of the year.  No, I don't, I just, no (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Australia.  Eventually I'm gonna get to Australia, haven't been there yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: How bad can it be when you have God?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 573072
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And your father's [Norman Roberson, Sr.] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we're going to start first with just your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mother's name is Ida Green Childress, I-D-A, G-R-E-E-N, C-H-I-L-D-R-E-S-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth, Broussard, Louisiana, May 25th, 1936.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about that, your mother's ancestors, I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh.
Speaker 1: --how far back can you trace that group of people in Broussard, Louisiana.  Do they--are they--were they, were your ancestors slaves in Louisiana, or how did you--how do you--do you know?
Speaker 2: You know, my ancestor- well, my mom's family, all I know for sure is that they were, what they refer to as Geechees, so, French, black ancestry.
Speaker 1: Now, Geechees is normally--
Speaker 2: Now help me.
Speaker 1: --South Carolina, blacks that are--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the Gullah people, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The, usually the French and black are the Creoles, I don't know--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Creoles, yeah.
Speaker 1: --is that it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Pretty much?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they're Creole ancestry.
Speaker 2: Creole.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, are there any--so they spoke the Creole--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Patois?
Speaker 2: They did.  They did.
Speaker 1: And, is there any stories about that side of the family?
Speaker 2: You know what, as far as remembering, I only can remember my Grandmother Emma, and my Grandmother Elizabeth and that they did voodoo, that's the stories that would always go around and that's all I ever knew about them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were, so, so they were said that they could voodoo?
Speaker 2: They were said that they could do voodoo.
Speaker 1: Any stories about them putting a--
Speaker 2: They said they could pull--no, no, not necessarily putting curses on people, but, but helping people fight demons.  When someone had put a curse on them, they were the ones they would go to to say, "Mama Emma, Mama Elizabeth, this has happened and I need you to help my daughter," or son or whatever.  And I just remember one story of my mom saying that this young girl had gone to her grandmother's home and they did some--whatever they do, and a snake came out of her mouth.  That's what I heard.  I don't know, I wasn't there, but that's what I heard.
Speaker 1: That sounds like, did you ever here the Miss Rudolph story that Richard Pryor tells?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Is that something like that?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Miss Rudolph's a hoodoo woman--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --can take, take curses off you and--
Speaker 2: Take the curses off of you, yeah.
Speaker 1: --whatever.  Yeah, soak your feet in certain solutions, and put you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so they could lift curses?
Speaker 2: Lift curses.
Speaker 1: And was that--now did they do that as a, as a vocation or just as a part--just a service they performed--?
Speaker 2: Just by word of mouth people heard and this is where you go to have this taken care of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is your grandmother and your great aunt?
Speaker 2: Grandmothers, both grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Both grandmothers, okay,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Great-grandmothers, my great-grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Great-grandmothers?
Speaker 2: These are my great-grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Great-grandmothers, okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's grandmothers.
Speaker 1: On mother's side?
Speaker 2: On mother's and father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Elizabeth was Mother's mother's--no, Emma was mother's mother, and Elizabeth was Mother's dad's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, any other stories about that, that seem like there'd be a lot of stories associated with that?
Speaker 2: No that--you know was the only one that I held onto.  I'm sure there were other stories but that was the one that stayed in my mind that--yeah, these were the grandmothers who could lift curses.  And I remember going visiting in the summer, but kids stayed on the porch and played, they were not in grown folks' business, so just by way of hearing that this is what they could do.
Story_ID: 573073
Speaker 1: Now, I noticed when we were talking earlier when I came in you have an affinity for Africa?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you know celebrate Kwanzaa--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and other things and--did--are there any African survivals in your family history that you have?
Speaker 2: You know, all of my--as far as generational grandparents have--are deceased, so as far as knowing that part, I couldn't say for sure.  On my, on my mother's [Ida Green Childress] side, my fa- wait, okay on my mother's side, I was going to say, but my father's [Norman Roberson, Sr.] side is something different, but on my mother's side not for sure where they actually originated from.  Other than knowing they were raised in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you--did they--what did they do for a living, I mean?
Speaker 2: Mother's mom [Maudra Green] was domestic and her dad [Louis Green, Sr.] was a porter for the train com-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--did he--as a porter did he make the run to Utah, up here to Ogden [Utah]?
Speaker 2: No, no.  He was always--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, he was always, no, he was just stationed in Texas, just in the Texas area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So I've heard that, you now, Ogden was a place where a lot of black porters came through and they founded a community with you know all the black entertainment an all that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  And stayed here.  Oh, they stayed, they stayed down south.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, your grandfather was a--he was a Pullman porter or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Pullman porter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you don't know where his run went?
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they usually go hundreds of miles away.
Speaker 2: I have to ask my--like I say, Mom is downstairs, I could ask her but, she would say, oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, a typical route is through Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: On a--the City of New Orleans [Louisiana] train, you know?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, I should have done some homework (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know that song, "A train called the City of New Orleans" ['City of New Orleans']?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, there's a song called, (singing), "There's a train called the City of New Orleans," da da da, you know, anyway, but it originates in Chicago and goes right down--
Speaker 2: And goes straight down New Orleans?  Okay.
Speaker 1: --the Mississippi [Mississippi River] to New Orleans.  But, well, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So any other stories from your--did your mother have any stories about--now did she grow up in Broussard [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Mom grew up in Broussard, and I don't remember any stories, other than--
Speaker 1: I mean, did she seem to have a easy childhood or happy childhood or?
Speaker 2: I think she had a happy childhood.  There were only three of them, sister and a younger brother, she was the oldest.  She--they did lose another sister during childbirth, but other than that.  I think she grew up as well as expected in the '30s [1930s], in regards to opportunities, you know, going to school doing that type of thing.  I never heard her talk about any hardships that she or her family endured.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born in '36 [1936] you said (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, 1936.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Depression [Great Depression] was pretty much over--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it was waning anyway, it was during the Depression but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was waning then.
Story_ID: 573074
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Ida Green Childress] get a chance to go to school down in Broussard [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, went to elementary, junior high, high school.  Left school in eleventh grade and the reason she left school is that she had been having eye problems and when she went to the doctor to talk about--to get an exam and everything, the doctor told her mother [Maudra Green], "You need to pull her out of school because she's gonna go blind. It's nothing we can do about it."  So, but needless to say she didn't go blind, but she didn't finish high school, because the, whoever the doctor was said, "There's no sense in this going on; you need to get her in a special school because she's eventually going to lose her sight."  And so she didn't graduate from high school.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this a white doctor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So anyway, so she was misdiagnosed apparently?
Speaker 2: Misdiagnosed, absolutely misdiagnosed.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did she regret dropping out of school?
Speaker 2: She did, later in her, in her--as she got older and everything--and that's one of the things that she really encouraged us to do, is to go as far as we could possibly go with our education.  So, so yeah, she encouraged us to do that.
Story_ID: 573075
Speaker 1: I'm gonna switch to your father now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Norman Gene Roberson, Sr., N-O-R-M-A-N, G-E-N-E, R-O-B-E-R-S-O-N, Sr. [Norman Roberson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 24th, 1934, Navasota, Texas.
Speaker 1: Navasota, Texas, okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  Now, there's a story.  His father, father, was a white man, Irish doctor.  His mother [Faustina Gilbert Roberson] was Native American, his stepfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, wait a minute.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, great-grandfather was an Irish doctor?
Speaker 2: Irish doctor, McKelvin.
Speaker 1: Now--his name was what?
Speaker 2: Last name was McKelvin, M-C-K-A-E-L-V-I-N [sic.], McKelvin.
Speaker 1: McKelvin.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now which one was a Native American, do you?
Speaker 2: His mother.
Speaker 1: Now would this be your, your father's mother?
Speaker 2: My f-
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My great-gran- yes, my grandmother, grandmother, grandmother--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, okay, grandmother was Native American.  You know what group she was--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know what, I don't know that, I don't know that.
Speaker 1: --from or what, what nationality of American--Native American?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't know that one.  Now see, now I'm gonna go do some deep, deep history.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now I assume everybody else is black (laughter)?  In your family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, everybody else, yes, so the grandfather [Emmitt Roberson] married the grandmother, who is of black and Native American descent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: And he was half and half, I guess then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was half--yeah, Irish and black.
Speaker 1: Now was there any advantage for him being--having an Irish father he could identify--did they--
Speaker 2: No because he didn't--no, no--
Speaker 1: --did he pass him down anything or give him anything?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, absolutely not, absolutely not, so it's one of those, in those history times when white men and black woman--white man and Native American woman get together and give birth to a child and he goes away and mother marries a--.  So his stepfather raised him, that's where we have the Roberson last name.  The stepfather adopted and raised him--and raised him.  So, but no, the Irish father, no, no, no claim.  And that's the--when we talk about it in our family it's like, "How did you find out about that?  Where, where--?"  We don't ever talk about that.  Thinking, well we need to talk about that.  So, so yes.
Speaker 1: So, let me get--I think I need to go back again for a minute and just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So the great-grandfather was Irish?
Speaker 2: The great-grandfather's Irish.
Speaker 1: And then his son, who is half Irish and half black--
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: --married a Native American woman?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your father's grandmother, I guess?
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: I mean your father's mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mother, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then, okay, okay, all right, I got it--
Speaker 2: Okay, we got that?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, so, but there was no adva- the Irish people--
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: --didn't do anything.  Was there any connection to the Native American side, either?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that you?
Speaker 2: No, not that I can think of.  Not that I can remember, us associating one way or the other.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, now did all this happen in, in Navasota?
Speaker 2: You know, and that's where, that's where it comes kind of foggy because I know it happened in Texas.  And I know my paren- my father was born in Navasota, so there's Tyler, Texas, there's East Texas, there's Navasota, Texas, there's Dallas [Texas]; that's all of that kind of intermixed together, so where it actually took place--in the 1910s, 1912s, I--yeah, I'm not sure where?
Speaker 1: So, Navasota's near Tyler?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in that area?
Speaker 2: In that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, do they have a tradition of being from anywhere else?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --coming there from Tennessee or--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --some other place?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Story_ID: 573076
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about slavery or Reconstruction, any of that in the family?
Speaker 2: You know, the only thing that I do remember of my grandfather [Emmitt Roberson], my dad's dad worked on a ranch where they herded bulls, cattle, and I remember us having to rush him to a medical facility because there was a stampede and he had gotten trampled, gorged by a bull.  And, I just remember the story of my father [Norman Roberson, Sr.] saying they wouldn't let us in this hospital, we had to go to the next hospital, the next hospital and they finally met a doctor who would administer help, or medical attention.  So, knowing that basically during that time, not to say that they were slaves at that time, but, you know, tending to the owner's property but not being able to get medical attention when needed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was he a cowboy then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather, you said (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Grandpa was a cowboy.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's a--that's interesting, you know, you know, we have books about black cowboys and I remember when, back in the, you know, through the early part of the century the media glorified the cowboy and we'd only see white ones.
Speaker 2: You'd only see white ones, yes.
Speaker 1: In the late '60s [1960s] I guess, William Loren Katz and other people started writing about the black cowboys--
Speaker 2: About the black cowboys.
Speaker 1: --and the Buffalo Soldiers, and we--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --were shocked because we watched Gene Autry and all them--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, they were the only ones that we saw.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were only white people.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So now we were shocked to find out we had black cowboys.
Speaker 2: We had black cowboys, black soldiers, all of that, yes.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather was a black cowboy?
Speaker 2: He was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was.  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Did he have any stories about being a cowboy, other than the one about being gored?
Speaker 2: That's the only one, you know, growing up and you think you're listening to what your grandparents were saying, or what your parents are saying and when you think about it you can't--I can't remember, and I'm sure there were stories, but I can't remember what they may have been.
Speaker 1: Well, did they--was Navasota [Texas] still kind of a horse culture when you were--
Speaker 2: It was absolutely.
Speaker 1: --growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and as far as the property is concerned, I know the, the, family still has property there.  So, you know, the grave sites were there on the property.  And it's still owned by the Roberson clan so, so yeah, yeah, herding and farming and all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 573077
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Norman Roberson, Sr.] talk about what it was like growing up for him, did--
Speaker 2: Well my dad, and, and, I--well in that time, you know, you've got two family household, you got the mom [Faustina Gilbert Roberson] and the dad [Emmitt Roberson], you've got fourteen siblings on my father's side going to school, being educated.  My father was an electrical engineer, so, he had the, I guess the wherewithal to advance himself in regards to the education of where he wanted to go.  So, elementary, junior high, high school and trade school to get the electrical certification.  And, he pretty much knew how to work the system as far as advancements, needing to go somewhere, talking to the right people, doing the right thing to advance in order to support his family.  So, he--
Speaker 1: Okay so he had good social IQ and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --social skills?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right now do you know where he went to school, where he got his?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do not.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 573078
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I'm not--I don't even know that answer.  I don't even know how my parents met.  My mother [Ida Green Childress] was living in Houston [Texas] at the time, my father [Norman Roberson, Sr.] was living in Dallas [Texas] at the time.  How their paths crossed I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I do not know that story.
Speaker 1: Mother lived in Dallas, your father lived in Houston?
Speaker 2: Dallas---Mother lived in Houston.
Speaker 1: Oh, Houston, your father lived in Dallas.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Father lived in Dallas.
Speaker 1: And you were born in Navasota [Texas].
Speaker 2: And I was born in Navasota.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's right outside of Dallas?  So--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's outside of Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  So to--hm, I don't know how they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: How the paths crossed.
Speaker 1: But they, they met--now did they marry?  Did they--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  They married in 1954.  Yeah, in 1954; October 1954 is when they were married.
Story_ID: 573079
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about their personalities and, you know what were their talents, what were their dispositions like--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --their personalities like and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, okay.  My mother [Ida Green Childress] is very quiet--has always been very quiet, very reserved.  Being the oldest in her family, of three children, being the oldest taking on that responsibility like most older siblings do, so, doing the right thing.  She has always said she wanted a large family, so what she did say to me was what attracted her to my father [Norman Roberson, Sr.] was that there were fourteen of them so his mother [Faustina Gilbert Roberson] and father [Emmitt Roberson], seven girls, seven boys and so she was thinking, this is a size family that I could really get connected to and be involved in.  So, however that happened they started dating and then was married and had their own crop of kids also.  So, very quiet, very responsible, very traditional, very traditional, stay at home mom, raised the kids, did the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] thing, going to school plays, supported the kids, did the homework thing.  So, very traditional mother.  My father, on the other hand, (sigh) (laughter) socialization skills, personality, he walks into the room and he's the center of attraction.  He is all about him.  So, outgoing, loves to have fun, he's, he's, he's a good--he's a cool cat (laughter) my dad's just cool.  He's just cool.  Yeah, so, and I guess with fourteen siblings you, you have to kind of create your own identity to know who you are and stand out among the group, so he was, he was that kind of guy.  Flashy, dressed well, played pool, profe- pool shark.  That's what they would call him, Dad's a pool shark.  He could go into a pool hall and play and beat the crap outta the people and take their cash, so fun guy, fun guy.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now where did he rank on the, on the four- in the fourteen?
Speaker 2: In the fourteen, and I wanna say he was the eighth of fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanna say he was the eighth child.  I have it written on my, my little history thing.  I think he was the eighth child.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now where do you rank and--with your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I am the second.
Speaker 1: Second?
Speaker 2: There's six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I am the second oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there's four girls and two guys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Personality wise, I think I'm a mixture of my mom and my dad 'cause I'm, I'm really a--can be a serious take charge, this is how things are supposed to go, this is how families are supposed to behave with one another.  But then on the opposite side, oh man I like to have a good time.  You turn the music on and I am dancing--hello--just have a good time, so on my dad's side, having a good time, being around family, yeah, so a mixture of mom and dad.
Story_ID: 573080
Speaker 1: How many years did you spend in Navasota [Texas]?  Were you there long?
Speaker 2: No, I've--believe my childhood--there was an older sister [Violet Roberson Machado] and myself, so, I would--it was before I even went to elementary school [Albert Sidney Johnston Elementary School, Dallas, Texas], so, two years, three years, right after birth, because the other siblings were all born in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you spent about two or three years?
Speaker 2: Two or three years in Navasota.
Speaker 1: Okay, then you moved to Dallas?
Speaker 2: Moved to Dallas.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  When I was looking back on those pictures I kept thinking, what could I possibly think about early childhood?  I remember, and this is not necessarily good thing or a bad thing, I remember we were living in an apartment and we were in the process of moving to a home and as we were packing things up and moving our things, this little girl, who lived next door to us, came and knocked on our door and said, "Could you please help my mommy?  My daddy is hurting her."  And all I could remember was my dad [Norman Roberson, Sr.] and his brothers going to that apartment and stopping whatever was going on.  And I kept thinking, that's what men are supposed to do, they're supposed to protect women if someone is hurting them.  That is wh- that has always stayed in my mind that men do not do that to women, and if they do, there's someone else, another man who will help and assist.  That's one of my earliest.  And I don't even think I was in elementary school when it happened, it was still pretty early in my life that I remember that engrained that this little girl asked for help and my dad and his brothers went to go help.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that's one good memory that I have, so, and hope that other people are helping as we get older in life, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah.
Story_ID: 573081
Speaker 1: Now when you moved to Dallas [Texas], what side of Dallas did you all live on or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Oak Cliff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: South Oak Cliff.
Speaker 1: So how do you spell that?  Is that--
Speaker 2: South, S-O-U-T-H (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) South?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Oak--
Speaker 1: Oak Cliff?
Speaker 2: O-A-K.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Cliff, C-L-I-F-F.
Speaker 1: South Oak Cliff.
Speaker 2: South Oak Cliff.
Speaker 1: In Dallas, okay.
Speaker 2: In Dallas, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now was this all-black part of town?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, and the strangest thing too is that, when we--and now I'm kind of jumping ahead--when we moved to Utah, we said to the realtor, "So where's the black neighborhood?"  And he said, "(Laughter) There is no black neighborhood in Utah."  Oh, my gosh.  So growing up in a culture (background noise) where your neighborhood was--
Story_ID: 573082
Speaker 1: Well I was asking you about the neighborhood you grew up in--
Speaker 2: The neighborhood we grew up in, all black, all-black neighborhood [Oak Cliff], yeah, in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  The laughter, I mean, I don't even think we watched television except on Saturdays.  We were doing the, the jacks and the marbles and the jump rope and the pickup baseball game, we--yeah.  The sounds of the neighbors watching you and correcting you and telling your mother what you did and that was growing up; a very simple, content life.  Mom [Ida Green Childress] knew all of our friends, they knew all of their parents, walking to church on Sundays, walking to school not having to worry about getting there safe or not.  Just that.  We all--all the kids would meet at the corner and walk to school together, so that was growing up.  Sundays going to Grandmother's [Houston's paternal grandmother, Faustina Gilbert Roberson] for Sunday dinner.  So, with all the cousins, so we would all migrate to Grandmother's house and have Sunday dinner and the good thing about it, the aunties were in there cooking, and of course the guys were playing dominos, so seeing that as far as growing up with family, what it meant to be family was knowing that you had parents who loved you, and aunts and uncles and cousins and grandparents and neighbors who took a concerted interest in your life and your safety.  So, growing up as a kid was phenomenal, just phenomenal.  So, having Mom come to the school, to your plays or to your award ceremony or to hear you do a speech or do a presentation, to have Dad [Norman Roberson, Sr.] be there also was, was, was a good thing, was a good thing, so that's what it was like growing up.  Everybody knew everybody.  And everybody was best friends.  And the good thing to was that I remember, incident happened at elementary school [Albert Sidney Johnston Elementary School, Dallas, Texas], and this young girl that I thought was friends with me did something and my mother said, "You can't play with her anymore," and that was the final word: "You can't play with her anymore."  And I'm thinking, okay, so be it (laughter).  And there was no questioning, there was no, but I want--I want to play with her, I want her to be my friend.  No, you can't play with her anymore.  So, respecting parents and being afraid of parents, not in a bad way but in a respectful way, that you did not ever want your mother to get the phone call that Emma [HistoryMaker Emma E. Houston] has done something at school and she show up.  You just, you just didn't want to have that happen.  So just respecting your parents I think was crucial during that time of growing up and developing and I think all of my friends felt the same way as far as, we all knew Mrs., Mrs., Mrs. Roberson; we all knew my mother and if something was to be done, then it would be done by, by Mom, so, it was, it was good, it was good experience, good experience.
Story_ID: 573083
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was definitely a big part of growing up.  Grandmother [Houston's paternal grandmother, Faustina Gilbert Roberson] was an Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star], so you know Grandmother was Sunday school teacher, and yeah, there was no option in my going to school, to Sunday school or to church or to Vacation Bible School or Easter program or Christmas program.  There was no option in that so, yeah, we grew up in the church, singing the songs and learning scripture and reciting the poems on those special day occasions, so a big, big thing.  Going to church with parents [Ida Green Childress and Norman Roberson, Sr.], going to church with grandparents with aunties, uncles; a big, big, thing.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Sweet Home Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Sweet Home, okay.
Speaker 2: Sweet Home Missionary Baptist Church, yes, Dallas, Texas [sic. Garland, Texas].
Story_ID: 573084
Speaker 1: How influential was popular culture, you know, records and radio, TV, movies?
Speaker 2: And that's what I'm saying, the thing is that we watched television on the weekends, on Saturdays.  You know, coming home from school doing your homework, doing your chores, doing whatever, an occasional evening thing, and Lawrence Welk was on television ['The Lawrence Welk Show'], or, yeah, you know who was on TV then (laughter).  'The Ed Sullivan Show.'  On--at night before bedtime, but we watched Saturday morning cartoons, 'Tom and Jerry' and all those characters.  But it wasn't much as far as us glued to the television, or even the radio.  We had other things that stimulated the mind and it was not television.
Story_ID: 573085
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school was Albert Sidney Johnston [Albert Sidney Johnston Elementary School] in Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Albert Sidney Johnson [sic.], now--
Speaker 2: Albert Sidney Johnston.
Speaker 1: Who was he?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). I do not know who Albert Sidney Johnston was I've got to do some more searching about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought it might have been somebody from the community.  I think he--I'm thinking he might be a Civil War general, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't know that one.
Speaker 1: Any rate, so Albert Sidney Johnson School.
Speaker 2: So, first through sixth grade was--
Speaker 1: First through the sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: English, and I wanted to be a reporter when I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Reading and writing I just--and the reason, let me tell you why the reason, I was such a avid reader.  I remember leaving first grade going to second grade, and you know you have to test for your reading, and if you read this well, then you sat in this row and if you read this well you sat in this row.  I remember testing to read and I remember I read the word, out run to out--turn--I mispronounced it to some kind of way and I remember the teacher giving me the other book and I thought, I don't want the other book (laughter) I do not--.  So second grade I made it a point that my reading was definitely going to be top priority, so, everything I could possibly get my hands on as far as reading and learning better to read and write, I did that.  I think--what eight, eight years old, nine years old, whatever second grade is at that time, so yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you read for recreation at home?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, you should see my library, yes, yes, recreation, everything, absolutely everything.
Speaker 1: What did you like?
Speaker 2: History, I love history.  And, and the thing about history is that what I think about when you know the history, when you know the struggles of the people, when you know that they overcome those struggles, how bad can it be?  How absolutely bad can it be?
Speaker 1: Did you get any black history in school in those days?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, what you were just saying kind of--
Speaker 2: Not until high school [Franklin D. Roosevelt High School, Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 1: --indicates you might have had--got some--
Speaker 2: Not until high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So early years, junior high, elementary, junior high school [Oliver Wendell Holmes Junior High School; Oliver Wendell Holmes Humanities and Communications Academy, Dallas, Texas], not--nothing significant, other than the traditional, you know, [President] Abraham Lincoln, Civil War, that type of thing.  But high school, because then you're looking at early '70s [1970s] and you're looking at the progressive movement then when you're talking about--and you're hearing Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Malcolm [Malcolm X]--you're hearing all the transition that's happening in the '60s [1960s].  Yeah, high school is when there was a first indication of, wow, African American people, black people pretty much have built this country and have been left out of the history books, so what is it--my responsibility to find out the true history.  So I took it upon myself to, to say okay, let's just see what it's all about.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you liked history even before the black history (unclear)--
Speaker 2: History even before.  History before--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know in my, you know, innocence, in those years--and I have always felt that forefathers--the forefathers who they may have been, were visionaries.  I absolutely in my deepest heart believe they knew I was coming and although they wrote, "We the people of the United States of America, in order to form a more perfect union--," I honestly thought they were thinking about the people, whatever that would look like.  That it encompassed all of the people, so I have always led to believe that they were--they knew I was coming along, so they wrote this in order for me to benefit from all rights and privileges.  And people say to me, "No, that was not--."  (Laughter) "They were not thinking about you, kid, and believe me."  I'm saying, no, they were, they were visionaries, I believe they were visionaries, so.  It was a struggle, we had to help them see the vision along the way, but, you know, when you write a document you are inclusive and I thought--I have always thought they were inclusive (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 573086
Speaker 1: What motivated you to think about becoming a reporter?  Were--did you--I mean were you exposed to any reporters?  Or--
Speaker 2: I was.  Well, no I wasn't exposed.  When I was in high school [Franklin D. Roosevelt High School, Dallas, Texas] I was in the journalism club and part of the yearbook staff so I had this phenomenal teacher and his name, oh, what was his name?  Who taught journalism and instilled in us that you report accurate information.  That the truth never is put on the sidelines. That you always report accurate information regardless.  That you do no harm to people when you report.  So I thought, what a phenomenal industry, what a phenomenal way to think that if you report the truth then people learn from it, so.
Speaker 1: But you weren't thinking about that in grade school or?
Speaker 2: That was in high school, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just in high school?
Speaker 2: That was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I thought you meant grade school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in high school.
Story_ID: 573087
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in grade school [Albert Sidney Johnston Elementary School, Dallas, Texas] that you would consider mentors or role models for you?
Speaker 2: In elementary school, I did not see a mentor until--I consider a mentor--until I went to high school.  And my biology teacher, her name was Denise Blackwell [ph.], I remember her well, but she was the first white teacher that I had, and taught biology, and was intense in regards to fairness.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In giving you everything you needed to be equipped to go out and conquer the world.
Speaker 1: Now she was the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My biology teacher.
Speaker 1: --first--
Speaker 2: She was my first white teacher.
Speaker 1: White teacher?
Speaker 2: My first white teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's see here, so in--now what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: High school, Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Okay, Franklin D. Roosevelt High School [Dallas, Texas], now was it a mixed school or all-black school?
Speaker 2: It was all black until '72 [1972], and we had our first white teachers and our first white students, which was interesting, interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems the reverse of most--
Speaker 2: It was, absolutely was.
Speaker 1: --integration plans.
Speaker 2: It was reversed.
Speaker 1: So white students were bussed into--
Speaker 2: Were bussed into--
Speaker 1: --your school.
Speaker 2: --our school.
Speaker 1: Did it create any agitation or bad feelings?
Speaker 2: It created more so among the teachers agitation because we as students were used to our, our adults being black, our teachers being black.  And the norm--what really--I had a history teacher, white guy, history teacher, and he had a very difficult last name and I remember him saying to the class, "Oh, just call me by my first name because my last name is very difficult."  Now you know in the black culture (laughter) you don't call any adult by their first name and I remember our principal having to come into our classroom and we were having a conversation about something, and I said the man's first name, and my principal said, "What did you say?"  I said, "He told us."  I was in trouble, not the teacher, I was in trouble 'cause I knew better and I thought, but he told us to call--and so, never, never, that was a lesson learned.
Speaker 1: So it was a clash of cultures there?
Speaker 2: It was absolutely a clash of culture, absolutely, absolutely.  And in Utah we find that, that when we came here many years ago they wanted our children to call adults by their first name, it was like, if you want our children to speak to you, you will be Mr. this or Mrs. this.  But you will not be Jane, Jill or Bob.  It's not gonna happen.  "Well I just feel so old when they call me Mr. or Ms.--," that's not happening in this household.  So, yeah, that, that, culture clash of giving respect, not that it's because you're a white man or a black man or whatever, it's out of respect. I, I'm a child and you're an adult I need to recognize that, so that was with the teachers coming into an all-black school wanting to change the norms of what was inherent to our culture.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Now how did that play out, did they eventually kind of change every--change things or what did they?
Speaker 2: Well, the principal laid the law down: "You are Mr. this or Mrs. this; there is no first names being given, we do not cross that line."  So, so yeah, they truly understood that.
Story_ID: 573088
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or--in grade school or high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was involved in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in high school, cheerleader in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Journalism in high school.
Speaker 1: So you were on the newspaper staff?
Speaker 2: Newspaper staff, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of your paper?
Speaker 2: Oh!  I don't--I can't remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have to go look in my yearbook upstairs and see what it was.
Speaker 1: What was your mascot?
Speaker 2: It was Mustangs, Roosevelt Mustangs.
Speaker 1: You had to know that 'cause you were a--
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew that.
Speaker 1: --cheerleader.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Roosevelt Mustangs.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: I did not run for office.  Homecoming queen, ran for it (laughter).  Ruby Johnston [sic. Ruby Johnson], my--she--very good friend of mine, I remember senior year she was crowned Miss Roosevelt, the girl could sing, oh, my gosh, she was extremely talented.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any, any people that are now famous that were in your class at Roosevelt [Franklin D. Roosevelt High School, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: If they are, I don't, I don't know, no.  No, I don't think so, and maybe, but I haven't kept up with that, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, when you were a senior on verge of graduating--now did you have good grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely I had good grades in high school, 'cause like I said, education was crucial to our family so, you know, you get the education you can pretty much write your ticket, so good grades, honor society, so, you know--and of course you have to have good grades if you're in ROTC or on the cheerleader squad so have to maintain those 3.5 and above grade points [grade point average], so, so yeah.  Good grades, good grades.
Story_ID: 573089
Speaker 1: So what were your plans?  Had you selected a college?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or did you know how you were going to go to college or?
Speaker 2: Senior year in high school [Franklin D. Roosevelt High School, Dallas, Texas], I had actually received a scholarship to go to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  Ah!  Yes I did, yes I did.  Now, now, keep in mind, black kid, 1970s, leaving home, family, was not happening okay, was not happening.  And so, turned that down, and six months before graduation, my parents separated, so we relocated to Houston, Texas.  Mom [Ida Green Childress] took the kids and we all went to Houston, where her family was, and into a new high school.  Knowing no one, no one knows me.
Speaker 1: Now that had to be--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was not pleasant.
Speaker 1: --really devastating.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was not pleasant, it was not pleasant.
Speaker 1: I'm just thinking that you--
Speaker 2: But circumstances--
Speaker 1: First of all your parents are splitting up, now, that's negative.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But then you--you're a senior in high school--
Speaker 2: A senior in high school, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --cheerleader, newspaper, honor student.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you gotta change high schools in your senior year?
Speaker 2: Change high school in my senior year, in my senior year.  And there was no option in regards to, okay half your kids can stay with Dad [Norman Roberson, Sr.], half of you can go--.  No, no, no, all kids are going with Mom, all kids.
Speaker 1: So did you--
Speaker 2: We're all going.
Speaker 1: I mean, were you--was that all right with you at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely.  'Cause at that time my older sister [Violet Roberson Machado] had graduated and was in college and had joined the [U.S.] military, she had joined the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  So I was now the oldest child at home so to help Mom in the transition was--you're absolutely right, yeah we're gonna go with Mom and, we're gonna relocate an life goes on.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you do?  Did your grades suffer or did your--or did you lose--you had to lose (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I had to go to night school.
Speaker 1: You had to lose status on some level--
Speaker 2: I had, I had--oh, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --'cause you went to another school.
Speaker 2: New school, different requirements, even though it's State of Texas, different requirements, different school districts.  I had to go to night school two days, two days a night, because there was a couple of classes that I needed to take that I didn't have to take in Dallas [Texas], so to make up in order to graduate on time, I was going to night school and working on the weekends to help supplement some income, so, so yeah.  It was, it was a challenge, it was a challenge to leave friends and family, and all that you know and just up and move, it was a challenge.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you do in school, in?
Speaker 2: Well, my first--I think I got there like mid-semester or mid-quarter, whatever they call it, and just thought, what the heck, I've already got enough credits, I'm not going to even do anything.  And my first report card from Stephen F. Austin [Stephen F. Austin High School, Houston, Texas], I was failing, I was at like a 2.0 [grade point average] and I'm thinking, okay, let's stop feeling sorry for yourself and pull your act together.  So before graduation I had gotten up to my 3.5 and graduated with honors, so it was in the top 10 percent of the class, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it worked out--
Speaker 2: It worked out.
Speaker 1: --eventually and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were you there for your whole senior year or?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Just part?
Speaker 2: Just--
Speaker 1: Just the last part?
Speaker 2: --February through May, February through May, yes, yes, so just a few months.  I can't even remember who the principal was, if, if there was a principal, but, you know, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So, wow, you turned down a full scholarship to Penn State, and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, parents are divorcing, Mom needs assistance. What are you gonna do?
Story_ID: 573090
Speaker 1: So where--what did you do?  Where did you decide to go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went--then I went to University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  We relocated from Dallas [Texas] to Houston [Texas] so that whole transition with the parents [Ida Green Childress and Norman Roberson, Sr.] separating, enrolled at the University of Houston and attended there for two years and that's where I met my husband [Larry Houston] and--
Speaker 1: So this is 1974?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1974, high school graduate [from Stephen F. Austin High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, so University of Houston?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, so you met your husband when you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, went to Houston, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: Now how did you all meet, is there a story?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh.  I was working on the weekends at the university housing, dormitories, in the cafeteria and, of course, that's where the athletes lived, so housing there.  And met him as I was the cashier--the person that you check your cards with and make sure you got a meal card, so we met at University of Houston in the housing department.  And started dating and--for two years, and then married in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Now was he a football player?
Speaker 2: Football player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, football player.
Speaker 1: Was he on those teams with Andre Ware and I guess--?
Speaker 2: He was on there with Reggie Cherry.  Oh, he just said, 'cause they're going--he's going back next month they're having this reunion thing that they do every April.  Who else?  I can't even remember the names, but I--he can tell you those names, but yeah, there were some names that were--some big names that I do recall in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause I--yeah University of Houston has some real--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, big time football players--
Speaker 2: They have--yeah, they have turned out some big time football players, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yep, that area around Houston, Texas and Galveston [Texas] and all that, famous for football players.
Speaker 2: Yeah they are.
Speaker 1: They go all over the NFL [National Football League].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  They definitely--
Speaker 1: They've got a town [sic.] called the Texas Triangle or something down there--
Speaker 2: It's a big thing.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: I know, it's a big thing.  Howard Ebow--I'm trying to remember names--Howard Ebow, Reggie Cherry, oh, I, I'll have to think about it.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah, so we met there and dated and got married, moved to Florida.  Left Texas, up, just left, just left family.
Speaker 1: Just left it, I mean?
Speaker 2: Just left it, got married and left.
Speaker 1: So did you meet in your freshman year or, or what?
Speaker 2: My freshman year, his senior year, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you got married and just moved to Florida?
Speaker 2: Moved to Florida, yeah.  He's an engineer by trade so.
Speaker 1: So he had a job in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was recruited right after graduation and, for Lockheed--no, for Rockwell International [Rockwell International Corporation], he worked on the space shuttle.
Speaker 1: Okay, what part of Florida did you move to?
Speaker 2: Melbourne, Florida.
Speaker 1: Melbourne?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Melbourne, Florida, so we lived there for ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--he was an electrical engineer with Lockheed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lockheed--Rockwell International.
Speaker 1: Oh, Rockwell, okay.
Speaker 2: It's Rockwell.
Speaker 1: Okay, Rockwell International, so did you go to school in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yeah, community college couple of years, you know classes here and there.  You know married life, children, all of that stuff happening.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two?
Speaker 2: Two girls [Lorry Houston and Erica Houston Critchfield].
Speaker 1: Okay, two girls.
Speaker 2: We have two daughters.
Speaker 1: They were both born in Florida?
Speaker 2: Both born in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, when did you eventually finish school or how, how--
Speaker 2: I did not finish school until I--we moved to Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, classes here and there, raising family.  Went back to school 2000, 2002, so finished--finished degree [from the University of Phoenix] in 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 573091
Speaker 1: How did the move to Utah come about?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, just--a recruiter was looking for my husband [Larry Houston] to come to Utah.  So, he recruited him out from under Rockwell [Rockwell International Corporation], and we came out in the spring of '86 [1986].  And came to Utah and just being surrounded by the mountains and the atmosphere and the culture was like, now this is a good place.  This is, this is a safe place.  This is a place you can raise children and be comfortable with it, so, the environment is what attracted me to Utah, and the decision for us to move here.  When we lived in Florida, right around early '80s [1980s], mid-'80s [1980s] the influx of drugs in the community was rampant.  You could not drive down the street without someone knocking on your window wanting to sell you a piece of this or a piece of that.  So the culture in the community that we were living in had drastically changed in the mid-'80s [1980s] and the opportunity to move to Utah--the door just opened, so it was a good time for us to leave that particular environment.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you relacate--relocate here in 1986?
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: How did you like Utah, what was your first impression of Utah?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh.  My first impression was I loved it.  Absolutely loved it.  Looking in the community to find housing had--wasn't a problem, I guess because the people that we met, the real estate people that we met directed us in, you know, directions.  And so coming here was, was a good experience.  Once we were here for a minute, and I mean a minute, a couple of years, the culture and the way blacks or African Americans were treated was an eye opener.  And coming from a very strong family culture it was just not acceptable, just not acceptable to me or my husband, so, going into the schools, being on the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], being a homeroom mom, taking kids on trips, chaperoning was what we were used to doing.  So to go into a school and introduce yourself to the principal was not the norm for black people to do that, to my understanding.  The fact that our children had a black principal was completely out of the norm, so walking into an elementary school and seeing the administration being a person of color was an added bonus.  So, once we learned how to navigate the culture here, it's a done deal.  It's a done deal, and to educate our children on being proud of who they are and not accepting what people give them just because they think they should get less than, yeah, we had to raise strong daughters [Lorry Houston and Erica Houston Critchfield], strong daughters.
Story_ID: 573092
Speaker 1: Well I take it that from what you said before--now we didn't really deal with this when we talked about college but you had some black history in college right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, black history in college, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: Yes, in college.
Speaker 1: And--black history and culture, and you seemed to have a certain dedication to it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, well, who taught you and what, you know, can you talk a little--
Speaker 2: Oh man--
Speaker 1: --bit about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm thinking, you know I think as far as, as learning more about history, my husband [Larry Houston] is my educator because he--militant, absolutely, strong black man who understands the value of what our people had to go through and understand still the oppression of what blacks go through even in 2008.  So, understanding the Black Panther movement [Black Panther Party] and the Civil Rights Movement, and you know being in all-black schools and having all black educators, the importance of that, so my, I guess enthusiasm with history is to get the story right.  And be proud of the fact that although we were slaves--all intent and purposes is that, yeah, but we're still here.  And the advancements that we have made for this country, it would not be what it was if it were not for black people.  So celebrating--and I, I think being black is the best thing going.  I think the fortitude, to have the integrity and the proudness to be black and to recognize it and to own it and to celebrate it, I think it's the best thing going; I think it signifies the strong will of a person.  And I know every person has been oppressed in some way or the other, but to stand on the shoulders of people who made the way for you--.  When the elections were going on--primaries were going on, my colleague said to me, "Well, just vote online or just go and vote early or just go and send in an af- just go--mail your ballot in."  I'm saying, "As long as I can walk into and pull the lever to vote, you better believe I am going to make it my business to do that."  Too many of my people suffered and died because they tried to pave the way for us to do it, I will always physically go and vote.  So learning the history and understanding it and embracing it and being proud of it, once you know the truth you can't help but, I guess, express it.
Story_ID: 573093
Speaker 1: You come here in 1986?
Speaker 2: Nineteen-eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: And, there's a--what I've heard is that it was a very small, tight community, black community here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very small black community.
Speaker 1: --in Houston [sic. Salt Lake City, Utah].  Did--
Speaker 2: Your socialization happened at the church or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] meetings.  That's where it happened, that's where you gathered the knowledge about what was going on in the community, whether it be right or wrong, and what avenues you had to correct the rights or wrongs and the church fellowship.  That's where our kids [Lorry Houston and Erica Houston Critchfield] saw kids who looked like them, who believed like they believed, whose parents thought like they thought.  So our church and our NAACP was the place to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you--did you join Mount Calvary immediately?
Speaker 2: Tha- we joined Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah].  Um-hm, we did.  Been there since '86 [1986], been there since '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: With Reverend France--
Speaker 2: Reverend France Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis].
Speaker 1: --France Davis, right.  Okay, and the NAACP from what I've been told, the former head of the NAACP was quite a mentor to a lot of people around here, a woman by the name of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mrs. Dr. Alberta H. Henry.  Mrs. Alberta, yes, yes, brought a lot of people along the way.  She came from Topeka, Kansas and worked with the school board and made sure that our kids were getting the necessary education in the manner they were supposed to get it, and called people to task.  Not only the black community to task, but the predominant culture to task, that if we're talking equal opportunities and equal education, Mrs. Henry made sure that you lived by your word, so, absolutely, mentored quite a few people.
Speaker 1: Okay, who are some of the other personalities in Houston here that you would--
Speaker 2: Who are the other personalities?  Well other than Reverend France Davis, Mrs. Alberta Henry, Jeanetta Williams is the current NAACP president.  Phyllis White was the principal at the school our daughters attended [M. Lynn Bennion Elementary School, Salt Lake City, Utah].  I'm trying to think who else, all of our clergy in regards to--Reverend Charles Petty, Reverend Harold Fields, Reverend H.J. Lilly, so, the church was the component and because we are sister churches in a convention, IGBC convention [Intermountain General Baptist Convention], you know, we traveled back and forth to celebrate and support other churches within our geographical location.  So the clergy was basically mentors here in regards to who we looked to for guidance and direction and support.
Story_ID: 573094
Speaker 1: You started working for the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of Utah]?
Speaker 2: I did, I did, I started a troop with my daughters [Lorry Houston and Erica Houston Critchfield] when we first came on board because wanted them to get active, to meet some friends, move from Florida, okay, my kids want to be in Girl Scouts, what is it that we need to do?  "You need to be a troop leader."  Oh, okay.  So, to be a troop leader, now, keep in mind, here we are pretty predominant culture in regards to religion, in regards to background culture, black woman being a troop leader, and of course, all the troops are white.  So, our (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So all the rest of the Girl Scout troops--
Speaker 2: All the rest of the troops are white.  So, here we are in--
Speaker 1: Now, where does your--where was your troop based?  Out of the church or?
Speaker 2: No, our troop was based out of the elementary school.  The very first troop--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was based out of the elementary school
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, based out of?
Speaker 2: M. Lynn Bennion, M. Lynn Bennion Elementary School [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm, I'm a co-leader, assistant leader with Mary Ann Gertsen [ph.], and our children are there, and my daughters are there, and we're all having this celebration, you know.  And I'm saying to her, now, I'm the assistant leader, what is my roles, my responsibilities, I'm just not here to sit on the sidelines and she said, "You just do what I tell you to do."  I said, "That's not acceptable," (laughter).  So, contacted the Girl Scout chapter here, received training to start a troop and moved our troop to the church [Calvary Baptist Church, Salt Lake City, Utah], that's when we moved the troop to the church.  And our little darlings, an all-black troop, black leaders, parental support, church support, we got more phone calls to do flag ceremonies in the city, because we were an all-black troop.  And it was like, we want everyone else to know that we want all girls to be involved in Girl Scouting, and that was one of Mrs. Henry's [Alberta H. Henry] pet peeves; she said, "Until you got involved with Girl Scouts, I told our people, 'Don't join, don't join because they will not treat you right.'  You got involved--."  And she put the word out: "Let your girls join Girl Scouts now, Mrs. Houston [HistoryMaker Emma E. Houston] is involved."  Flourished, absolute- not to say that because of me, but really, because Mrs. Henry gave the word, "Let your girls join Girl Scouts because one of us is there."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 573095
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you started in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Started in '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Stayed 'til 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'til 2002.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you actually worked for Girl Scouts of Utah at some point right?  Or did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  Yeah, I was originally a volunteer organizing a Girl Scout troop and I came on board as a staff member in '89 [1989].  Had to give up the troop, you can't work for an organization and volunteer for them.
Speaker 1: Oh in--was this in--
Speaker 2: In '89 [1989], yeah.
Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]?  Wait a minute, not '89 [1989], but--
Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989], I came, I came--I became a staff member in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Oh, that's before you started the troop?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, it was after, in '86 [1986], '87 [1987], '88 [1988] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, 'cause I had you started the troop in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So you started in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Ei- let me, let me, let me do my math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We came on board in '86 [1986].  I started working with them in '89 [1989], yeah, I started working with them in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started working--
Speaker 2: What does my resume say (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started working in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Yeah, it says that you were with the Girl Scouts of Utah from '96 [1996] to 2002.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's one job, and then the other job, then the other job.  So as a director I was there from '96 [1996] to '92 [sic. 2002].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I first began--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So I'm looking at--okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Am I in there some more?
Speaker 1: It says, yeah, ninety--okay, 1989, right '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay, there we go.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So '89 [1989] I came on board as a staff member, but those three years before, I was a volunteer troop leader.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, hm, okay, so you worked for them in '89 [1989]?
Speaker 2: In '89 [1989], started '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: But you started in '86 [1986] as a troop leader?
Speaker 2: As a troop leader.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we had a troop at the church [Calvary Baptist Church, Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 1: But you had to stop being a troop leader after you--
Speaker 2: I had to stop being a troop leader after I came on as staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Which did not sit well with me, but you know, it is what it is.
Speaker 1: All right, did you still--you still worked with your girls' [Houston's daughters, Lorry Houston and Erica Houston Critchfield] troop probably, right?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) I couldn't.
Speaker 1: You couldn't?
Speaker 2: I couldn't, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was policy.  But I was able to reach more girls being a staff member than I was being a troop leader with only thirteen, fifteen, twenty girls.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So and you continued with them as a program product sales specialist?
Speaker 2: I was in charge of the Girl Scout cookie sale--hello (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: That was, oh man, I loved that job.  I really did.  So I coordinated statewide cookie sales for the twelve thousand plus girls, in the state.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then in--.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So I came on as entry level as a membership director, recruiting, training girls and adults.  And then I was promoted to the product sales manager in regards to the cookie sale.  Then I was promoted to the director of membership, which means I supervised those who recruited and trained girls and adults.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that takes us to about 2002, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002], absolutely.
Speaker 1: And in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're at 2002.
Story_ID: 573096
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002] you got involved with the Salt Lake City 2002 Winter Olympics, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Winter Olympics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was an experience.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So how did you--well, I know it wasn't hard to find out about it, but--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't hard to find out about it, but one of the directors had worked with the Olympics in Atlanta [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] and had relocated here to Utah and had--came on board to work with 2002 Winter Olympics, Salt Lake City [Utah].  And his wife said, "Hey, come work for me."  I said, "Girl, I have a job."  She said, "Well, when you s- come work when you're supposed to be sleeping."  So, I would leave my eight to five Girl Scout job [Girl Scouts of Utah], head over to the Winter Olympics from nine to six in the morning.
Speaker 1: Nine o'clock until six o'clock (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nine at night until six in the morning I was at the Olympics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Checking in those athletes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then working during the day?
Speaker 2: And then working during the day.  I mean, but keep in mind, it was, what, a six week turnaround.  So for six weeks you can pretty much do anything.  It was a good experience, a very good experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So yes.
Speaker 1: So you were the pass administrator/coordinator--
Speaker 2: Pass administrator, you couldn't get through the door unless you passed me.  So I did the credentials, did the credentials.  Well, me and other--team, I don't mean me by myself.  But a team, we did the credentials for the athletes and the coaches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So in order to get on base you needed to have your credentials in order, or I would have to call your coach and he would have to come and scold you for losing your credentials.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I can't recall--I think there might have been one black athlete, or two in those Olympics, can you?
Speaker 2: We had the bobsled young lady [Vonetta Flowers].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't ask me her name.  I got her in the Ebony book somewhere.
Speaker 1: I know--the black athletes I can think of, I don't know what--I think Debi Thomas was before you, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, yeah, Debi was before me.
Speaker 1: The skater, figure skater.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I don't know, Shani Davis the speed skater, the brother from, I think from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Speed skater, he, he--
Speaker 2: Was he in '02 [2002]?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure, that's the only thing--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So he may not have been if you don't remember.
Speaker 2: The, the only black athlete I met was a female.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I can't remember her name, but she was a female and she was--and I want to say, bobsled.
Speaker 1: Now is the black community here really involved in winter sports to a high extent?
Speaker 2: We have a black ski club and it's a handful of people.  It's a handful of people so, if you like that stuff--.  But you know it gets cold--it is--this is such a cold state and it's a cold chilling to your bone state, so--but if you like it, we do have a group that does ski, I think Dr. Coleman [HistoryMaker Ronald Gerald Coleman] and Dr. Samuels [HistoryMaker Wilfred D. Samuels] is part of that ski cla- ski club.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they may have more information on that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're surrounded by mountains.
Speaker 2: We're surrounded by mountains.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: In order to live in this state you really have to adapt to the four seasons.  Whether it be, you know, the water rafting when spring and summer comes or the hiking or the snowing, yeah, you really have to adjust to it to survive.
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories from the Olympics from your position as a pass--anything happen there that--
Speaker 2: That was major?  No.  It was a really well run Olympics.  I mean as far as the logistics of everything, no major threats or--the [U.S.] military was in force so, it was, it was pretty smooth, pretty smooth.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so there weren't any major pass crises or anything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No major pass crises.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 573097
Speaker 1: You stayed with the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of Utah] un- now 2002 was your last year with Girl Scouts (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was.  I was with them thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: Well there was a change in management and, and being the strong willed person I am (laughter), there was a personality clash.  So they could no longer use my services, is the term that they used.  So yeah, so yeah, I left Girl Scouts.
Speaker 1: Okay and what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, I became the diversity coordinator for a private school.  Rowland Hall-St. Mark's [Rowland Hall-St. Mark's School, Salt Lake City, Utah] hired me on as their diversity coordinator and my responsibility was training and development for teachers, for parents and for students, cultural sensitivity.  We had just initiated the Reverend France A. Davis scholarship.  Someone had endowed a million plus to diversify the school.  In order to do that teachers needed sensitivity training on the quick influx of twelve African American students.  So my job was to prepare, educate.
Speaker 1: Now this scholarship--
Speaker 2: Sensitize.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were on scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now this scholarship was for 1 million, $1 million scholarship?
Speaker 2: The endowment scholarship came in for $1 million, twelve students initially came on board using some of those funds.  And as long as they stayed at the school, the tuition was paid from that endowment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pastor Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] didn't tell you that?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think he did.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah.  So twelve--were these twelve black students.  Were they all black?
Speaker 2: Twelve black students.
Speaker 1: Okay, twelve black students.
Speaker 2: Twelve black students.
Speaker 1: So your job was to--
Speaker 2: My job was to--
Speaker 1: --make their--?
Speaker 2: --be the go between with parents and students if there were issues in regarding to race, cultural awareness, sensitivity, education on black history, black culture.  The norms, so you're going into an all-white private school from administrators all the way to kitchen help, and black students coming in changing the scheme of things, so my job was to make it a smooth transition.
Story_ID: 573098
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did the--yeah I imagine--
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now here's another cultural--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --clash, sort of.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, culture clash.  You have children saying--calling the principal by his first name.  And when I would introduce myself: "I am Mrs. Houston [HistoryMaker Emma E. Houston] and that's what you will call me, Mrs. Houston."  They had teachers letting children call them by their first name and my education to them was, you're gonna have twelve students coming to this environment, their parents will not allow them to call you by your first name.  So, when they say, Mrs. Smith, Mrs. Jones, Mr. Whatever, please do not correct them by saying, "Call me by my first name."  That is not acceptable.  So educating them on that.  The fact that they would call Reverend Davis, France [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis], I said, "No, he is Reverend Davis.  His wife [Willene Davis] calls him Reverend Davis.  Give him the respect--," she does, "give him the respect that he is entitled.  He is not your friend; he is Reverend Davis."  So, the baby steps that it would take, what is acceptable, what is not acceptable.  You never use the N word.  You absolutely--and if you do you correct it and you educate immediately on why it is unacceptable.  And we had an incident where that happened.
Speaker 1: Well what are the--white people called the--?
Speaker 2: Yes, called the student, called the student.
Speaker 1: In a, in a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In a classroom setting.
Speaker 1: Was it out of meanness or just a casual reference, or what was it?
Speaker 2: It was, it was supposedly a reference to the book they were reading, 'Tom Sawyer' [sic. 'The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain], and the teacher said, "Now where are we in the book right now?"  And the student said, "We are at the point where the such and such is now being done such and such."  And there was an African American student in the classroom.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And the class went hush, and the teacher overlooked it.  And the parents called me (laughter).  Not the black parents, the white parents called me and said, "Do you know that this happened and what are we gonna do about it?"  So it was that dialogue with the teacher, with the student, with the principals, with--.  Okay, if we're having zero tolerance, what are the consequences for your actions?  (Sigh) And the parents were not happy with the consequences.  So yeah, it was a learning experience for us all on what is appropriate, and how a teacher responds, how a teacher becomes the adult and explains.  This is your prime opportunity to educate an entire classroom on why this is not acceptable.
Speaker 1: Now did the teacher try to explain the use of the term--
Speaker 2: The teacher said to me it--
Speaker 1: --and the context of it in the book?
Speaker 2: --took him by surprise and he simply froze, he didn't know what to say.
Speaker 1: Well, you would think if he chose the--chose 'Tom Sawyer' for them to read he would know exactly that the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, the context.
Speaker 1: --one of the key characters is Jim--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --who is referred to by the N word--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --throughout the--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --book?
Speaker 2: And would have been prepared to address it.  But ill equipped and was not prepared to address the issue, so they called me.  "Okay, Mrs. Houston, we need to diffuse this."  And the parent, whose child was in the classroom, she herself is an educator as a professor at a college, was not happy.  But we had several incidents where for some reason they couldn't remember the child's name, and called this child every other name but her name, so there was some stuff that was going on that the staff was not ready, or was not willing to be prepared to change their norms because they figured they were in their house and they could do what they wanted to do.  So, my responsibility was to correct the problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, now you were there from 2002 to 2007 right?
Speaker 2: Is that what my resume say (laughter)?
Speaker 1: To two--yeah, 2002 to two thousand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now in the meantime I was doing this part time and doing my county job full time [at Salt Lake County Aging Services; Salt Lake County Aging and Adult Services].  So I was shared.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was pretty much like a consultant at the Rowland Hall-St. Mark's School [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Story_ID: 573099
Speaker 1: When did you start with the county?
Speaker 2: I started county 2002, October '02 [2002].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So these jobs were contemporaneous?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, they are.
Speaker 1: Completely, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you worked for Salt Lake County Aging Services [Salt Lake County Aging and Adult Services]?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: All right, and--
Speaker 2: That's my employer now.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you started off as a center supervisor?
Speaker 2: I did, center supervisor, I started off as a center supervisor.  I managed a staff of eleven. In participants, on a daily basis I would say of membership of four to five hundred, so in and out, in and out people.  And it's a day facility for well bodied, able bodied seniors, sixty and over.  So we provide--provided, I provided programming, education, trips, resources for attorneys, medical--overall, whatever you needed, if you were sixty and over we provided that for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I did that for five years.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I got a promotion, yahoo.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 573100
Speaker 1: During this five years though there's something else we need to talk about I guess, before you got promoted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What do you wanna talk about?
Speaker 1: Now you, you became a cancer patient right?
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: During that five years?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was diagnosed 2005, stage four breast cancer.  Carcinoma in situ, carcinoma, stage four, there's only (laughter) there's only five stages so you know I'm right up there at the very top of, of the stage.  So, normal going in for my annual checkup.  February is my birthday, I make sure everything's taken care of in February.  So, go in for a regular checkup, go in for mammograms, go in for everything.  Clean bill of health, everything's fine, I had scheduled an appointment with a plastic surgeon to do a breast reduction and during the breast exam she says, "Well what is this?"  I'm saying, "Well it wasn't there yesterday."  I mean within a timeframe, two different doctors doing the same exam she finds a lump and go back and my other doctor says, my primary says, "Oh, it's pretty fluid, I don't think you have anything to worry about, but we'll just, you know take a biopsy."  Take the biopsy and, it's cancer.  Absolutely it's cancer.  So, getting the results, I'm there, we go into the room where we're looking at the x-rays and the technician is saying, "You see this, you see this, you see this, these are cancer cells?"  And, I'm in the room thinking, okay, so what do we do next?  And immediately after he delivers the information to me, I don't know, five, six nurses, doctors, they're all in the room.  Now, keep in mind it's just the two of us to begin with and then I look around and someone's patting me on the shoulder, I'm thinking, what's going on here?  And I guess when people hear the word cancer they freak out.  My words to him was, "So what do we do next, so what do we do next?"  So they give me the regiment, they tell me what needs to happen, intense, intense chemo [chemotherapy], intense chemo.  And I'm thinking, really, how bad can it be?  The technology, the advances, really, how bad can it be?  And that was my thought going in being treated for cancer with chemo and radiation, lumpectomy, all of it.  How bad can it be?  Can't be that bad.  All my family and friends around me knew it was that bad.  I'm thinking, it can't be that bad.  So I think that's what really got me through it, it can't be that bad.
Story_ID: 573101
Speaker 1: Was it a difficult struggle to, to deal with or?
Speaker 2: People tell me it was.  People tell me it was absolutely difficult.  And when I look back on it, it was difficult, it was difficult.  It was difficult because of the pain, because chemo [chemotherapy], the poison that they put in your body to get rid of the disease in your body, near about kills you.  So, going in to have chemo, intensive chemo, was, was difficult, was difficult.  I had, I had a port put in to administer the medication so it wouldn't go directly into my veins, and the port malfact- malfunctioned, malfunctioned.  On top of the port malfunctioning, I got an infection which put me in the hospital for fourteen days with 106 degree temperature (laughter).  So I had an infection that went through my entire body and the doctors could not figure anything out; they could not isolate it, they could not determine where it came from.  When they took the port out, they said, "Your port was infected."  So yes, so I'm, I'm, I'm thinking, you know, how bad can it be?  So in the midst of me in the hospital hooked up to all kinds of stuff.  My heart stopped, I stopped breathing, they had to put me on all kind of monitors, MRIs, CAT sca- everything, everything you could possible think of, antibiotics, seven--twenty-four hours a day.  As I'm looking at my family and all the doctors and the nurses coming in they had a social worker who'd come in and I'm thinking, oh, how nice that they're talking to my family and giving them encouragement and support.  My husband [Larry Houston] later says to me, "No, sweetie, they were preparing us, they was giving us details on what to happen next."  I'm thinking I don't know who y'all was talking to, but I had this under control 'cause me and the Lord had already had this conversation.  So, my, my journey was, I think, a transition that needed to happen, to get whatever was inside of me out and to start me all over again.  My family's experience is totally different, totally different.  They said they saw me at the lowest that anybody could possibly be.  My pastor was at my bedside every day I was in the hospital.  So it was--they were seeing it on the outside of to the devastation that had taken place with my body, and I was seeing it on the inside as, this is a cleansing.  I've got something do for--to do for the next fifty years, so, I'm just getting prepared.
Story_ID: 573102
Speaker 1: You had other complications too, as well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had other complications.  I did.  I had--other than the infection, I had allergic reaction to the chemo [chemotherapy] where, (sigh) it affected my breathing and my lungs so they had to monitor that.  Had thirty-six treatments of radiation, so getting up to know every day for thirty-six times you have to go to this place, lay on this table, let them beam radiation into your body, get up go another day and go another day.  This is the coolest thing about radiation though: my very first trip, I'm in the dressing room changing and I hear someone spraying something and I say to the lady, "What are you doing?"  She said, "Oh, this is the best stuff, this is the best stuff, I got it from my vet [veterinarian]. He said as soon as you finish your radiation treatment, spray this on the area, spray this on the area."  I said, "You got it from your vet?"  She said, "Yeah, I got it from my vet."  She said, "But be careful, the more you use it you'll start barking."  And I just thought, oh, my gosh, this is crazy and she said, "I'm just kidding, I'm just kidding.  It's a sunburn spray."  So she gives me this can of sunburn spray and every time I leave radiation I spray it, I had none of the side effects of the darkening, of the peeling, of the burning, because this woman crossed my path.  So, when I think about my cancer treatment, I think people needed to be in my life and I needed to be in their life for a reason.  Now I wouldn't vote for it again, but, it makes me appreciate every single day that there are people out there developing a cure, their sole purpose is to rid the world of cancer.  And that they are dedicating their lives to make people with cancer survive and make it as comfortable for them and their family as possible.  So I just thinking my journey, I needed to do it for whatever reason, I needed to do cancer.  The thing too--the nurses, I would wear heels every day, every day I would walk in.  Now there're days when my husband [Larry Houston] would wheel me in a wheelchair, but I had my heels on.  And the thing about cancer you have no control over anything.  How you feel, how you look, how you react.  I had no control over anything.  The only thing I had control over was putting my body together, dressing from head to toe; that was it, that was the only thing I had control over, and I would not give that up.  So, my journey, it showed me a different side of people.  I had a col- a colleague who said, "We're going to bring meals to you every day you're in treatment."  And she did a round robin with my friends and my colleagues and strangers and every day I had--whenever I had treatment there was a meal delivered.  Every single day I had cancer treatment, a meal delivered.  So people, in time of distress, in time of crisis, good things happen.  And I was blessed to have people who cared enough to say, "We're gonna help you through this journey."  So--and I went to work every day.  I went to work every single day.
Speaker 1: I was wondering if you had to take a lot of time off.
Speaker 2: I went--the only time I took off was during radiation treatment because it was during the month of December, and because of the change of weather and flu and all those diseases going on, my radiation doctor said, "I want you to take the month off, I don't want you to go to work, I don't want you to do anything but go to treatment and go home, because you are--."  Your immune system is compromised when you do radiation.  That is the only time I took off.  There were days I should have took off, and my secretary would say, "Go home."  I would come in and I would--.  She'd say, "It's time for you to go home."  Okay, and I would go home.  So I had also given people permission to take care of me, and that was hard 'cause I'm a controlling person.  I'm just like, I can do it and I can do it and I will do it.  So my doctor said to me, "Although I've just met you, your personality tells me you're a controlling person, you have no control over cancer, so let it go now.  When people want to help you, let them help you."  Okay.  So that sunk in really, really fast.  Yeah, so it was interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Story_ID: 573103
Speaker 1: Tell us about when you found out that you--that it was eradicated and--I mean, how did you wha- find out, and what was the moment like?
Speaker 2: It was just like we're having the conversation now.  So, what's the next step?  You know, my belief is that if you can't cont- change the situation, why fret over it, why stress over it, do what you need to do to make it happen.  So I believe that my accepting the fact that I had cancer, that there is phenomenal doctors out there who can make it go away, or not, I just need to put my trust in God, and that's exactly what I did.  Lord, I don't know why I'm walking down this path, I know I've been hardheaded, you've been trying to get my attention, okay, you got it now, so.  It brings you closer to I guess your mortality.  The fact that you're only here for a certain amount of time, when the time is up, it is what it is.
Speaker 1: So, well, at the end of your treatment I guess they told you that you were, you were cured I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh no, oh no, oh no.
Speaker 1: Or--no?  You still--
Speaker 2: I still go.
Speaker 1: You still have it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I go back--I don't have cancer, they say it's not detected in the body.  But keep in mind, cancer isn't detected until it gets big, so, they cannot detect anything right now.  So I go every six months now, I used to go every three months, now I'm at every six months.  I take no medication, I take no regiments; I take nothing.  So, they do not see anything in regards to the cancer being there, but they don't give you a clean bill of health until it's five years, I'm just three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's where we are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're on the upswing.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well you seem to have a real good attitude about it, so.
Speaker 2: You know what, it is what it is, it absolutely is what it is.  And when I look back on some of the pictures and, I can listen to some of the stories that family and friends tell me, it's like, really?  Really.  (Laughter) Because I didn't see it that way, I absolutely didn't see it that way.  It's like, okay, okay.  I remember leaving the radiation treatment and this gentleman was taking his wife to her first treatment and he said to me, and at the time I was bald, oh, and loving it, absolutely loving it.  And he says to me, "Can I talk to you?"  I said, "Sure."  He says, "It looks like you've had a little problem with your hair?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He says, "My wife doesn't want to do treatment if she's gonna lose her hair, could you please talk to her?"  And here I am, going through chemo [chemotherapy], radiation, bald as all get out, and I go over and I put my hand on this woman's hand and I talk to her, I kneel down and I talk with her and said (sigh), "Really, if you have this wonderful man standing by your side, losing your hair is not going to even matter.  'Cause he still sees you as the beautiful person that you are.  If this is gonna save your life, consider getting the treatments that you need."  And they're both crying, I'm thinking, oh, my gosh, it's really, it's really not that bad.  Me and my eyes, it's really not that bad.  If this is gonna save your life, how much hair do you need?  So, cancer experiences.
Story_ID: 573104
Speaker 1: This experience [of breast cancer] help you deal with some of your clientele as a program manager in the--at the aging services (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the aging services?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think when you look at your journey and you look at seniors who may also be having a journey of their own, and may be angry about losing something, whether it be their health, their independence, whatever, I believe my experience has helped quite a few people.  What has helped was, I've had people come to me and say, "I never thought of getting a mammogram at my age, but because of your experience, I got one."  "My son is in Atlanta [Georgia], he's been diagnosed with cancer, what can you tell me?"  So for people to feel comfortable coming to me and ask those questions, and me being totally honest about it, I'm saying there's nothing I can explain to you because you cannot walk in those shoes, but I can give you some advice, just in case this will help you along the journey.  So yeah, it does help.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It does help (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell us a little bit about what you do now.  You're the assistant program manager for the Salt Lake County Aging Services [Salt Lake County Aging and Adult Services]?
Speaker 2: I am, I'm the assistant program manager.  I interviewed for that position, after being five years in the agency.  Thinking, okay, I think I know enough to manage seventeen senior centers, and my peers.  So what I do now is I do that.  I manage, guide, direct, coach, mentor the seventeen directors in Salt Lake County Aging Services on how a senior center should operate.  How it should run.  How it should market, how it should partner with communities.  How it should deliver services to seniors.  So my charge is to make sure that the directors are following those procedures.  That's what I get to do.  It's exciting, it's exciting.  Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well, are there any stories associated with this job that you can tell?
Speaker 2: Any stories associated with the job?  Well, keep in mind that I am now supervising people I used to work side by side with.  And my management style is basically, let's sit back and observe, let's see what all of their strengths are and let's see how I can help enhance those strengths.  And my way of mentoring, coaching, directing is to give people the benefit of the doubt; that you know your job until you prove me wrong.  I trust you, I understand because I have walked in your shoes, so I'm not a new kid coming in not knowing about senior centers.  I have lived that life.  And my responsibility is to support you but also help elevate you to make it bigger and better.  So, when I was at the Sunday Anderson Westside Senior Center [Salt Lake City, Utah], one of the things that my supervisor said, "I would love to have a center accredited."  And I said, "Oh, what does that mean?"  Well, there are these nine standards that the national organization has put together.  You need to fulfill all these nine standards.  They come out, they review you, they say yes or no.  So I took it upon myself, and my staff, to get together to get community leaders to be on the committee and go through the accreditation process, which is a year, two year process.  So we started January 2007, we completed the project August 2007.  I was promoted August 2007, so I had to leave the center while still in the middle of accreditation.  We submitted our proposal in December and now, March of '08 [2008], the accreditation team is coming out to review our program, to review the center, to talk to committee members and to say yes or no, that we have done what we're supposed to do.  My goal, my ambitious goal is to have all seventeen centers accredited between now and 2012.  That's my goal.  Now, my directors (laughter) are not necessarily on board with that because it is intense, it is intense, it's just an intense process, so.  What senior centers can be is a place for seniors to come, socialize, take some educational classes, keep living life because we have found that if you are stationary, that if you do not keep stimulating the brain, you die way too early.  And senior centers are a way to get people to stay living longer.
Story_ID: 573105
Speaker 1: What are your future goals?
Speaker 2: Oh, my future goals, my future goals.  Now if you had asked me that when I was at Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of Utah], I would have said, I wanna be the executive director, I wanna be in charge of a Girl Scout council.  Now, I'm not sure what my future goals are.  I'm planning to, you know, go back, go back to school get some more education.  But whether to say I would be the executive director for Aging Services [Salt Lake County Aging Services; Salt Lake County Aging and Adult Services], I don't know, I'm not sure.  I would like to talk to people about cancer, especially black women, young girls, the importance of managing your health, the port- importance of hiring a good doctor and firing a bad one.  I would like to let people know that just because someone says you have a disease that may take your life away doesn't necessarily mean you need to give up.  How to encourage people to do that.  Motivate, just motivate and let sisters know you can do all things.  You can do anything, absolutely unlimited possibilities, and to say to young women, the world is yours, it's absolutely yours; you can do whatever you set your mind, your heart, your desire to do.
Story_ID: 573106
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: (Sigh) My hopes and concerns.  My hopes and concerns for my people is that we recognize that we are a powerful people.  That we can do anything, either individually or collectively, my hope is that we unite with one another, that I'm happy when you're happy, I'm happy when you're successful because I know when you're successful, I'm successful.  I hope that we as a people could celebrate the goodness in us and recognize the goodness in us and recognize the strength that our forefathers gave us.  I hope that our people would value education and get as much education as they possibly could and help our young people get education also.  To succeed, to setup scholarships, to give $10, $50, $100; to give what you can to help educate a person.  I would hope that our young men in the world that we live in would respect the women that they are surrounded by that, they come in contact with, and I would hope that our young girls would respect themselves.  And I think teaching that by word, by deed, by action, I think is all of our responsibilities.  And I would hope that our people would not think that we are entitled to anything without having to work for it; that nothing is given freely, that we have to earn, that we have to earn, that we have to earn.  That you're just--aren't going to get something just because you exist; you have to earn it.
Story_ID: 573107
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Any major thing I would do differently?  What would I do differently?  I think I would have gotten education before marriage and children.  Not to take away from that, because I'm, I'm content with that way of my life, the way it went.  But I think I would have traveled more, would have learned more.  I think I would have been more active in celebrating blackness.  In mentoring young girls, in mentoring young boys to understand and respect one another.  I think I would have done that.
Story_ID: 573108
Speaker 1: Now likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, my legacy.  I think my involvement as youth director with my church would be my legacy.  I believe that when I was asked to take on that responsibility my vision was to listen to what the youth were saying, involve their responses, teach them how to be leaders and sit back and watch them grow and develop.  So, with that being said, having reached out to the community to create a job fair where employers would come in, and we had taught our children how to interview, how to write their resume, how to present themselves was one of the things that I did as a youth director and out of that many of our youth got internships or summer jobs because of that.  Helping them with their college fair, we created a college fair where the uni- local universities and colleges came to the church and we opened it to the community, not just our youth, we opened to the community, if you want to get in college, you want to get into a trade school their gonna be here, come and talk with them about the possibilities.  Having that with financial aid workshops, talking with parents about that, the job fair, the college fair, I think that--people still talk about that.  So, I'm proud that I have the opportunity to work with our youth and open the doors to say you can go to college, you can get a good paying job, you can be successful, and have them take that to heart so.  Several of the young women and men, scholarships, so, you know, it's a good thing, it's a good thing.  I worked with Westminster College, which is a private college here [Salt Lake City, Utah], and worked with one of the academic advisors, they do a summer camp and they wanted to get some children of color there, and this is a summer camp that is a week long, it's $1,200 and there's no way our kids have $1,200 to spend seven day on campus.  So, collaborating with him and saying, "We need some scholarships, give me a scholarship."  We started out with one scholarship, we are now at four scholarships every year to give these kids the opportunity of college experience, but also the opportunity to say, if I want to be an engineer, if I wanna do avionics, if I want to do finance, these camps you can go to.  And on turn, when you go to these camps you need to come back to the church and make a report, stand before the congregation and tell us what you learned while you were there for a week.  And it has been a tremendous experience and because these kids go, they get college credits, so when they go to college this experience transfers to some hours for them.  So, working with the youth ha- I think has been a good legacy for me.
Speaker 1: Now this is an important thing, it's been mentioned several times since I've been here, the youth program at Calvary Baptist Church [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: And, you know, Reverend Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] gets a lot of credit for it.
Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, I'm pleased to meet you as the person that's actually in charge of it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 573109
Speaker 1: Now tell us a little bit about your family, your daughters and your hu- your husband.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My husband Larry and I have been married thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: Larry Houston, you met him at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Larry Houston, met at--
Speaker 1: --University of Houston [Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: --University of Houston, so we have been married thirty-two years and we have two daughters.  Our oldest daughter, Lorry [Lorry Houston], is an actress.  She's an actress by trade.  She and her husband [Robert Burkins] live in South Carolina, he's a police officer, she's an actress.  And I wanna say that Denzel Washington was in a movie with her, but actually she was in a movie with him (laughter).  She says, "Mom, you can't say that."  I'm thinking, I'm the mommy I can say anything.  So she was in 'Deja Vu' with Mr. Washington as a disaster cop.  She was at the scene when the explosion happened, so.
Speaker 1: I saw that movie--
Speaker 2: Did you see that movie?
Speaker 1: --so I know I saw her, but I didn't know she was (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, well that was one of my--that was my kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, she has always been an actress, she--I told her she came out of the womb acting very dramatic, just, a sense of humor and a timing that is unbelievable so, that's what she does.  And our youngest daughter, Erica Elizabeth [Erica Houston Critchfield], is an artist.  And the pictures in the house, in our home are many of her pieces of work, pieces of work so she is an artist by trade.  Her day job, she's a waitress, but she is a, an artist and she and her husband, Samuel [Samuel Blue Critchfield] live here in Salt Lake City [Utah], and he's an artist also and we've got some of his work displayed, so talented young women that we have.
Story_ID: 573110
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Oh, anything, anything, anything.  I have a good circle of girlfriends, there's nothing like girlfriends it is absolutely--I tell my young sisters, if you can find two, three good girlfriends, that you trust and they trust you, it is nothing like sisterhood.  It's nothing like that, so.  Good, good friends, good friends.  My sisters and I, well my first sister, my oldest sister [Violet Roberson Machado] turned fifty.  I called my younger sisters--this is the year I was diagnosed with breast cancer, I called my younger sisters and said, "I'm celebrating Sissy's fiftieth birthday, you wanna go with me?"  "Sure, you're paying?"  "Yeah."  So, so we all fly to New York [New York], unbeknownst to her, unbeknownst to her, surprise birthday.  So we fly to New York and treat her to the town.  We take her to a Broadway show, we take her to dinner, we have a backyard barbeque, we go to church with her; we celebrate her fiftieth birthday.  And so now it has become a tradition that every time you turn fifty, sisters are coming and we're going to celebrate wherever you are.  Now the thing is, my brother [Norman Roberson, Jr.] turned fifty this past December, he says, "So what are you gonna do for me?"  And we're saying, this is a sister thing (laughter).  So he's whining, he's whining, so we surprise him, we all fly to Houston [Texas] and celebrate his fiftieth birthday with him.  So now the brothers are in on the celebration so, we do that, we celebrate, we celebrate, which is a good thing, good thing.
Story_ID: 573111
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.
Speaker 2: Legacy--okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  How would I like to be remembered?  That is a difficult question because I think that when you leave this planet, and you have left your fingerprints, that all is well.  I hope that I would be remembered that when she left all was well.  All was well, no big thing, no dramatic thing, no name on a wall or a plaque, that all is well.
Story_ID: 573112
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother, my mother's mother, Maudra Green; and she's holding my cousin, Bob, Jr.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: That's 1966; I saw it on the back of the (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, tell us about this one?
Speaker 1: Now this is my grandfather, my mother's mother [sic.], Louis Green, Sr., and this is 1966 and he's also holding Bob, Jr. Calloway [Robert Calloway, Jr.].  Yeah, my cousin.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this one?
Speaker 1: That is my now husband, Larry Houston and myself and we were dating in 1974.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay ready.
Speaker 1: Now this is me and my two brothers, my oldest brother, Norman, Jr. [Norman Roberson, Jr.], and my youngest brother, Brian Keith [Brian Roberson], as you can see the age difference in there, that's like 1973, '74 [1974], I'm thinking that's '74 [1974], cause we were in Houston [Texas] around that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's me, that's Emma Elizabeth [HistoryMaker Emma E. Houston], I am named for my--both of my great-grandmothers on my mother's side.  So Emma Elizabeth at seven months, so that is 1956 and something.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me and my older sister, Violet Louise [Violet Roberson Machado].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  April 1958.
Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh, and as you can see we have Easter baskets, so it must have been Sunday and we were going to church (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Oh, Daddy, Daddy (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: That is my father, Norman Gene Roberson Sr. [Norman Roberson, Sr.], and I'm thinking that's right before he and my mother were married, so 1934, right around that time.  My grandparents, my mother's mother, Maudra, and Louis Green.
Speaker 2: Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's my mommy--my mother and a girlfriend of hers.  And my mother is on the right hand side, she's the tallest one.  Ida Green [Ida Green Childress].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Mommy and Daddy.  Mother, Ida, and father, Norman.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next one.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's my older sister, Violet, my dad, Norman, and my baby brother, Brian Keith, and me.  We were at our oldest brother's wedding in Houston.  That's what that pictures for.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next one.
Speaker 1: Oh, and that's me, Emma Elizabeth and we were doing a Kwanzaa presentation at the Sunday Anderson Senior Center [Sunday Anderson Westside Senior Center, Salt Lake City, Utah], so, traditional African attire.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh my (laughter).  My older sister Violet Louise and me, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], Franklin D. Roosevelt High School [Dallas, Texas].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: My grandparents, Faustina Henrietta [Faustina Gilbert Roberson] and Emmitt Roberson.  It's my dad's parents.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 1: So my church family, church family, Brian [ph.] and Denean [ph.] Michael, Reverend France [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] and Rob [ph.] and myself.  Reverend France.
Speaker 2: Okay, here are my chemotherapy oncologists, doctors, nurses.  Dr. Saundra Buys [Saundra S. Buys] is my oncologist, Lisa [Lisa Gauchay] is her nurse and Janet [Janet Bloch] is her assistant.  So that is my last day of chemotherapy in January 2005.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my boss, Mayor Peter Corroon, Salt Lake County [Utah] mayor and my three sisters.  They have come to Utah to celebrate my birthday, my fiftieth.  And the other lady is Shauna O'Neill, who is the executive director of Aging Services [Salt Lake County Aging Services; Salt Lake County Aging and Adult Services].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: So there's Vicki [Vicki Roberson Herndon] and Violet and Estella [Estella Roberson Jones].  And this is my husband, Larry, my mother, Ida, and me, and we're celebrating Kwanzaa 2008 at our home.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Sister friends, this is Melinda [ph.] and Michelle and Michael Johnson [ph.] and we're celebrating Michael's MLK leadership award.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Sister friends, Valarie Green [ph.], Michelle Johnson [ph.], Lorilee [ph.], (Unclear), and we're having breakfast at Ruth's Diner in Salt Lake City, Utah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I have different hair on all these pictures (laughter).
Speaker 1: I am doing a CNN interview and I can't remember the reporter's name for the Huntsman Cancer Institute [Salt Lake City, Utah].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Glenn Beck, I was doing a show for Glenn Beck, he was doing a documentary on Jon Huntsman [Jon Huntsman, Sr.] and they needed some patients from the Huntsman center and they invited me to come talk.
Speaker 2: That's my staff, Salt Lake County Aging Services, senior center directors, the guy sitting next to me is my boss, David Turner.  He's the manager.  I'm the assistant manager.
Speaker 1: That's me and my sissy (laughter).  My sister and I are exactly nine months apart, don't tell anybody.  We're exactly nine months apart.  Violet Louise and Emma Elizabeth, and I think we must have been at the county fair or something 'cause where else can you get candied apples?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is my oldest daughter Lorry [Lorry Houston], my youngest daughter Erica [Erica Houston Critchfield], my mommy Ida, and me, family photos, July 2007.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Those are our girls, Lorry Annette in the blue and Erica Elizabeth in the white.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a marketing brochure for the Huntsman Cancer Institute, and I am one of the persons they interviewed for their annual report, so they've been circulating that picture.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: These are four girls from Spelman University [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] was part of the choir that came to celebrate Black History Month in Utah and I hosted them at our house.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: I have their names written down somewhere.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: Well, there's Pastor Davis, but I'm in, I'm in the audience (laughter).  And that was, at the History Library [Family History Library, Salt Lake City, Utah], they were giving a presentation on how to research your black history, how to search--research black families and I was in the audience participating.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right in the front.
Speaker 1: Right in front.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Different hair again (laughter).  Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]!  Michelle Obama was here in Salt Lake City.  And there I am kind of right there saying, "Yes we can, yes we can."  The energy, the excitement, the enthusiasm, phenomenal.  So we were at the Obama rally.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is Violet Louise, Emma Elizabeth, Vicki Lynn and Estella Mae celebrating my fiftieth birthday in Utah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, one above that?
Speaker 1: That is Emma Elizabeth in Salt Lake City--no, I'm in New York [New York] celebrating Violet's fiftieth birthday.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that?
Speaker 1: And that is Emma Elizabeth with no hair after cancer treatment.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay top right.
Speaker 2: And this is Violet Louise, Vicki Lynn, Estella Mae and Emma Elizabeth celebrating my fiftieth birthday.  We had high tea at the Grand America [Grand America Hotel, Salt Lake City, Utah], way fun.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, Estella Mae and Emma Elizabeth, Violet Louise and Vicki Lynn celebrating Violet's fiftieth birthday, we were headed to 'The Lion King' on Broadway in New York City.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay, ready.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, go ahead, okay.  This is a Salt Lake City Tribune [The Salt Lake Tribune] article on the importance of mammograms and when women should receive those.  And they interviewed me on my experience on what is an appropriate age to get a mammogram.
