Story_ID: 64369
Speaker 1: I'd just like to have you state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Jerry Harkness, J-E-R-R-Y, H-A-R-K-N-E-S-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like you to state the date, the locate--you know, that we're in Indianapolis [Indiana]--I wanna slate it--and, and your occupation, and date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, what is--the date is the 14th, isn't it?  And where are--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --or the 13--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--the 12th.
Speaker 2: The 12th?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see, I'm--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I'm, I'm out of the--I really am.  The date is July 12th, Wednesday.  And I'm in Indianapolis, Indiana, in my home, 8340 Misty Drive.  And I am 60 years old, May 7th, 1940.
Story_ID: 64370
Speaker 1: Now, sir, I ask everyone the same five questions--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --no relevance (unclear) thing, but I'd like to know what your favorite color is?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Rice; I love rice, yeah.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring, summer, right, right in the middle there.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: It's a nice place.  And a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things unseen.
Speaker 1: I don't know if somebody--I think my mother always says that too.  Okay.
Story_ID: 64371
Speaker 1: I'm gonna have you--what we usually do is have everyone start at the beginning, and I'd like you to talk about your parents.  You were just talking about your father, you know, senior, his granddaughter and coming to tears.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'd like you to talk about--give me your father's [Lindsey Harkness] name and, and what, you know, what he was like and you know, or what he is like--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what he, you know, in the youth--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what he did, what he was like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and your mother [Lucille Harkness] growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, my mother was the one.  My father was a hardworking man in New York City in Harlem [New York City, New York], where we grew up, was sort of a womanizer; did not do the things I would be proud of as a dad.  He was not in the home, but he worked with the United Nations.  He washed the windows of the United Nations building and that we were really excited about him.  He--for a number of years I was really disappointed in him as an individual in my life, 'cause he didn't play a part in my life.  But I felt a lot better as I got to know him later on in his life and the fact that he was trying to take care of his entire family, his sisters and, and his mom, and his dad.  And, and he was one of the big breadwinners.  So that made me feel a little bit better but was not the person that I needed in the home.  We were on welfare all through my years in, in, in Harlem growing up.  And my mother, obviously, was the real strong one that had to take care of us when he didn't show up for Christmas and things like that.  She--we--things that I wasn't proud of also is that she went into Bellevue Hospital, we puttin' so much stress on her, couldn't understand why we didn't have--we had holes in our shoes and couldn't eat certain days.  And she went to Bellevue, but she was fully recovered, got herself a job.  We moved into the projects, into the Bronx [New York City, New York], and it was like a, a good ending, not a happy ending, but a good ending because she struggled in Harlem all by herself raising two of us.
Story_ID: 64372
Speaker 1: So, my, my father, Lindsey Harkness, as I indicated, was a hardworking man.  He just was not in the home for us, but as I indicated, later on life I felt a little bit better about it because I realize he was trying to help too many people, and as a result, wasn't doing a good job overall in helping any.  But he, he would help his sisters.  He had two or three of them and cousins, and he was just trying to work and help everybody plus he ran the streets.  He enjoyed life, and, and Harlem was swinging then.  The Savoy Ballroom, oh, he was just--I'd see him out sometime and thing, but it--that's the way he was.  But my mom, Lucille Harkness, was, was just my pride and joy.  And she, she stood by me and, and struggled in my ways, because I wasn't the, the best kid coming up - bigheaded, spoiled, and couldn't understand why she wasn't providing the things for us - why are we on welfare and why do we have to run and hide the phone when the caseworkers come, or things like that.  And so I made things a little tough for her.  And my, my sister, Marlene, was just as bad.  She was worse (laughter) than me probably in some ways.  And so we put a lot of pressure on her.  And as a result, she went into Bellevue Hospital, and that's always hurt me.  But she fought through that, fought through some tough times, and she came out and got her job.  And she was insecure about work.  I mean it was just tough for her, and--
Speaker 2: Let' me--
Speaker 1: --we moved to the projects.
Story_ID: 64373
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this: When, when she [Lucille Harkness, mother] went into Bellevue Hospital, how old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I must have been--I don't--10, 12, right around that; I'm saying 9, 10, something like that.  I, I think it was elementary school, before I went into junior high.  And my aunt played a role there, Clara Paine, who has done a tremendous, tremendous job of, of our family roots, put that together.  But she kind of took over while she was gone.  Plus my grandmother, Eliza Bailey (ph.), and my grandfather--okay--Moses Bailey, they were hardworking people.  And they lived in a real nice location in Harlem called the Dunbar, and that's because they both worked so hard.  And it's--what's ironic about Harlem [New York City, New York]in those days, and I don't wanna go on and spread out of this thing, but I was there with Bojangles and all of the top actresses and actors, and the dancers, and entertainers, because there were no--it wasn't any integration, so we all stayed as a family there.  So I was close to all of that.  The doctors were right there and so on.  And that was kind of--that weighed on me because we didn't--we were really at the bottom of the pole, and--but they took care of us while she was gone.  And when she came back, her life was better from there on out.
Speaker 1: Was that something--were you very aware that your mother had--she had a nervous breakdown--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you very aware of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, you just--
Speaker 2: As, as a kid you don't--I know she was sick, and I started to realize that it--a lot of that was us putting pressure on her.  So we were better when she came out.  But we had matured anyway as kids, so it was a little bit better.  But gosh, she, she put her heart into the two of us and worked very hard for us to be successful.
Story_ID: 64374
Speaker 1: Now, let us know about your mother's [Lucille Harkness] side of the family.  Let's just talk a bit.  How had--had they, had they been in New York?  Where are they from originally?  You know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where is your family from originally, that side?
Speaker 2: They were from Virginia, Orange, Virginia, where we used to go in the, in the summertime.  To get a break from Harlem [New York City, New York] we'd go up to Virginia.  And that's when I--that's the only time I really started to feel the, the discrimination and the prejudice and didn't understand, because if you're in Harlem they're all black, and there was no problem.  I mean everybody kind of cared.  It was a closeness there that you--it was good for me.  A lot of people don't understand that Harlem was so good because it was so family-like, and people cared about you, and everybody looked after their own kids and was--the, the homes, the, the apartments was so close.  I mean you--if you see how Harlem is made up or you'd come out the streets there, and there you are with your buddies--you don't have to go a, a--we--a mile away or something--they were right there and they're in the same complex and all like that.  But we would have a break and we'd go to, to Virginia where my grandparents--really, that's their, their family, and they had started in, in Virginia.  We had something like 12, 14 acres, so we're, we were proud.  And, and it was nicely--it was rich, chickens, it was corn as far as you could see, and the cows and all like that.  And, and from my mother's side on--they were hard workers, and they took care of that farm.  Oh, it was just beautiful to go there and see that.  We had the well and the outhouse and things but just a beautiful place to go.  And it made you proud that that belonged to you and your family.  So we would go there in the summertime, and I'd race around.  And when we went into town is when we, we knew.  I couldn't understand the colored--water for colored and water for white, but I, I, I dealt with that.  I mean early on it didn't hit too bad and because there were so many other things that were so good and different about the South and, and things.  So it was fun; it was a fun time, but I was happy to get back to my friends.  We'd come back after two weeks to, to New York City and be around my friends before we'd start school again.
Speaker 1: But you were saying that your aunt [Clara Paine] had done a lot of research on the family.  And I was just wondering some of the things she traced back.  Do you know?
Speaker 2: She went all the way back to the Squires, way back, Squire May, which are--were before us.  And they were on the farm--Monroe's farm I believe--back, back sometime on the plantation.  She went so far back--I, I'mma show you the book soon (laughter) as I get a chance, Julie, and I get off camera, but--and, and came all the way through.  So she went right during slavery when they were on the farm--the plantation.  She, she got all of that information, and it starts back with Squire May on the farm and, and comes all the way up.  And, and it's just phenomenal because then the, the--you could see the Baileys spread out to--all across the--in Massachusetts, all across around Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, all of that.  So it's just phenomenal to sit there and, and have her talk to me about individuals, my great-great-great-grandmother and so on, so it goes way back.
Story_ID: 64375
Speaker 1: We--you were talking about--I'd like you to share some more memories growing up, you know.  And, and I'd like you to describe--well, let me have you first describe how you were as a, you know, a young, young person.  You know, were--you know some people are precocious; some people are dreamers; some people are shy.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was shy except for I--early on I realized that I was gifted athletically.  I was real fast; I was the second fastest in the area.  I was shy with the young ladies, and that led for a long time in my life and probably helped me because I, I penetrated into athletics later on.  But early on I found out that I was fast, and I, I got involved in athletics; went to the Harlem YMCA.  And in going there, later on in life, it--I, I met a person that turned my life around.  I didn't have a lot of confidence in myself.  Even though I, I, I excelled in sports, I still wasn't sure of myself.  And this guy came up to me--and this is early on--well, I was in high school.  And I didn't wanna jump into this, but it's such a big part of my life.  He came up to me and said, "You know, you're not that bad of an athlete."  I looked up to him, and my mouth flew open.  Then he walked on and walked away.  He said, "You know, you might be able to get a scholarship to, to, to college," and he walked.  We were at the Harlem YMCA, and his name was Jackie Robinson.  Here he used to come down and talk to the guys and the kids, and I was one of 'em, and Jackie--that was it.  And strange enough, when he told me that, I felt confident.  And as a senior in high school I went out for my basket--for the basketball team, only as a senior.  And I made it, and we won the championship, and I got a scholarship.  But he gave me that extra push, that edge, and I loved him.  And he--I--he was like a, a, a spiritual dad, somebody that you just admired and just, oh.  And when he told me that, it changed my life around.
Speaker 1: Well, I can understand that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have other contact with him besides--
Speaker 2: No, I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so bashful.  If I wish I had because people ask me that.  I really wish--I'd follow him sometime when he--even when he, he stopped playing ball, and he was with Chock Full O' Nuts and downtown he had become a vice president.  I re--I saw him down there and followed him, just wanting to say something to him and couldn't--didn't have the nerve.  Even when he was with all the ga--the kids at the Y[MCA], I was so bashful I didn't wanna go up to him or get involved with him or.  But he--that's all he needed to say 'cause I, I admired him so.  And my life kind of, kind of leaned that way, doing the things that he was doing, not as good (laughter), but leaned that way.  I often wondered--he had that much of an effect on me.
Speaker 1: Well, sometimes it just takes one, one instance--
Speaker 2: One instance--
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that, that
Story_ID: 64376
Speaker 1: --now I wanna go back though younger.  You were--so you were--you would say you were shy, you know, a shy, introverted child?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You--did you have--I mean before, like your teen years.  But did you ever dream of things or you know, or think of what you wanted to be or have?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know?
Speaker 2: I, I dreamed of the Olympics.  I--my first love was running and, and track.  So I can remember reading books.  I was reading about Jesse Owens back then, Ralph Metcalfe, and I off--often would dream about that and daydream about things like that.  I--my parents--my grandparents, Eliza and Moses Bailey, lived in the Dunbar Apartments [Harlem, New York City, New York], as I indicated.  And I'd go over and work for them, do anything, go to the store for 'em, so I can get some pocket change.  So, I always worked hard at things to, to, to--I don't know; it was just a part of me.  And that's maybe my dad in me; he was a hard worker.  And so my, my mind was on working hard to get the things I wanted in life at an early age, even though it was just for ice cream and a magazine or something.  So I'd go over there and ask them for help and would work with them.  But then I'd come back to the block and play sports.  That was my recognition, was sports.  I was starting to get noticed.  I'd be picked the top--one or second on a team, so early on I did.  And I was very hard headed.  And my dad [Lindsey Harkness], when he did come in my life he tried to get me to study.  And I could see him hitting me in my--upside my head, and I'd just do the opposite.  I could see all of those things.  I saw a spoiled brat, but I was a very good athlete, very good athlete.
Speaker 1: You know, it's hard for me to think of you--you're very soft spoken, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'm trying--the reason I'm pushing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on this, I--you don't seem the spoiled brat--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was hard.
Speaker 1: You (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was hard.  I don't know what it was.  I was hard--
Speaker 1: But I mean what age--
Speaker 2: --to get along with.
Speaker 1: --are we talking (laughter) about?
Speaker 2: We're talking elementary school.
Story_ID: 64377
Speaker 1: You were a spoiled brat?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was quiet and everything, but I was--she did everything for me.  My mom did a, a lot for me that--to help me that--because she realized she couldn't do--so she would try to do as much as she could.  And I was hard headed in a way.  I was conceited.  I was kicked out of the block because I was--I--it's almost like I think of Muhammad Ali effect--is that I, I don't think--I think I used the conceitedness, that I'm this guy; I'm so much better than you and used to brag about how I was over other guys just to hide the fact that I was insecure, and so they kicked me out.  I'll never forget the whole--everybody just said you can't come back in the block.  That's how bad I was.  So I--because I lived on an avenue in the block, like 147th Street.  And they wouldn't--they did--the whole--all my friends and all, they just kicked me out of the block (laughter), 'cause I was--and finally they let me back in, and I got a little bit better.  But early on I was--I started to, to really do well in sports that I started to play with the big kids, the older kids.  They started to pick me, so I would play with my friends--
Speaker 1: And, and was this running?  You were racing or what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in, in basketball.
Speaker 1: Basketball on the street?
Speaker 2: Racing--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --on the street in Harlem [New York City, New York].  Pretty much basketball started to come in there a little bit.  And I had--
Speaker 1: When did you--
Speaker 2: --struggled.
Speaker 1: --start playing basketball?
Speaker 2: Fifth grade, fourth grade, fifth, fourth.  And after a few years of struggling with it I started to get better.  And I was better than the kids my age, so the older kids started pick--asking me to play with them.  And I wasn't good, but I was competitive with them.  And we're talking about five, six ye--years older.  So I started to really perfect my, my talent by playing against the older kids.  And then after I was finished with them I'd go back with my younger kids, and we'd do all the other things that we had together.  But--
Story_ID: 64378
Speaker 1: Can I ask a question?  This is sort of--but why do you think basketball is really so popular in the black community--I mean of all the--you know it's the thing that kids play when they're young--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even more--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --you know, even more than base--even more than baseball.  I mean if you go--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --in any black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you hit it on the nose.  It's right there.  You, you--all you need is a basketball and a hoop, and they're all over the place.  We can go to the park, you got a basketball and hoop.  Baseball, you need a number of guys that gotta have mitts, that gotta have bats; you gotta have a field to go to, you gotta have a location, and it's not right there.  So we could go right--I'd go out of my house and go shoot around, and I could shoot by myself.  But when you're playing baseball, unless you're hitting it against a wall or something, you can't do that by yourself either.  So if kids aren't around I could shoot by myself.  Then I could play with kids, and then it's something that you could do--we could do day and night 'cause we'd go inside.  Once baseball--it was no lights or anything, so you'd finish at night.  So we'd go inside the gym inside the school and play indoor.  So it was--is the availability of the game is so easy.  That's one of the reasons why.
Speaker 1: And do you--and, and in the community, in this--were things in New York at that time, were they separated by blocks?  You know, did people stay with them or was it a several block area--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a several block area, but we did have a tendency, like we were at 147th Street [Harlem, New York City, New York].  We had our group of guys, and 146th had a group of guys, but we were--would compete against each other in sports.  And that's why I got--they had to ask me to come back in the group, because I was so good and the other teams were beating them.  And--but it was, it was worth it though in the long run because I got better.  I just--my disposition improved somewhat.
Story_ID: 64379
Speaker 1: Right, and when--what about school?  Were you a good student, a bad student?
Speaker 2: Terrible.  Yeah, I just--and I don't know, Julie, to this day if I, I had a, a learning defect or, or what, but I was not good.  I had certain things that I would work at and work at and work at, and I, I think a lot of things--I didn't know how to study.  And then I got so involved with basketball and athletics that--and, and, and my mom [Lucille Harkness] didn't have the, the capability there, and my dad [Lindsey Harkness] wasn't there.  She'd get on him, call him and say I'm not studying, and he'd come over and try to bang it in me.  And it, and it just didn't work.  I was not a good student all the way through.  And I was--I had potential because I went to the Frederick Douglass Junior High [Frederick Douglass Academy, Harlem, New York City, New York].  And a Mr. Phillips there and some other teachers, they, they put me in the, the better classes for potential, but I wasn't a good student.  I--to this day, I just felt that it was very difficult for me, really difficult.
Speaker 1: Did you find that--now where did you go to elementary?  You went--
Speaker 2: P.S. 90, which is an elementary school in Harlem [New York City, New York] at 147th in--and 148th Street in 8th Avenue, and it was a good school.  As matter of fact, I--at the time there were black and white teachers in, in the school, all black kids because of Harlem.  But it, it, it was a good education.  I mean I can't say oh, we--the, the school didn't do this--(unclear)--good teachers.  We had a good facility and we had good equipment.  We had everything that, that was right for us to be successful if we wanted to.  But I think the background, coming out of the, the poverty and depending on so many other things in life that people take for granted, depending on it, but like going to school with holes, holes and the water coming in on a rainy day, and your feet are soggy and it's on the ground, and you're on welfare, and people--it was those kind of tough things that you had to deal with.
Story_ID: 64380
Speaker 1: So really, that you didn't feel good about--you were angry in many ways back then.  Were you--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: --angry at--
Speaker 2: I think I was and didn't realize it, a little angry.  It--and then again, I--every--a lot of people were that way.  But I was so close to the Dunbar, which was sort of--they had a garden and all, Bojangles and all--Sarah Vaughan, all these--they all lived in there, so we--and they lived well.  So, and that was my--my grandparents lived in there also because they worked so hard to live there.  And it's, it's strange now, life is.  And I thought my grandfather [Moses Bailey] was, oh, this big guy, big man and everything because he, he took care of his family so.  And I went downtown one time in Radio City Rockefeller Plaza, and there he was with the elevator; people going up and down.  All he did was run an elevator, but he was proud.  And I don't know within if he was hurting, but he was a proud person when he got home.  And his--and his wife, Eliza Bailey, took care of him like he was a king.  So here he is running an elevator, but he felt proud of himself, all day long up and down (laughter), Rockefeller Plaza.
Story_ID: 64381
Speaker 1: And do you--now with, with this whole thing of Bojangles and Sarah Vaughan, you had a child's view of them, but what--that's why I'm wondering, you know.  Harlem [New York City, New York] was--Harlem has always had a special thing--you know, feel and, and all that.  But what, what would you--I mean, you know, what was Bojangles like back--you know, what was--
Speaker 2: Ah, he was a star.  He, he really was, like Joe Louis.  Later on when he came through he'd have 20 people around him coming through the Harlem and everybody trying to get to him, shake his hand and people looking out the window.  Bojangles, all of those were big stars right there in the community.  I mean you could touch 'em, so you could, you could feel a part of 'em.  And you said oh, I wanna be like that; oh, I wanna be like--I wanna be like Joe Louis or Sugar Ray Robinson and all, all those guys were right there for you.  And the doctors were all there for you.  You got the dentists.  I mean I didn't--I walked downstairs and half a block, and I'd go to the dentist (laughter).  I mean it was all there right there in the community.  So, if you wanted--as--to be in, in, in a profession, there was a role model right there for you, so it was good.  It was so much good that we don't realize--a lot of poverty now, and the poverty stayed with the, the rich.  It was right close.  And they protected the rich by guards.  And they had this beautiful Dunbar Apartments, and when you go through there, oh, you get--you felt rich when you go in there.  The guard was there and all like that, and the place was well kept and clean.  And you'll see Bojangles come through and then you'll see somebody else, Sarah Vaughan and Dinah-Diane [sic] Washington [Dinah Washington].  I mean they were, they were all there, yeah.
Story_ID: 64382
Speaker 1: Do you think if you had--do you think because you were in a city environment and there--and you could see the difference between poor and not poor that you were aware of being poor?  Do you think that, or do you think it had something to do with being on welfare?  Because you know, sometimes people have said to me, you know, we were poor, but we didn't have a clue that we were poor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I tell a lot of people all of the guys around me were poor.  We--but I had that Dunbar to look up to.  Matter of fact, later on in life when I went and played with the Knickerbockers, New York Knickerbockers, where did I get me--where did I live at?  The Dunbar Apartments [Harlem, New York City, New York].  I just felt I had made it (laughter), you know.  And the Dunbar Apartments was run down a little bit then (laughter), but you know, you didn't realize it at the time.  But that was my goal.  So I knew--well, now that I'm talking to you, I realize that there was a difference; that we were struggling; we had--we was poor.  You know, when you eat once in awhile or I had to run over to my grandparents to, to eat 'cause we didn't have food, you know something's wrong or something's not there.  But it--I, I don't think it--maybe it did.  I'm not gonna say it affected me that much because all my friends were poor.  But we could tell the difference because right down the street is the Dunbar, two blocks.  That's 149th; I'm at 147th.
Story_ID: 64383
Speaker 1: I'd like to--let's--okay, so you're in high school.  School is not so relevant.  You're shy, though.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're shy but are you--have you tempered your, your, you know, cockiness?  Are you feeling like--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I, I tempered it in, I think, in junior high, is when I started go out in junior high.  Here, the competition was a little bit better because you, you moved out of the elementary school, and then the kids are coming from a further area around to that school and at 139th and 8th Avenue--7th Avenue--was P.S.--I mean Junior High School 139, Frederick Douglass [Academy, Harlem, New York City, New York], all black.  The majority of the teachers were, were black, and they cared about you.  And there were a couple, Mrs. Bernard.  I can still remember her.  She showed an interest in me.  And there was another teacher that was really nice.  And I'll never forget, she said something about my mom because I was acting up a little bit.  And she says, doesn't your mom teach you better than that, or you acting you, your mom--ooh, when she said that I jumped on her, and I, I jumped at her, I mean verbally.  And they took me down to the principal and said you know you can't do that.  That's the only time I really think I got in trouble.  But here, again, was put in a good school and a good class, because I showed potential.  I was always clean and neat and spoke halfway decent but was not good in, in the studies, not bad.  I, I got by but not very good.  And I started because I didn't make the high school team, the basketball team, the, the junior high.  I started to calm down a little bit because I wasn't as good as I thought I was.  And then I started to work at it.  And that was a good experience for me.  I'll never forget for the first time I went to the prom I think I went by myself.  We went over to the Renaissance Savoy Ballroom to the prom, and went by myself,  and just sat up there; was clean and neat and didn't dan--I don't think I danced with anybody.  I just felt kind of lonesome, but that's the way I was.  I didn't know any girls or anything, so I didn't have a prom.  But I--then I went to DeWitt Clinton High School and I think a lot really opened up, because it's a predominantly Jewish school in the Bronx, Upper Bronx [New York City, New York].
Story_ID: 64384
Speaker 1: And then I realized how far behind I was when I started running and competing with them.  But I went out for the track team and was very--wasn't that good at first.  I worked awfully hard at it.  And the kids started to get better than me in my sprints.  I had been a great sprinter in my--but they got better than me in the sprints.  So the coach said why don't you do distance.  And I looked over on the corner, and there was about 15, 20 white kids running the distance.  I said no, I don't wanna do distance (laughter).  And he said well, try it--no.  And finally I tried it.  I went over there and worked, and I started to do well.  And a long story short, I was the best--third best--in cross country in the entire city.  I was the best in the city in a thousand-yard run.  And distance was my thing, but I, I just thought that was limited to white kids, and we only did the sprints.  So I limited myself.  And I be--I got a scholarship to St. John's, if I could only keep my grades, do well, in distance running.  But that same year is when Jackie [Robinson] told me--Robinson--that, you know, you're not a basketball player.  So I started thinking: Now I loved track, but am I gonna make some money in track or will I have a chance to make some money in basketball?  And I chose basketball.  Did not graduate on time from high school.
Speaker 2: Now are you at DeWitt at this--
Speaker 1: DeWitt Clinton, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're at DeWitt Clinton.  Now what year did you go to DeWitt Clinton?  That's the--
Speaker 1: I went to DeWitt Clinton from 1955 to 1958.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Stayed out a year to go to summer school and all.  I graduated with a general diploma.  That was a--not, not enough to get me a scholarship.  We had won everything.  In my senior year we won it in basketball, and I was the top scorer--one of the top scorers.  And I had gotten all of this, but I couldn't because my grades were so bad.  And I went to summer school and I improved on it, and I played a lot of sandlot basketball.  And a guy named Walter November took a--put me on his team.  And I played against all of this great competition in New York, Connie Hawkins, Roger Brown, all of these great players, and I held my own; I started to really come.  And he called the--he sent around and said hey, this here is a kid that can really play and nobody knows it.  And I had a chance to go to NYU [New York University].  I took the entrance exam.  I was gonna play at NYU [New York University], and I failed so miserably on the exam that they, they couldn't take me in.  So, I went back, went to summer school, worked hard, and Loyola gave me a, a chance, Loyola University of Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 64385
Speaker 1: Now what did you know about Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois]?  And wasn't their team so--their team was not very good at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --kind of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --they were that--
Speaker 1: -so that's--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  They--their teams were not that good, but here's a chance.  They gave me a four-year ride.  And the coach had come down to see me.  I didn't play that well, but Walter November convinced them that this guy is good.  So he took a chance with me anyway; gave me a four-year ride.  My studies had improved somewhat.  And he said well, we'll give him a chance, because they're, they're--I think they were 10 and 10 or 6 and 14, that kind of a year.  So they, they brought me in, and I, I packed up.  Oh, that was a good--my, my mom [Lucille Harkness] was so excited and happy.  And I left the projects.  I walked through the project with my suitcase, and I went on to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, Walter--now you said Walter No--you said--
Speaker 2: Walter November.
Speaker 1: Now who was he?  Who was he?
Speaker 2: He was an--a, a, a--an Italian guy that a lot of, a lot of individuals in New York would pick teams and compete against each other.  Jewish guys would just--
Speaker 1: But this was outside of any school?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: In the summertime we'd play against other teams.  And these guys just enjoyed getting teams together and giving us some socks or something like that.  And, and we agreed to play for that team.  And Walter, not only did he have me on his team, but he looked after me and said hey, I'mma try to get you in college.
Speaker 1: That's fa--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: So was it part--
Speaker 2: --turn in my life.
Speaker 1: --like a boy's club or anything?  It wasn't a program that teach kids--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, now I went in--I went to all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I might--and I participated in the Harlem Boy's Club [Harlem, New York City, New York].  But it's a, it's a bunch of us.  It's not any individual attention.  And I played for all the basketball teams coming up there, St. Phillips, which is a guy named Rucker, who was known as a great coach.  He had the Rucker Tournaments, and it's an outdoor tournaments in New York.  I played in that.  I played with the CY, the Harlem CYO [Catholic Youth Organization].  I ran track there.  I did the Police Athletic League, and those things kept me out of trouble; they really did.  And I did well enough that I got some recognition, so I stayed in those things.  But it didn't get me any scholarships.  I wasn't that noted until I played in those--I, I won this one year basketball didn't--that hurt me.  Because even though we won it all, and I was starting to get a reputation, my grades were so bad.  And he stayed with me, Walter November, and I did well on his team.  And we, we competed very well.  And afterwards, he, he wrote to a number of schools in Chicago [Illinois].  Loyola of Chicago [University, Chicago, Illinois] showed an interest and was willing to take a chance with me.
Story_ID: 64386
Speaker 1: Now let--I'd like to put some things in historical context, just, you know, so we understand where blacks stood in the game of basketball at that point, I mean even with college ball.  I mean what--who, who were the pe--were there people that you could look up to in the--or the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Walter Dukes from Seton Hall [University, South Orange, New Jersey], the Harlem Globetrotters, ah, did I look up to them.  I think we all did because they always won, and they, they were funny and talented together and couldn't understand why they didn't play in the pros.  But some of the guys like Sweetwater Clifton [Nathaniel "Sweetwater" Clifton]--I looked up to Ray Felix and all of these guys that played with--Willie Naulls and all of them played with the Knickerbockers.  So I, I had some people but Walter Dukes especially, 'cause he was very good in college at Seton Hall.  And I really used to watch him play at--on TV.  A little bit of TV was starting to come in, and I really did.  We would play in the Rucker Tournaments and all of these--Guy Rodgers--all these great athletes would come down.  And the white kids would come to Harlem [New York City, New York] to play in the tournaments too.  And it, it put you in perspective.  North Carolina, South, all of those schools used to come to Harlem and take the white kids and, and give them scholarships.  And we, we couldn't get those.  We'd go to prin--ah, at that time, predominantly black schools, Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], if I remember, Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], all of those schools up in that, that area on the, on the East Coast I remember a lot of the guys going to.  But the schools were not quite open for basketball players.  They were starting to open up, and so they would take one or two at each school, black athlete.
Story_ID: 64387
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you know, I, I, read that the Harlem Globetrot--trotters actually started in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Which was--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ba--Abe Saperstein--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Abe Saperstein started them in Chicago.  But here, again, the name Harlem was so big at that time.  And they were great athletes.  They had the Renaissance teams in Harlem too.  Pop Gates and all these guys were great athletes in Harlem.  So even though it started in Chicago, the name original Harlem Globetrotters had much--a, a better ring to it because Harlem was so dominant at the time.  It was the Renaissance and Duke Ellington, all these guys, again, you would see and with Sarah Vaughan.  And it, it was just the, the epitome of black talent.  And, and not only we're talking about music talent, but also poetry and painting and things.  It was all of that all there together.  So if you wanna have athletics, you wanted to be a part of that Renaissance sort of be.
Speaker 1: Because I had done my--one of my honor's thesis on the Harlem Renaissance, that those were great--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know period.  Chicago said they had something but they, they (unclear) quite qualify it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 64388
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  I--so you go, you go to--you get this.  So it's--I just wanna ask one other question.  Really, so you're saying that whites were recruited.  It's not today where, you know, people are aggressively recruited?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was that someone actually found you a place, you know, that the team was just doing okay, but they could give you a four-year ride?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and it wasn't quite open for a bla--a black players on, a--like having three or four go to the school at that time.  It was starting and we were the first.  After I went there and we started to improve so well, I brought a, a guy by the name of Ronnie Miller from Harlem [New York City, New York] from the, from the high school that did well.  I brought him to Loyola.  And see, Walter November and Coach George Allen started to have a good thing especially with me coming in and being such a positive.  So--but Walter said well, all I got is good black players.  He said I'll take 'em, I'll take 'em.  So George Allen went to Nashville, Tennessee, and picked two guys from an all-black team that had dominated the high school, Pearl High School in Nashville.  And they came and it was four of us, and that's--he had to play four of the best.  I mean it was no getting around, we were so dominating.  And that was an un--it was sort of unheard of, maybe one, I think Cincinnati.  But most teams didn't have four, and we had four.  And we were dominating.  I mean we were playing very well.  And we were going in the South and here.  They were throwing and calling us names, and all the, the players on the, on the teams were.  So I was in that era where we would go to Houston, and they'd call us--my team is red hot; your team is all black.  And that was a--and they'd scream at us and spit at us and all that.  So we went through that, but there was a closeness among us, all living in the dorm--the dormitory--all together as a group.  And we stuck together and it made us even closer when we ran into the problems like that.
Story_ID: 64389
Speaker 1: Now that's--so, how was the whole experience?  You've been in the cloistered and--I mean you've been in Harlem [New York City, New York].  That was your--that was your whole world except a few trips South.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So here you are in Chicago [Illinois], you know, for the first--you know, in another city for the first time.  I'm just--and, and really, a Catholic institution--you had been in a Jewish--you know what I mean.  You said the school that had sort of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, DeWitt Clinton [High School, Bronx, New York City, New York], right.
Speaker 1: And so--but you had had exposure.  You, you were starting with DeWitt Clinton--have exposure to, you know, whites.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And we--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how was--was that transition easy for you?
Speaker 2: It, it was tough, because the dormitory was pretty much all white except for the athletes.  They'd have events, and you weren't invited or felt a part of it.  And what we did is, to offset that, we started traveling to the Southside and going to parties there.  We went to Evanston [Illinois] and started to come--some of the guys who were on the team took, took us to Evanston.  We, so we there and stuff, so.  But it was tough to be a part of the school environment per se.  We just were not accepted.  And, and we were probably not accepted because they didn't want us.  And then we didn't push ourselves to be a part of it because it was just too difficult.  We, we didn't feel--felt--we didn't feel secure being a part.  They had the, the sorority parties and all like that.  But as you go on and we started to get more ballplayers in, we'd go to a school called Mundelein [College, Chicago, Illinois], which was all white.  And we had a couple of black girls over there.  But we went over there and started dancing with the white girls at the time and the, the nuns had a--was having a fit.  They called to the--so I was in that era.  They'd call over to us, say, give--get your, get (laughter) your black players out of here.  They're dancing with all these white--(unclear).  It was just not to be.  It was too early.  And he sat us down and said you know I'm not prejudiced, but that's--we're not ready for that.  And one of the guys jumped out at a--the coach said hey, if they're green, blue, purple, if they're fine, we go for 'em.  You know, and that--so we had a debate with the coach, and he struggled with us there.  But we didn't go back to much anymore.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't go back to Mundelein (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, that was--well, nuns were on us to, to--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --keep us out.  And you had a lot--you ran into a lot of problems.  We had a, a freshman thing--party.  And you'd put your hat in the thing, and then you'd have a chance to dance with a girl.  And we put our hats in, and the white girls kind of--(unclear).  We'd dance and the priest would come up to us and no mingling.  What--and dance with the (laughter) white girls.  The priest tell us no mingling, so it was, it was a tough time.  And you'd have to sneak out to do things if you wanted to, to date white girls and things like that.
Speaker 1: Now this was 1960--
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-nine--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --sixty.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is even--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's a freshman and junior--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --from fifty-nine, sixty.
Speaker 1: Yeah, see, that's like four or five years out after Brown v. Board of Ed-Education [Brown v. Board of Education].
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 64390
Speaker 1: So how was--now you had, you know, had trained--I don't know--which coaches have had the most impact on you?  I mean you had Walter November, he helped, because he took an interest in you and everything.  Did--was there a training, things that you learned about playing basketball under him that you know--or was it under [George] Ireland that you started really sort of coming into your own?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or is it--
Speaker 2: Playing in the streets, playing against the best, and New York [New York City, New York] had the best I think at that time overall, black and white players playing against each other, playing in different tournaments.  I think that developed my game.  And early on I started playing against the older kids early in my life to get the confidence.  And as I came on, and playing against the best competition you could think of got me better.  And I started to, to get closer to them and skills.  And when I got to Loyola [University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], they took my skills and used it for the best.  They set plays for me that, that pulled out the most of my talents.  And I wasn't that great of a player, but they made me a great players, because everything was around me.  And I had such a fantastic supporting cast.  The key--now that you get older, the guys from Nashville, Tennessee, Les Hunter and Vic Rouse [W. Victor Rouse], they were the key.  I mean I brought the team to a winning season, 15 and 7, but they made the team fantastic.  I mean with all of us together we all knew our role, but we couldn't do what--they could do without me a little bit more than they--we could do without a Les Hunter or a Vic Rouse.  And you'll find that out later on, even though I was All-American on every All-American team, because I was a senior and they were the juniors.  So a lot of things can make the difference in your life.
Story_ID: 64391
Speaker 1: And you--I mean because there were so few black--I mean, you're saying that [George] Ireland, because he put four teams, his--this--
Speaker 2: Four black kids out there.
Speaker 1: Four black kids.  Weren't there things where people didn't want to touch you or you know, want you touching them and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they--it wasn't quite that bad.  It was name calling by other players when we'd go to--I remember we went to Virginia, West Virginia--Marshall and the name calling by the other players and the fans, if they got close enough would call you names.  But the players, you weren't at that point where they were playing against (unclear) and outside.  It just wasn't organized in colleges, so it, it wasn't at that point.  But we, we played a, a, a major role.  It's ironic that with Jackie Robinson in the background and all like that.  So we had been playing against all that.  We went to Loyola New Orleans [Loyola University New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], and we had to go in separate (unclear).  The white players stayed in the hotel.  We had to stay in, in, in a community, a black community that they--we were all heroes.  When we came in that community, they had a parade for us.  I mean (laughter) we--and we were like king.  And the pretty girls, oh, from New Orleans, I mean we just had it made.  And these guys were stuck in a--and we were mad that the white guys were stuck in the hotel and we had this whole community come after.  Then we come together on--and play against Loyola of New Orleans, and the blacks were on one side, and the whites were on the other.  And we won by 40 points, and we just dominated them.  And we just--that's what we--the--that's what we went through during that whole period.  But, again, it made us closer.  And then the, the whole community coming out on your behalf, don't you--it made you feel good.  So when we went in the game, we felt, oh, we, we, we gonna kill this team.  We're the, we're the best--whole community, the ministers and everything.  It was, it was nice.  And it kind of gave a feeling of Harlem [New York City, New York] again, because people coming after you and supporting you like that, blacks coming together to support the team.
Story_ID: 64392
Speaker 1: That's nice.  Now which--what games were the most memorable.  I mean, I know the one, you know, where you shot it--you know, you sat--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that the most memorable or--
Speaker 2: There are two or three games.  The most memorable one for me is when Mississippi State [University, Starkville, Mississippi] had to sneak out to play us.  See, we were in that era where Mississippi [State Univerisity, Starkville, Mississippi] was in that Deep South conference, Mississippi State.  And they would not--they would win their conference, but they could not come--they could not come to play in the NCAA Tournament because it was against their rules to play against black players.  Now they got tired of that, Babe McCarthy [James Harrison "Babe" McCarthy] and all these guys from Mississippi State, the president.  And it was just the government was against them doing it.  So I think the government was getting ready to, to serve an injunction to make sure they wouldn't come up.  But Mississippi State said I'm tired; we're gonna play in this tournament; we're the best, and then our season ends.  They split the team up and--six in each or seven in each--and they took two separate planes at different times.  And they snuck out of Mississippi, and they played us in East Lansing, Michigan; and I'll tell you, all of the hate letters we got from the Ku Klux Klan and all that, that we bet not play, and we bet not win.  And then we got letters from the black community, that we'd better win (laughter).  So we got it from both ways - we'd bet not win; we'd better win and all.  And it got so bad that [George] Ireland, the coach at the, the--watch our mail.  And anything that came into the dorm, he had to look--he had to, to look through it before it got in.  And they had snuck up there, and then we're getting to play.  First time the Deep South had come up, and it was history.  And I'll never--you don't realize history is being made until I went to shake the, the captain's hand at Mississippi State, and I saw all these lights go off, clack, clack, clack.  And here we're playing in the NCAA tournament.  And we play 'em tough, rather they played us tough I should say, and we won by seven or eleven points I, I think; but really tough, a lot of--I started to feel the pressure because people were--we were starting to be noted as the all-black team and kind of representing black folks, so.  But it was excellent.  But the white kid, Jack Egan was just a fighter, a strong Irishman from the Southside [Chicago, Illinois] who didn't care wherever--he never showed any prejudice, but he didn't show any support for us either.  He was just a hard-nose; I'm on your team; we're gonna win together and that's it.  And we've gotten to be real--he's a lawyer now.  But he, he went through it too in the South, because he was Catholic and Irish and so he had some, he had some problems too, so it brought us all together.  And he had a leadership skill that was good along with Ron Miller's leadership skill.  It kind of blended us in, bringing it from his nationality, and all of us bringing it from parts of the South where they wasn't afraid.  I was gettin' nervous.  And Les [Hunter] and and, and Vic [W. Victor Rouse] were--had been through this before, the South with the segregation.  And I would--had just had dibs of it from Virginia, so it hurted.  I, I, I was influenced; I was shaken a little quicker than them, but they kept me together.  It was--we had all the parts of a, a national championship team; we really did, early.
Story_ID: 64393
Speaker 1: So now, what, what were some of the other?  You said there were two or three that were--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the championship game, we're down 15 and we're getting killed in every way possible.  And going into the game, Julie, you remember certain things.  I stayed up all night, we gotta win, trying to psyche myself out and hitting Les [Hunter] over the head, banging with pillows: we gotta win this thing.  We had killed Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina].  And that's another thing.  It wasn't a big game, but Art Heyman was from New York and was a big--and I had played against him in New York.  And Duke was ranked number two, and I think we were three.  And we blew them out.  We beat 'em real (laughter) good.  (Unclear)--so it was a good game.  Les was just phenomenal.  All of us, we played well.  And leading into the game, our first game was at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and we beat the team.  We beat 'em by 70, and it's still the largest margin ever in an NCAA Championship.  And [Jack] Egan knew some of the players.  And they were in their locker room, and Jack [Egan], who's the, the--the white starter with us.  This is to give you an idea of the type of guy.  He went in the locker room and told 'em--they were nervous, and he said, "Don't worry, it'll be over quick," (Laughter) he told those guys.  And these guys all (unclear), and here we are, they playing against blacks; they don't know, and here we killing teams; we're averaging 93 (laughter) points a game; and we been (unclear)--and they came out, they were frozen.  I mean we beat 'em by 70.  They weren't that bad of a team, beat 'em by--they were just shell-shocked, you know.  And so we--that built up so much confidence, and the Big Ten champion was Illinois [University of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois], and we beat them by 18.  They won the Big Ten championship.  That's how dominating we were back then.  Then Duke, we had them by 20-something.  And we beat them by 15, 14-something points, and they were ranked ahead of us.  We--they were never in the game; we just blew 'em away.  But we knew Cincinnati [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio] would be tough.  We just--after Mississippi State [University, Starkville, Mississippi], we knew Cincinnati would be tough, because they played the defense; they matched up so well with us, and they just had us.  I hadn't scored a point the whole entire half.  A guy by the name of Tom Fackel (ph.) was so good.  He just played me so well, and we struggled.  And with about seven minutes to go, the time out was called.  And I started saying to myself: I'm on TV, first time national TV.  It was delayed; the game was delayed at the time, but at least we were on national TV.   And I thought of all of the guys in the projects, all of the people in Harlem [New York City, New York], and I, I pictured back the Joe Louis and all those guys coming in and how everybody cheered on him.  I'd said, oh, they, they looking at me.  I just--I said, oh my gosh!  I said we gotta make it close.  I was thinking of winning; I just didn't wanna be embarrassed.  So we put a press on, and I finally hit a basket.  And they, they announced: "Jerry hit his first basket (laughter)!"  This was a big thing, the second half (laughter) I made my first basket.  Then I stole it, hit again, and hit a free throw, and then score--hit a jumper and we--next thing you know, we, we were down one point, and I fouled a guy.  He goes and if he hits both, because it's about six seconds left, he hits one, the first one; they up two; he missed the second; we get a rebound; and they throw it to me; and I hit a jump shot to put it into overtime.
Speaker 1: And wasn't that jump shot the longest or--
Speaker 2: No, that's in the pro ranks.
Speaker 1: That's in the pro ranks, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's right.
Speaker 2: But the jump shot was a 10-foot or 12-footer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And when I look at the high school games, all my life I've come from behind to win, even when--before you came here, I was lookin'.  I don't look at my scrapbooks.  I just had some things out.  I looked; we were down 12 in high school and we won it, and we've done the unexpected.  I've been on teams that have not been the favorite, unexpected.  So, we--when we got into overtime, Vic Rouse tapped it in.  I was supposed to take the last shot.  I passed it, 'cause they played me well.  And Vic Rouse, who passed away just recently, hit the winning shot, and the rest was history.  Oh, the place with crazy.  I lu--Chicago is the only NCAA Championship team in basketball in, in Chicago was Loyola.  They were rocking buses; it was packed downtown, and the place was a mess.  We got back; Mayor Daley [Mayor Richard J. Daley] meet--greeted us at the airport and gave us a tro--oh, it was, it was heaven; it was really like heaven.  It was the greatest thrill in my life, to be with those guys and to go what we went through and to stay together as a team and in the, the national championship.
Story_ID: 65532
Speaker 1: Okay, go on.
Speaker 2: And, and it was just a, a great thrill to be the best in the nation.  Everybody, wherever you went we got in the movies, I mean little things, but you get in the movies free everyplace you go, on campus; everybody pointing you out.  We, we, we left school and, and did speaking engagements.  We did everything.  It was just, just phenomenal.  And then the time came when my, my wife-to-be was involved with the movement [Civil Rights Movement] and also was at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I had met her at Loyola, and she was very much involved.  And Jesse Jackson and all them wanted to get me into the movement.  And here I am, everybody's treating me great.  Even though I did have all of those problems, this, this was not the right time, because I almost like felt I had raised above all that racism because we had won it all; everybody loves us; everything's great; I'm here on the north side of Chi--Chicago, and everybody just love--and he's trying to get me to get in the movement with my wife.  And I went and met with them.  I said okay, I'll go to, to--I'll go to a meeting.  I'll go to the church and lis--he said just listen to this guy, Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther, King, Jr.].  I went to the church.  Here I, I, I stood up at the church.  They introduced me.  The place went up.  Then they--because you don't even feel--you know that you're well known, but you still don't get a feel for it, because you're still just on the North side of Chicago and everybody know you there.  So I went out, went the church were King was gonna speak.  And they introduced me, and the place went for grabs.  I said oh my goodness!  And he spoke, and I said oh, my gosh!  He was awesome.  I just--just awesome.  And--but I still didn't like the idea of them going to Gage Park and all these places and getting stoned in my--and I went and got all upset with my, my wife-to-be.  She was gettin' stoned. She was marching, and I, I just didn't understand that.  And then we met with King and, and talked with him.  And Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson] was trying to get me involved, and I just, I just couldn't see it.  And that's the first major mistake in my life.  I mean you, you think of things that you could go back.  I would do anything to be a part of the movement.  And when I got to Indianapolis [Indiana], after that, I got so involved, because I really felt I had let the movement down when I had a great opportunity to help.  But, I came; I did a few things, but nothing the way I should have to help the movement.
Speaker 1: Do you think--what did they want?  They wanted you to be a spokesperson--
Speaker 2: Yes, to be--
Speaker 1: --because you had the notoriety?
Speaker 2: --be right in there with Jesse and all of the guys and maybe be a part of the march in the Gage Park.  And all these guys, all the, the--I mean it was awful.  White folks was awful.  I mean we're coming in their neighborhood, which in Chicago was all--Gage Park was all white, all those different suburbs up in there.  And they didn't want us in there, and they spittin', oh, and the rock throwing, and they burned cars and--wa--I said no, it's gotta be a better way.  And Jesse and, and all of the guys were teaching my wife and all 'em how to fold up so that you can take the blows and all this stuff, without fightin' back.  I couldn't--I said wait a minute, this is silly.  But it was a, it was, it was a good approach, and I, I felt awfully bad that I didn't take part.
Story_ID: 65533
Speaker 1: So you were pretty much--you won the NCAA Championship.  You're pretty much in your prime?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean every--the world is a good place?
Speaker 2: Good place, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in my environment, my surrounding, good place.
Speaker 1: And your, your mother [Lucille Harkness] at this time, she's on cloud nine?
Speaker 2: She's--yes.  She's suffering a little bit.  Yes, she's on cloud nine, but she's--
Speaker 1: 'Cause she's--
Speaker 2: --starting to suffer a little bit from cancer, and I didn't know what this was all about.  But I used to run and get her her cigarettes to calm her down.  And she was getting--I think Kools was a big cigarette.  And we didn't know what was going on with cigarettes, and I knew it calmed her.  And she'd smoke, smoke, smoke and have her little beer.  She loved her little Rheingold and Schaefer (laugher) Beer and New York.  And she was a--just a good woman.  So she was on cloud nine.  I'd come back to New York, and I'm on (laughter)--everybody knows me and cloud nine.  And I picture back of--I felt like the Joe Louis (unclear).  I could see the great athletes coming back and the Jackie Robinsons.  I just felt a, a little bit like that.  I, I felt good.
Story_ID: 65534
Speaker 1: So now who's mentoring you at this point?  Is there anyone mentoring you or--
Speaker 2: No, not really, and I think it was a weak part of Walter November a little bit, but I was too far away from him.  So the, when the Knicks called, they were calling me to get me to sign.  I had no idea what I was doing and so on.  They got me to sign a horrendous contract.  Back then, that's right before the agents, you see.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right before the agent.  Matter of fact, they were thinking of getting me an agent.  Nick Kladis, who had--I had gotten real close to, he's from--sort of a little bit kind of looked over it, but he looked over the whole team.  He was just a nice man who was a former athlete from Loyola.  And to this day, he beats himself that he didn't get one of the guys to, to, to look after me.  Agents was just starting to come in the picture.  And the Knicks just took advantage of me, (unclear) a terrible contract.  And I--I'm still on a cloud, and that money they were talking about was so great--to me it sounded great, but it was horrendous.
Speaker 1: Tell me what it was.
Speaker 2: Twelve thousand, two thousand bonus.  And that was nothing.  It was still--for 1963 it wasn't bad.  The number one draft choice, I think Art [Heyman] might have signed for 18--$19,000.  And I was number two, but I was the 10th person drafted, number 10 at the time, and both of us went to the Knicks.  Art [Heyman] was from New York and I was, so it was match, and things looked good.  I was gonna make this team anyway.  Here I go with getting conceited: I don't need a-no (unclear); I don't care about that; I'mma make it, 'cause I am good.  And the world started to crumble down in on me a little bit.
Story_ID: 65535
Speaker 1: Describe that.
Speaker 2: I came to--I had gone to all these banquets, got the big head.  I mean it's, it's very hard not to as a 22-year-old kid that the just, just every--we were first everywhere I went.  On the 'el' train everybody stoppin', getting autographs; I get off the train everybody's around, or trying to recognize, or at the dorm and everywhere.  And even, even I had a, a family to call me from a Jewish family that their son needed some mentoring, closeness.  So I went and stayed with the family during the summer and got paid, in Winnetka [Illinois], so I was just on cloud nine.  I didn't really practice hard.  I was going to all the banquets, overweight when I got to camp, and I didn't play well.  And the--I realized that my knees couldn't take the, the, the schedule; it was much more physical; it was a step up; it was harder on my knees, and I just didn't play well.  So I had some good spurts, and if I had the no-cut contract, I might have gotten better.  I played well against Boston Celtics.  I remember that, with K-K.C. [K.C. Jones].  I went around him and scored and, and Bill Russell laughing at, at Kasey.  So I had some potential, but the Knicks needed help then, right then, because they were losing, and the--it's a great market, and they trying to win.  So they let me go, which was unbelievable, and you're the 10th person pick, in that day.  But I had the no-cut, and they needed to do things.  So, that was tough.
Speaker 1: So how tough, because here, you're back on your home turf--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I had gotten my, gotten, gotten a nice place in the Dunbar Apartments [Harlem, New York City, New York] and just felt great, but I didn't not, I did not do well.  I, I just--it was just too much.  I was playing a forward, and they had me at a guard, which is my--where I should be.  But in college, because we had two big guys, I could play that small forward at 6'2", 6'2" and a half; you get in the pros, you gotta play guard all the way around, so it was an adjustment there.  And I wasn't shooting well.  My legs were in pain, so I wasn't--didn't have the speed.  And I didn't practice the way I should have to prepare myself, because I felt so confident that I'd make it.  So it was a big letdown.
Story_ID: 65536
Speaker 1: We didn't have any money.  I couldn't get a, a job.  I had gotten my degree and still couldn't get the job I wanted.  Finally, I got a call from the Quaker Oats Company, and I was their first black salesman.  They took a chance with me.  And they had some--as I found out later, they had some long-range plans for me.  And I was--we were poor.  I was in the Dunbar [The Dunbar Apartments, Harlem, New York City, New York], and I didn't have no money because I didn't--
Speaker 2: So this is--
Speaker 1: --take that--
Speaker 2: So you're what--you're married at this point.
Speaker 1: I'm married and thing and have a kid at this point.  And I'm--no money coming in, so it got to be tough.  Then the Quaker Oaks opened, but they were paying not much, $325, I believe, a month.  So I had to wait that entire month.  I was spending the, the money they gave me to, to--for--just for expenses, just to make it.  Oh, it was a, a tough time, really tough.  Then what made it tough, finally they moved me back to the Merchandise Mart in Chicago, things looking great.  I'm back in Chicago.  I'm the first black salesman.  So, they wanna put me in an area which is Winnetka [Illinois], all up in there, Wilmette [Illinois], all and--calling on those kind of stores.  And they just felt that they were gonna do something with this guy, gonna use him.  So here I am, since they moved me there, that meant that I should get a--an apartment on the Northside.  So I go to Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], go around in that area, couldn't get a place to stay.  Boing, it hit; that's when it really hit.  We're talking about a year I had won the national title.  Everybody love you, and then I realize that I should have marched and all like that.  It hit.  I couldn't--and, and it was national TV.  I--and to this day another mistake.  They were--they wanted to promote this, and I said no, ah, forget it.  I couldn't get a place where my territory was.  I didn't wanna necessarily be on the Northside, but they wanted me to be in my territory so I can go to Wilmette from Evanston [Illinois], all right up in that area, Northside.  And here I had won the national title; everybody loved me; and I couldn't get a place to stay in the area right around the school.  Ooh, boy, talking about pain, that hurt.  That really hurt, but reality set in, and as a result, it made me a better person.  It, it widened my horizon to bet--to things.  But--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --eventually, we did--I, I, I didn't get a place.  I got a place on the Southside, and I drove all the way through.  But that'll tell you what, what life is all about.
Story_ID: 65537
Speaker 1: So what was your wife saying at this time?  Was she saying I told you so, or was she, saying I told you so, or was she trying to rally up support for you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was trying to rally.  She was supportive at that time the best way she knew how.  And I wasn't--I'm still playing with young ladies, and I'm still wild out there too.  And it--and she was doing what was best.  And we had the kid a little premature, my first child.  And she was a good woman.  She had some insecurities as I see her now, but she was a good person for me.  But--and, and she--we started to clash with all of that hitting on us and money still--we still hadn't hit the jackpot.  Even though I did get back here and was at the Merchandise Mart, still wasn't--after they--this came along after they tried to put me in--on Wilmette [Illinois] and all like that.  They had plans to put me into the Merchandise Mart.  But--and I got in, in starting to come.  The--they really were looking to, to help me and move me up into the Quaker Oats Company.
Speaker 1: And then [clearing throat] the ABA [American Basketball Association] came about, the American Basketball Association.  And I'm reading all this, and I just got cut.  I'd been out two years now, two or three years.  And I said I've got to try.  That's when my wife said you've got to be crazy.  You got a great job.  We're back in Chicago [Illinois].  We're starting to make some money.  You're starting to do well.  I says, but I'll, I'll always question myself.  So, I came back to Indianapolis [Indiana] and tried for the Indiana Pacers by myself, and rightfully so, until I could find something then I'd bring her up.  But she didn't want me to, and I can understand how she felt.  We had struggled, and here was Quaker Oaks was really trying to, to use me and, and, and move me up the ladder.
Story_ID: 65538
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about this.  Why was the ABA [American Basketball Association] started?  Was the--I mean what--how did that whole thing come about?
Speaker 2: Well, we--the NBA [National Basketball Association] only had 10 teams.  I mean there was still a lot of talent.  Like I said, I was 10th pick, and I was in the second round.  So there are still a lot of basketball talent out there.  When you only got 10--now they got 28, 29 teams, to give you an idea, and they only had 10.  So people felt that this--there's room for another league.  And the NBA was just dominating.  They were making--the owners must have been pulling tons of money because we weren't getting paid.  And they were just trying to hold on and controlling it.  So here's this ABA, which was saying we're gonna use some of that talent.  We're gonna pull some of those players from the NBA, 'cause they're not paying that--the money that they deserve; it was all management.  And plus we're gonna use up and coming players in the ABA, and we're gonna start our own league, and we're gonna start it in different cities.  Some will be the same but mostly different cities than the NBA, great idea, great thought.  And I came to Indianapolis [Indiana] to try out and left my job, left everything to come to Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: And how many were they starting at the same time?  I mean I'm just wondering, when you start a whole--
Speaker 2: I think it was seven or eight teams, If I--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --recall--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --something like that--
Speaker 1: And how--
Speaker 2: --from all over Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], California, Utah, all these places.  Indianapolis had a team, the New Jersey--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --areas where the NBA was not in that--and here we still had a ton of talent coming out of colleges that were being cut by the NBA.  So--and then the ABA said we're gonna steal and we're gonna take some of those players from the NBA.  When their contracts come up, and bring them over, we're gonna be competitive.  And that's how it started.
Story_ID: 65539
Speaker 1: And, and did you--was anyone advising you here?  Were any guys say oh, let's go over here, you know, Jerry, you know?  You just decided on your own?
Speaker 2: I was ma--I had gotten--I was a little more mature I think than the average--'cause I had three years.  These guys coming out of college.  I had a, a taste of, of working every day, and I was a hard work--I always felt good about myself there.  But that, the Dan Ryan [Expressway] was driving me up a wall.  I'm going from (laughter)  Merchandise Mart trying to go--oh, gosh!  And here is something where I can have a--if I can't make it, I had six months off--six, seven months I play, and then I'm off.  And it's a great life I felt, something I wanted to do.  I'mma give it shot.  And I felt that I'm still young; I'll get a job, if I don't make it.
Speaker 1: So, so, here, you come here--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I come here.
Speaker 1: Tell the story.
Speaker 2: Come here and I try out on the first time, and I'm racing, doing little wind sprints and I get sick.  I'm sick as--and they take me in the back.  I'm throwing (laughter) up.  I thought I was in shape, but you never know the shape you're in until you get out of shape and try to get back.  And they said, Jerry, we know your reputation; we know you're not in shape, just work your way.  So guys were coming in, and, and we had over a hundred--hundred and fifty guys trying out for the team.  There were fifty guards, so I had to be one of the fifty to hopefully to make it.  Some had no cuts, so I had--my chances were slim, but they, they knew I had the--still two or three years, a national champ, an All-American.  So they felt I'd be good for the league if I could make it on my own, I'm sure.  So I went to the Y[MCA] over here, swam every (unclear).  Those guys were partying a little bit.  I swam; I ret--I, I ran, because I always had running skills, and I ran a mile or two miles.  I, I, I practiced hard.  Then all of a sudden I noticed that I was starting to win sprints, then I dominated the sprints.  I played better; I shot better; and I made the team.  And, I'll tell you, tears were in my eyes, because I was one of the last ones to make it but the greatest feeling I could have--couldn't get a place to stay.  (Laughter) I mean, when I made the team, they moved me out of the hotel.  There's no places for blacks to stay.  It was nothing real nice here in any--so here I am running into this who thing again.  So Roger Brown--some of the guys got their own home.  And finally, a guy from a Democratic group--Welch, Robert Welch had some homes on Post Road, and he got me out there.  So my wife came in and we, we started, and I started moving and getting involved.  That's when SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] started, and then I started getting involved.  And the people could not understand why a Pacer was so involved with the movement, wanted to get involved.  Even the people in the movement wasn't sure of me.  Because I knew what I had gone through and what I--I just said I'mma, I'mma make up for that.  So I got strongly involved in the community.  And then I had--I was playing with the Pacers, which was a great--it was great both ways.
Story_ID: 65540
Speaker 1: So what--so you were a different person.  New York--the New York Knicks experience, it taught you to be a different--
Speaker 2: That and plus two or three years just being out there--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --and reality, and then that experience on the, on the Northside really opened my eyes.  Here you are being loved by all, you thought, and you couldn't even get a place.  I mean nowhere would give you an apartment.  The apartments were better; they were cleaner.  And we went up in there in  one and we got it, and then they called back and said no; somebody else had already--(unclear)--that kind of stuff.  They just would not--we're talking about right there at 6th, all, all round Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  In that area all up and down there, oh, it was awful.  It was awful; it was a, a rude awakening for me, but it made me understand reality.
Story_ID: 65541
Speaker 1: And so, let's talk about your career with, you know, with the Pacers.  Talk about that whole, you know, that, that whole experience.  And you--
Speaker 2: [Clearing throat]--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--your--but you were, you were still a big guy.  I mean, you know the, the, the--
Speaker 2: I tempered.  I was kno--the [New York] Knicks--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --made me temper.  I was no longer the big wheel.  I tempered tremendously.  I just--I was in the best of shape.  Here I was, just be the best I could be and be prepared to be the--I always did that anyway, but coming off the bench was different for me.  I--everything was different for me.  And I played well for 'em early on, before the knees started to really (unclear).  I really played well coming off the bench.  I could've started easily.  But I really got my game together.  I was fast, quickness had come back, everything was there.  And even in, in the first game--one of the first games--when I went Dallas [Texas] and they called me off the bench, they, they had so much confidence in me coming off the bench is that I played--when I started coming off the bench, I played throughout the game, 'cause I was playing so well I think that first year.  And especially when we were starting to struggle, we, we were in great shape, so we were above everybody else in the league in shape and, and organization.  Mike Storen had done a good job with the, the Pacers.
Story_ID: 65542
Speaker 1: And when I came off in Dallas [Texas], we we're starting to lose a little bit.  The other teams were starting to catch, and we needed a win.  And we're down three or four, and we catch up and tie it up.  And with 18 seconds ago, we got the ball and we miss.  They take it down with at 15-14, 12-10.  Their passing it around for one shot, and with about three to four seconds to go they take the shot, and they score, in Dallas--two, one--and a guy named Oliver Darden [Oliver "Ollie" Darden] takes the ball out, gives me the ball underneath their basket, behind their basket.  And I just pull it back and let it go, and it was the longest shot ever made in pro basketball history.  So here I was back on top in a little bit of a way.  It was heard around the world.  I was in, "Believe It or Not" [Ripley's Believe It or Not].  They, they put a medal on me--had, had won the game, 'cause it was a three-point shot.  We didn't think of that.  But the ABA had come up with the red, white, and blue ball and the three-point shot, which was another concept that was different from the NBA [National Basketball Association].  So I was recognized all around the league, and it was just, it was a great, great individual accomplishment for me.  It's still the longest professional shot ever made in the history of the game.  And I worked hard for it.  It was luck, but I believe God shined on me and said, "Boy, you've been through a lot.  You've worked awfully hard to get where you are.  I'mma give this to you."  And he gave me that shot.
Speaker 2: And that happened within the first year--
Speaker 1: First year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was one of the few things that happened positive for the ABA.  There were a lot of positives, but this was big.  It gave 'em some recognition, hit a three-point shot, the longest shot in basketball history and to win the game with it.  And, it was good; it was real good for the lady; it was good for me; it was good for the Indiana Pacers, a one-time deal, could not touch the NCAA Championship by no means.  I mean this was just a nice thing.
Speaker 2: Now did you--now in this whole thing with, with the Indiana Pacers, were you negotiating your own contract--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were negoti--
Speaker 2: Did you do a better job?
Speaker 1: I did a better job, yeah, and they were, they were a little more open.  I think I got $18--$17,000, which in 1967 was pretty good money, plus I could pick up--I was active in the community.  I was going back into the inner city and worker with the Y[MCA] in the off-season making a few grand there.  So I--we--I had a $20,000 year, and that's, that was good money.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: That was not bad money then.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: So it was a, it was a good--it was, it was real good for me.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Really good for me.
Story_ID: 65543
Speaker 1: Do you think when you look back on those times that there are things that you know now that you would wish you had known then or--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, Julie, without a doubt, without--I, I, I think the reality of, of being a black person at that time, I thought that when you're among enemies you would get the discrimination.  But once I got back to my home ground, home turf, which was the Northside of Chicago [Illinois] right around Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I said well, I'm among friends, and they white and black, mostly white.  But I'm among friends, and they'll look after me because they, they--when we want at all, we could go anyplace but things like, to the movies (unclear)--we were--they're having dinners for us all over the place.  But we'd go back to the dorm.  But when it was open for me to stay in that area--(unclear)--where they, they, they put me down.  Oh, did I learn!  That was a big awakening for me, as well as other things, learning--getting a little morning mature, I didn't do that till later on in life, until--about young ladies.  Because I started so late I think had something to do with it, and plus I was around the guys that had an influence on me as well.
Story_ID: 65544
Speaker 1: Now, so the first year, you--now what, what year were you--I mean how old were you when you went to play for the [Indiana] Pacers.
Speaker 2: Twenty-seven.
Speaker 1: Twenty-seven, okay.
Speaker 2: See, and most of the guys are 23, 22, so here I was and I--and they used to joke with me about it, you know, old man and (laughter) 27.  But that was my recognition that I got.  And, and I, I was more mature.  I saved my little money on the, on the trips when I could.  I did--ah, I think I was a little more mature than those guys were at the time.
Speaker 1: Now, your knees start giving out on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they really did.  I had my degree.  In my second year I was doing well again.  They had changed coaches, and I was selected the co-caption even though I wasn't starting, with a guy named Mel Daniels.  So that showed that the team had, I think, a good feeling about me, more mature than most.  And I would--I gave a couple of--(unclear) my back went out.  Trying to take the pressure off my knees, my back went out.  I got better; they went out again, and then they told me you could be seriously injured if I stayed with this.  So I left, but ironically enough, as soon as I started leaving the Pacers, I was being interviewed.  And the television stations were under pressure to get blacks on the air.  So they said well, this guy sounds good, and Channel 13 asked me to come to work for 'em.  So all my life I've been that first, first at Quaker Oaks, and while I was there at 13, the United Way, after struggling, I got a job with them; I was the first to become a fundraiser for the United Way, first black.  So I'm the first at Channel 13, first at Quaker Oaks, first at the United Way, and I was the first, but I--it's nothing that I was proud.  I didn't--I wasn't a Jackie Robinson.  And, and, and the television I wasn't best.  I wasn't that good.  So, those are things.
Story_ID: 64407
Speaker 1: There's a--playing in the parks and all like that.  They were banging my knees up constantly.  And my best--I used to do the standing broad jump.  I know all of this stuff.  Now I can look back.  You stand and jump, and I was very good at it.  I'd win, but I was banging my knees.  A standing jump in the Police Athletic League, the PAL [Police Athletic League] Competition, I'd get a medal all the time, but I was banging and I was practicing in my projects, and I know how it happened.  Those knees were--I was beatin' to death, cross country, distance running, half-mile running, all that playing out in the parks all those years, playing day in, day out, night, and then you get to college.  They were starting to hurt, but I had the time to recover because there's one or two games, or one a week, maybe two.  But when you get to the pros, you're [snap] day after day after day.  It just, I couldn't; it was just too much, and my knees were hurtin' anyway.
Speaker 2: Now this is--my question though for you--I mean, you, you know, here you had a chance to play for the [New York] Knicks, and then that doesn't go right.  And then you, you play here and you, you know, you have the longest--this long shot, and that--but then what--my question for you, you know--then your knees give out--was there any sense--I know you got the job offer to be a sports announcer--but was there any, like, damn!  You know what I mean?  Was there any of that, like, I can--you know, like, I can't believe my knees are going out on me.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: Not that bad.
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: Because my dream had been ful--fulfilled.  I played pro basketball.  I was still--I, I  think it was tough on me not to be in the limelight.  I was worried about that all my life.  And people are on the--(unclear)--and, and that's--I don't mean that to say that, but I was just used to being in it all my life.  And then the sportscasting job comes up, and I'm in the limelight again, so.  And then I'm, I'm interviewing Julius or all--Julius Erving, all of the guys that I was playing against--of course George McGinnis and all these, Roger [Brown]--and I was still a part of that fraternity.  So, in a way, the sportscasting just really kind of helped.  It, it made my adjustment much easier because I was still--it was a slight adjustment 'cause I was still in the world.
Story_ID: 64408
Speaker 1: Now how long were you a sport--how long?  You--
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 12 years--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --as a sportscaster.  And I, I run into problems there.  Here you are getting a job in, in, in a, in a, a top station, and kids are trying their best to make it to be become anchors and so on, white kids, and blacks didn't--it hadn't opened up for 'em.  So I could feel the animosity within the station.  I'm still the number one.  You know what?  I, I didn't do well.  I, I, I did not do well on the air like I should have.  I just didn't feel there was nobody there to teach me.  And I'm not saying I--I think I would have been pretty good if I had the backing.  And I, I often talk to Barbara [Boyd].  She had a little bit--they, they supported her a little bit at her station, and she was good anyway.  Barbara Boyd [HistoryMaker] has that.  She, she's a yapper anyway; she'll talk you to death.  I didn't have that.  And I was, I was good putting the [Indiana] Pacers' stories together but didn't write well, things like that.  I wasn't good with the camera.  I was good enough, and plus when you--you can't--once you're in there, it's hard to fire a black guy (laughter), you know, during those, those (unclear).  I wasn't just horrendous, but I wasn't, I wasn't good.  I, I don't think I was.  And they let--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --me know it at the 13 [WTHR News Channel 13], under the environment and the af--the, the, the director of sports was on me, calling me up and sayin', boy, you didn't pronounce that right, and you didn't do this well, and constantly--and I'm the only one there, only black at the station.  And it, it was not easy for me early on.
Speaker 1: Now when you were the announcer, how many black announcers were there in the country, sports announcers?
Speaker 2: Not many, not many.  I was the first in the state here.  And then another guy named Chuck Workman came on right after me or the same time, and he became the sports director of his, his thing.  But I was on a network, and I was part time coming in on, on weekends.  I did the sports on the air on weekends, and then during the week I'd come in and do some stories.  But I was--there weren't many there.  Each station had one - Barbara Boyd, maybe Stubblefield; some had two, but for the most part, only one at each station just to have your representation.  They were starting to open up and they were pushing at the time.  So I, I, I was not--and then I did the Pacer games, and I started off good, but I wasn't, I wasn't that good at, at that either.
Speaker 1: So you worked there from 19--(unclear)--1970--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, '70' [1970]--probably '69' [1969] I had left the Pacers, '70' [1970] to '81' [1981], '82' [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 64409
Speaker 1: So did things change over that period, or the station was just the--you know, 'cause media, media can be really horrendous for black people.
Speaker 2: Oh, it didn't change, not for me.  I struggled through that.  And I think I, I would have been better if the people at the station had kind of taken me in.  And even the sports director I thought didn't feel good about it.  And I don't think it was he's a racist by no means, but he's--that's his personality.  And I wasn't good, and he thought I was hurting the ratings.  And, and it seems like when the general manager came in and they did something on me, I was, I was so well known by everybody and the, the popular, so he kept me.  The ratings didn't hurt that bad I guess 'cause I was well known and thing.  I wasn't good.  I was well known.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you that, what things?  'Cause each, each experience was a learning experience, what things did you learn from that?
Speaker 2: I learned to, to read better, to interview better, to ask the right questions, and as a result, Julie, I got, when I left Channel 13--oh, while I was at Channel 13 [WTHR News Channel 13, Indianapolis, Indiana], a radio station, WTLC, was gonna start sports, and they started it was a black station.  When I got over there in the surroundings, I won awards.  And I was on the radio.  I had a sports show that I am so proud of today.  Now it was 7:30 in the morning, and I interviewed Julius [Erving], all of the big guys, all of the--it--but I learned and I felt more comfortable.  I was more--better received, and, and of course, you can just read when you're on radio.  I didn't have to look up.  I wasn't--not a lot of pressure.  But the--I had learned how to read better and sound better, articulate.  I, I put my, my stories together better.  My timing was better, and I won awards.  I, I just had a real good radio sports show.  I was very--I felt I was good; I really did.  To this day, I'm, I'm really proud of that.  But I felt more comfortable, and being around my people I guess again, you know, rather than be around--even though I've had all that experience at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], it's just being around your own and feeling comfortable and wanting that show to be good because it's a black show.  So that was important in my life.
Story_ID: 64410
Speaker 1: And then United Way, now when did that come into being?
Speaker 2: When I left the [Indiana] Pacers, a year or so.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you had--but how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I had two jobs.  I, I, worked--
Speaker 1: You had two--
Speaker 2: --I was always a worker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A workaholic my wife would probably say, my first wife.  I've always worked.  And I was the first there, but I was good; I was very good.
Speaker 1: Now what were you doing?
Speaker 2: Fundraiser, professional fundraiser--
Speaker 1: Oh, you were doing--
Speaker 2: --for the United Way.
Speaker 1: [TAPE INTERRUPTED]
Speaker 2: --I--the way I speak.  I always spoke well I guess.  I was a good speaker, relatively good speaker.  And here I am with the United Way, and it, it came easy for me, 'cause I was always motivated to get out there and get--do the best.  And that's what fundraising is all about, really pushing it and getting out there and getting it, and meeting people.  Because people give, not necessarily for the United Way.  They give to you once you go out and meet people.  And a lot of people--I was still a former [Indiana] Pacer, and I did very well with the United Way early on, broke all the records.  When they tried to promote me to management I didn't do well.  I'm not a management, management type, where you sit in and get other people to do it.  I wanna be out there.  I've always been that way.  I wanna be out there in the, in the trenches raising money and getting people to raise money for you, so.
Story_ID: 64411
Speaker 1: Now when you said you did well, show me--tell me how--what kind of records you actually broke.
Speaker 2: Well, like the construction where you, you contact all of the construction companies.  And they were raising maybe 80,000 or 150--$400,000.  I came in raised 550,000, the highest ever.  I made all my goals, and then they moved me to the--what--the Northside.  They put me in Hamilton County.  They called up there to make sure it was all right, which is a predominantly white area.  And they, they checked with everybody before they did that.  But they moved me up there, and I dominated up there.  Because I was like a celebrity I guess, so I, I had an upper hand to go into that community and wasn't staying there.  I (laughter) guess I could still come back to Indianapolis [Indiana], but they received me so very well.  And it was a--it was like a Wil--Wilmette or Winnetka in, in Illinois, so it's not--you know, they will receive you.
Speaker 1: So now, United Way you work with until when?
Speaker 2: I worked with them for 25 years.
Speaker 1: This is just recent you stopped?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just stopped working with them.  I'd--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 64412
Speaker 1: And what, what I did there--
Speaker 2: Now wait a minute.  Did, did you go into management and then go back out of management?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was gonna get into that.  That's a good point.  I, I first started in the fundraising stages where I went out and I had responsibility; I had goals for let's say the construction, the government area, and I blew 'em all out; I just did so well, extremely well.  They said well, you promote a guy like that, that does well.  The right promotion is let him manage people and let them go out.  No, didn't do well; did not do it in organizing campaigns and all of this, wasn't for me.  So I, I didn't do well, and they didn't know what to do.  What did they start?  They start a minority program for minority giving where they would focus in on minorities.  Broke all kind of records we did.  We had a group here.  I had a great board, Bill Mays, Faye Williams [Dr. E. Faye Williams, HistoryMaker], all these standouts.  And we went around and, and got pe--blacks to give a thousand or more.  We broke all kind of records.  We started a vendor fair where all of the United Way agencies would look in.  The blacks would bring their little companies, and they get a chance to, to use the agencies.  Oh, I--we started a leadership program for minorities to prepare them for boards.  And we were recognized on the national level, and I was apart of that.  I was a staff person in charge of that.  That went over very, very well. So, here, again, I was truly success--I was successful when they picked the things for me that fit me.  And fundraising, getting out there and, and, and digging and hustling like I did playing ball, no problem.  And, and a new cause like working with African Americans in different programs, trying to help them get a foothold into United Way and its agencies, and economically company, oh I just loved it.  Leadership programs for African-American kids coming up, loved it, and was recognized by United Ways all over the country.  They had me traveling over it with programs, and we also gave.  So we had that leadership giving program, so it turned out to be the best in the country.  And I was traveling and--so, it was due for a change again in my life, and I wanted to do something else.
Story_ID: 64413
Speaker 1: And, and, and all along, while I was doing this, and I gotta put this in because it's an important part.  And then when I came to the United Way in '69' [1969], '70' [1970], I was also very much involved in the community.  And the community was trying to come up with a--an idea of a ba--of an expo.  So I jumped right in.  I liked this idea.  I wanted to be involved.  I got a chance to meet the best African Americans, strategic, knowledgeable, talented African Americans in the city.  And I had come off the Pacer cloud and come on down to reality, and I worked hard.  And we started, and people were not sure.  What are you talking about having an expo and having families, black families, come and see our heritage?  What are you talking about?  It's--it will never go.  And the first year we worked awfully hard.  We just a group of talented blacks that said we were gonna do it.  And they said Jerry, why don't you put together a basketball game of ABA [American Basketball Association] and NBA [National Basketball Association] players.  We did that.  It was the first time ever.  We got national TV.  We sent money to SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  It was a great feeling.  The second thing I did, which was great doing this, which was my part, is to find out the heritage, the music heritage of Indiana.  And I found out so much, and I got pictures, and we had this all put up at the expo.  The Ink Spots, Wes Montgomery, the Hampton people.  Oh, I could go on, Noble Sissle who wrote the fight song for Butler [Butler University, Indianapolis, Indiana].  And I started digging into all of this stuff and finding all of this talent came through the Hubbard family, Larry Ridley.  I, I said my gosh!  And we had pictures of all of this, which knocked everybody out, all these pictures at expo of all of this great, all of this great talent, musical talent, right here in Indianapolis.  And I just--oh, the next year they took it away from me.  I did it myself.  They said why you leaving out this?  And the people started to hold on, to grasp this Black Expo thing.  But the first year or two we--I did that myself, and I gave that as my, my piece to Black Expo.  Oh, that was the greatest accomplishment, the basketball game and doing this, and I did both of 'em while I was at 13 [WTHR News Channel 13] and while I was doing the United Way.  But I felt a part of the community.  I felt a part of something, of black people trying to do something extremely positive in this community.  And I played a part, and that is one of the greatest feelings as I look back at my life, national championship and starting--being a part, just a small part, of Black Expo, which has grown to be the best in the nation.
Story_ID: 64414
Speaker 1: So what are your thoughts about it?  Are you surprised at where it is?  Are you--do you--you know, I mean a lot of times when something is your baby--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, it's hard to see it grow or to let go and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, I got back to the big head a little bit again.  I, I worked so hard on that game.  And SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] called it almost a failure.  I had sent some--I don't know, 30,000--25, 30.  I raised--didn't take a cent--I wouldn't even think of that anyway--and took that money and had the--we--I was fortunate to get some television, regional coverage of the game.  And they probably cheated me, but we got 10 grand; I ate 10 grand.  So I sent that off, plus the money we got at the gate, 19 grand for the game.  We had Julius [Erving]--we had--oh, it was phenomenal with the talent we had in town.  We had Bill Russell doing the play by--doing the commentary.  And I had gotten to know him real well.  So I sent all that money out, and they said is that all you got?  I said well, that's all we could get.  And that hurt me, and then a lot of other things kind of--I said well, I won't do it anymore.  I won't do it.  And they called and tried to change, but I got bigheaded.  I, I've matured since then.  And I think I left.  I did come back with the United Way and making sure--as, as I taught that minority thing, well, I play--we had a breakfast where we recognized minorities as a part of that whole program.  And we did it with Black Expo, and I worked with them in that respect.  But I was bigheaded and silly, immature at the time, and I, I left Black Expo.  And it went on and blossomed.  You don't stop no show when you got something as good as that, and you got good people around it.  And I'd been playing a part with it trying to help out.  I felt later on real bad about the way I acted.  And I had done things, but I never played a major role like I did at the beginning.  And I've been recognized through the years by Expo for being a starter and, and doing that.  But oh, to get all those pictures, I got into it.  You know the history of all of these great people.  Oh, we've had so much talent right here, and to put all that together, and I loved that more than the game and then to be, be the first to organize a game between the NBA [National Basketball Association] players and the ABA [American Basketball Association] players, and to have it at a, a, a, a program, and Ralph Abernathy, all these guys come down, and Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson].  And I got a chance to talk with Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson] again, and I was doing something positive in his eyes.  I'm, I, I, I'm sure he was proud.
Story_ID: 64415
Speaker 1: Now you--so around the time that you leave United Way, you're getting--started to be involved with 100 Black Men, is that--
Speaker 2: Well, I was with--that's another program I started once I left Black Expo.  I needed something, and wanted--not right away, but 100 Black Men came about.  I said that's it, and I got deeply involved with 100 Black Men.  I came up with great programs.  Me and a guy named Moses Gray, we really developed the programs for the, for the organization.  We worked hard.  I really started feeling a part of something again.  It replaced my Black Expo and really because I was so stupid not to, to stay with that.  But I was contributing back to the black community.  It's always been a big thing.  My wife, even now, said you're overboard a little bit with this black thing, but I have always been that way.  So I got into it and got deeply involved in, in 100 Black Men.  Then I wanted to leave United [Way].  I thought it was time.  It's nothing else I could do there.  What else can I do that I felt black people need and I need?  Business.  So I, I worked hard and, and got my own business.  I don't wanna go into the ramifications of being kicked out of malls and not wanting to, to put your product in there.  And finally, the Circle Center started, and I opened up an athletic footwear store in the Circle Center Mall, thanks to the Herb and Mel Simon, who were the owners of the [Indiana] Pacers who, who knew me as a former Pacer, and I had a good connection there.  And so I opened up my--a, a black business, and that's where I'm at now.
Speaker 1: I have--okay, I wanna move to more philosophical questions.
Story_ID: 64416
Speaker 1: And I have several.  I have to think about what order I ask them, but I have several more to come.  You, you know, in many ways when I hear your story I think that, you know, the Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] experience--there are several sort of things, but the Loyola experience helped sort of you in many ways.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about not the Loyola--the experience right--the, the Quaker Oats experience helped you in many ways, because it pushed you back to the community where you had sort of raised and you know, been raised, but it pushed you back.  And I, and I, I wanna say--I wanna asked this because let's look at blacks and--you know, black athletes.  Times have changed.  People are making lots and lots and lots of money, and they, too, get thrown into a white world.  It is still--you know, the athletic industry is still a white world.  And my question or my--what are your thoughts about the role that black athletes can sort of play.  I mean, still a lot of things are still the same.  They're unsophisticated in many ways.  They're thrown into making a lot of money and all of that.  And I'm wondering, you know, what, what--I know that there--you know, you have Stedman [Graham] with his Athletes Against Drugs.  You have--there's a woman I'm told that has been about there being able--what would it take for them to be more productive parts of society?
Speaker 2: My feeling is that the athletes are not giving enough.  And, and, and Julie, I think you touched on it.  I didn't give enough because I didn't realize what was going on out there to the extent, because I was--everybody treated me so well.  And I'm in a world where I'm recognized, and I'm not dealing with reality because I'm not a part of that.  Once you're outside of it, and you getting money, you're young, you're not even thinking of stuff, you, you don't realize it.  Me, now, keep in mind that I'm very, very sensitive about black folks, extremely, now more than ever, because I've been involved in it.  And I don't think black athletes are.  The people get on the Jordans and all that, and they--and I think he does a lot, but not as much as he can because he doesn't realize, just like I didn't realize when I was on top of the world at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson] comes over to me and asked me to march.  Are you kidding?  Now, wait a minute.  I'll do this.  I'll come out to the event, and I'll show, and I'll shake hands, but I can't do that.  Well, it's almost like Michael and all the others.  If--and, and, and we're getting philosophical, but that's what hurt with segregation, integration.  When it was segregated I was there with the Count Basies; I was there with all of the doctors, and they--we could relate and all like that.  And I could see the hurt and he pain, even though I could see the success of people.  They're not close enough to it, and they don't understand it.  And if you--I can't down--and that's a problem we have.  I think we down the athletes.  They don't know.
Story_ID: 64417
Speaker 1: I think people like Arthur Ashe--I can go on and on--he was away from it, but he understood it for some reason.  Here he is, a middle class (unclear)--it's not--just because I was that far away, it's just that Arthur put him in position, and he did it in his own way, South Africa, the way he did things going over there when people: ah, you shouldn't.  And it turned out to be the, the good thing to do because they looked up to him and so on, and it was good recognition.  Muhammad Ali is awesome.  He's my--oh, I love this man because him--he's the--like a Jackie Robinson.  So there are people, but those today I can't find one.  Since Muhammad Ali and those guys, they, they--it's a different athlete.  There's a ton more money.  They're put in another area, too far away from reality.  But Muhammad Ali was in Chicago [Illinois]; he was out there; he would visit Africa; he thought black businesses; he thought black economics.  Since him, there's not been an athlete that you can really relate to and say hey, this, this guy represents us.  And because of, of the environment they're in, the money they make, they just moved them aside.  And I'm--I was that way, so I understand, while I was on top of the world in my own little small world, compared to Michael [Jordan].  He just is not there.  He's so above it all.  He's above a lot of folks, but he's not there in the grassroots.  And if he was and experienced the things I did, oh, that would be great for the black community because he would be in there.  And I experienced those things, and I came to Indianapolis [Indiana], and I really am proud of some of the things I did here.
Story_ID: 64418
Speaker 1: Why--do you think they'll ever come a time when black people can own sports teams successfully?  I mean there was the one guy I knew.  I interviewed him, Peter Bynoe [HistoryMaker], who owned the Denver Nuggets.  But he approached more, you know, business.  Do you think--you know, a lot o people feel that--I mean do you think that time will ever come?
Speaker 2: Yes, it will.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's in our day of age or what.  But moving away from the grassroots and the inner city, they've become more knowledgeable about business and things like that in that world.  And like Isaiah Thomas, who's going to be the coach here and has interests.  Magic Johnson [Earvin "Magic" Johnson]--and Magic is a good one.  He's been in both worlds quite a bit.  But you could see they're getting--gaining more experience in that world, where I, I couldn't even think of that.  We wouldn't be close to that, but they're making so much money, they're in there where they're just as important as a coach, the general manager.  So they're close because of--a perfect example, not having anything with do with color, Larry Bird, the job he did coming back here.  He wasn't the greatest coach, but he gave so much else and he was able to learn.  So Isaiah [Thomas], all of these guys are getting closer to the business world, the ownership.  Because they're making so much money, they're able to get closer to it, and I--there's no doubt in my mind they'll be, there will be ownership of a lot.  It'll come a long time before we dominate, but there--they have to be especially in basketball because we dominate that so.  Coaching has gotten to a good point, and we're gonna move on.
Story_ID: 64419
Speaker 1: --Isaiah [Thomas] is really, he owned the CBA [Continental Basketball Association].  They're starting their own companies, small basketball professional things.  They're getting in there.
Speaker 2: They are.  But see, my--
Speaker 1: They Grant Hill will be that.
Speaker 2: But you can't call his deal--his deal is just a, a real promotional deal, is it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Is that the whole thing with the Wizards--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, they, they're trying to get him out so he can coach now.  But he was with Toronto.  He was starting to get into the, the front office.  Billy Knight, who left the [Indiana] Pacers here is a, is a great athlete.  He's now with Toronto and is a general manager, then he'll get in--move in.  I think it's, it's never as fast as we would want, but I think it--I think we will start to own.  That's my, my belief.  And it won't be fast, and we'll still have to push and do all of that, but basketball, you, you, you have to.  That's--we dominate that so.  You just can't continue to say no.  We gotta be in there, all the areas.
Speaker 2: Well, we dominate it.  I often say we still dominate it as bucks.  I mean I--you know, I--but we still dominate it as, you know, as (unclear)--I mean people playing, you know, as pieces--chess pieces--but really controlling it.  That's what I'm really wondering--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: We'll, we'll break in.  We won't--(unclear)--we're starting to own a little bit, like you said, Denver [Nuggets].  They thought it was unbelievable.  Michael [Jordan] is starting to look into owning some, some businesses.  I think the Grant Hills, when they come out, are intelligent enough.  I, I could see two or three players when I was playing--they just, it wasn't open--that would have been just excellent owners.  But I, I see.  That's my, my opinion, and I, I could be awfully wrong, but I, I, I just see them jumping  near.  And I'd love to see 'em getting businesses within the community, and I don't see a lot of that.  And that's easy to do, compared to getting big, big businesses.  But they're closer to that.  That's what I'm trying to do, get a small business at a mall and maybe move out, branch out to a, to an area within the inner city and provide a service.  Maybe I'll sell athletic shoes, but I'll have a physical fitness program for the kids in the morning--certain mornings to come or do things--make sure I support the Little League teams and the little--and, and things.  And I, I, I'd rather see us doing that and building our way up, rather than asking for these kids going--asking other places for, for donations.  It's nice if they could see a black business supporting it.
Story_ID: 64420
Speaker 1: Now what do you think makes an good athlete?
Speaker 2: Determination and one that has determination.   Intelligence is I think more important than people think to make the good athlete; determination; a stick-to-it-iveness, which is determination I guess.  And the intelligence is not just knowing the game but knowing about the game, I think; and leadership skills.  I think those are three key factors in, in making a great athlete.  I think a Michael Jordan was determined.  He plays still, as good as he is; I think a Tiger Woods, as good as they are, they still stay after to practice.  The U.S. Open, he got op--he got up early in the morning even after--even with that great still.  So that's that stick-to-it-iveness, that determination.  Michael [Jordan] is a leader, especially in leadership things.  He makes the other guys better because he's such a leader, and he's a leader by example obviously as well.  But he knows the game as well.  And that third point is, is, is, is held down.  I, I hate to get into the--but the Venus Williams, they had the big battle and they were saying--and I heard this again and again, and I said oh, here we go again.  Venus and, and her sister, they are athletic.  And it's the athlete against the mind or the mental.  They are knowledgeable, they're athletic, but their talented and they--you've got to know the game.  You gotta know if the ball is not getting by the person you slamming it, that you just do the little drop pop, or you gotta see the person's weakness and feel where something is coming, you gotta be mentally prepared.  That's a lot of mental in that.  And boy, when Chris Evert say it's the athlete again against--oh, gosh.  And she played so well mentally, Venus, to win the Wimbledon title that came.  I mean they--so you gotta have that too, and all of that is a part of being a great athlete.  You gotta be mentally prepared.  You gotta be leadership, mentally prepared, and determined to, to make your sport or your skill as good as it can be.
Story_ID: 64421
Speaker 1: What did athletics bring to your life?
Speaker 2: Determination, drive, recognition I got.  And that's a big thing because I've found my niche where I was coming up in Harlem [New York City, New York] and in the projects.  Those guys that were great mathematicians--I mean when we needed something done, this guy would write it all up, but he, he didn't get recognized for it.  It never developed.  And he--we lost him to drugs.  And I can go on and on with that.  But I was recognized.  The community recognized athletes, and I was recognized; I felt good about myself.  And this brings up one point and you've given me an opportunity.  I get diagnosed just recently as having cancer.  The, the number one some--a black doctor, O. T. Gordon, that I'm in business with, said your hemoglobin is too low; you come on in.  Checked me out, he said, Jerry, we gotta get you in the doctor.  I don't like what I see; calls a black cancer surgeon, who's all in the 100 [100 Black Men], and the black--and the cancer surgeon is one of the best in the--(unclear).  When he said Frank Lloyd, Jr., I said oh, boy, I felt good.  He got that all out before it started.  He says it's all.  You won't have to have chemo.  It was all done by doc--isn't that a--that's just such a beautiful thing.  Ooh, that made me feel good.  And if we treated them the way we played--treated athletes in our community, wouldn't that be great?  I'm gonna promote this guy.  He don't know.  I mean that--he, they just cleaned me up, and they are so good.  O. T. is well known for his--and, and Frank is a, is a cancer surgeon that's known nationwide, but nobody else knows that, I mean very few.  So--and I didn't wanna jump around on you there, but I wanted to bring that out.
Story_ID: 64422
Speaker 1: And I feel so good.  I'm sitting here, a week after surgery, and I feel good.  And these guys are all black within the 100 Black Men, took care of me.  My regular doctor didn't even know I was in the hos--they just took me and said Jerry, you gotta move.  We're getting you, boom, boom, boom [hand clap] took the thing, told me, hey, no chemo.  We got it early, cleaned me all out.  In five days you're here, and I'm having the interview.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you about that.  In that period where you felt--when you learned you had cancer, was there any reflection on your part, or fear, or panic?
Speaker 1: No.  I don't why.  And earlier I talked here about a word, a, a saying, a statement, faith.  Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things unseen.  I don't know what it was.  I just didn't feel--and to, to this day.  And I'm still recuperating (laughter), but I feel there's more for me to do.  And when I felt that way, I just say He's not gonna take me now.  And to have four--well, four doctors, a doctor that I'm close with and said Jerry, yeah, you gotta go this way--all black, very talented, just made me feel even--I'm gon'--they gonna take care of me; I'm, I'm, I'm gon' be ready to do things; I'mma be ready to open that second athlete's foot store; I'm gonna be ready to take the 100 Black Men a step higher.  I just felt that I still got so much to give to the community but in, in particular, the black community.
Story_ID: 64423
Speaker 1: And then I want--well I'm gonna, I'm gonna ask this--I wanna ask what you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: One who cared about the development, the improvement of black people, cared enough for black people.  And I go overboard, and I've been hurt by 'em, and all that my wife said, and all that, and I've been--but I wanna really be known as a person that helped the black cause.  If it's Black Expo--I got a, I got an award, the Harkness Award is for a black basketball player now that, that's, that's not only a basketball player, but also active in the community, and also academically is strong.  And the guy that won this, this, the last Harkness Award, it was such a good feeling.  I went to his graduation, and he's at Southport [Southport High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], which is a predominantly white school, and he was Valedictorian.  Oh, and that, that's, that made me feel so good, to have the Harkness Award and be the top student, the top athlete, in his school.  Ooh, and I--it's just something.  That is such a good feeling to me that--and also to have an award before I pass away in my name for all of the things is a good feeling too; but to see the caliber  of kids that are getting it, that happen to be black.  And it's only for black kids.  So we go back and forth on that, but I, I think that's the way it should be.
Story_ID: 64424
Speaker 1: When you think about your life, you were blessed with talent, you know.  And what message would you want to give to kids out there?  You know, there are a lot of kids that are still born disenfranchised, you know, that have no support systems out there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and I would like to know what message you would like to give.
Speaker 2: I do it, because that's my job with the 100--I'm not only executive director, but I'm out there.  You remember I always said I gotta be there.  So I talk to kids.  I have a school of my own, even thought I gotta do the administration; and to find your niche.  Every kid has got something that they're very good in, and they just haven't found it.  And I don't care.  You can easily say that your, your dad wasn't there for you, which I almost used a little bit in my life, or that you're on welfare, but I can tell them that I--my dad wasn't quite there for me; I was on welfare; I was in the projects; didn't have food at certain times; and I (unclear)--still did pretty well for myself.  You gotta find your niche and find yourself.  And the great thing about accomplishing it is that you did it yourself; you found that; and you'll feel better about yourself.  Just stop looking at the negatives of life, and try to be positive.  And say despite all of this that I'm under, I'm gonna make it.  I'm going to make it because I'mma find what I'm good at.  It doesn't matter what it might be, a producer, a dancer, find your niche.  And, and it doesn't come early.  But one thing in looking for your niche, if you practice doing your best, when that thing comes it'll be easier for you to accomplish.
Story_ID: 64425
Speaker 1: And when all is said and done, who have, who have you most admired in your life?
Speaker 2: As far as somebody close to me?  I gotta go with my mother [Lucille Harkness], my aunt [Clara Paine], females in my life I guess.  I wanna say my dad--my dad [Lindsey Harkness] in a way too.  I'm, I'm not unhappy with him as I, as I was early on.  And those closing days of my with him, I, I, I got to know him.  And I didn't--I just conclusion on him.  But I can go back to my grandmother [Eliza Bailey], who was--when I didn't have food or money and would give me a chore, a job, or something and just give me money to, to stay with.  Oh, she was so good, and that spoiled me, just spoiled me rotten.  The women in my life spoiled me rotten, which made it probably rough for my first marriage.  But I've made adjustments in my second, and I've matured, and I've come around.  But I've gotta say--and you hear all the time--but my mother.  She, she just as there for me.  I don't--just gave it her all for me.  And when she had cancer and she came here from Virginia--and I didn't know she was just weak as can be--and she saw me on television, I said this show is for you, mom.  Oh, that was the greatest feeling for me and I know for her too, because I had become a sportscaster, and I had made it pretty good in life.  And she was proud, and I was happy that I could--(unclear)--my dad too was pretty happy, proud of me.  But my mom was just--I mean they go, go through sick, nervous breakdown for me, did all of that despite me being a bullish--and ooh, I just hate myself back--as I look back at the type of person--kid I was, didn't understand and took it out on my mom for not giving us the things we thought we should have in life.  And she stood and stayed with us, move us to the project, went to work for us, got me--tried to get me in the church and things like that.  I'd have to say my mom without a doubt.
Story_ID: 64426
Speaker 1: And you talked pretty el--eloquently earlier about the [Indiana] Black Expo and this whole heritage thing.  And I want your thoughts about why you think black history or people knowing--or black people knowing their own history (unclear)--why that's important?
Speaker 2: I, I think it's obvious.  It gives you more dignity.  It gives you more of a pass so you'll know your background, so you can know that you're a part of kings and queens.  It's--and black history is, is history.  It's a part of the total history.  It's just been kept out and kept away so long.  And as a result, when, when I read about Benjamin Banneker, I mean all of these great--I feel better about myself.  And it'll make you as a race feel better about yourself and not only the athlete or the musician; that we were great poet--and I mean it just builds up; and that we came from a--the beginning of sal--civilization, which was in Africa; that you were the beginning of civilization.  People don't realize that.  And, and the more you get involved into your past and feel good about it, it makes you feel good about yourself, and you can perform very well in the future.
Story_ID: 64427
Speaker 1: And one last question.  What are your hopes for the African American--African-American race?
Speaker 2: Something that I have just hurt about is that the coming together, not--I just see it's been so many things that have hurt us.  No doubt the, the, the inner city, the poverty wasn't the thing that hurt us.  It almost helps you, because it develops your character.  But drugs really took a bite.  It just knocked us back so badly.  So I'd like to see us overcome, and, and be closer to the, the black males, and let them feel good about each other.  Then we can support each other.  And when we start supporting each other economically, as well as educational and the way we used to--they talked about Crispus Attucks when we're segregated, the black teacher's kid about, and then the integration came and they lost that.  Well, we lost some of that, a lot of that.  We need hopefully to come together and feel good about each other.  Don't be scared of each other, and don't be nervous of each other, don't be leery of each other, and jump out there and say, hey, I'm--you're my brother; we're gonna do this together.  My business, they run right by me, the black kids.  And this is a perfect example.  I sell athletic shoes.  If they--and a lot of my shoes are the same as they are in the stores which have--are being publicized.  And somehow the word got around that Jerry's got the same shoes, same price; let's go to him.  Because then I can give the money back to its debutantes.  Everybody's calling on me, different programs within the inner commun--inner city, to help each other.  Then we'll feel good about each other because we're helping each other, that togetherness, and we've lost that.  We've lost a lot of it since the Civil Rights Movement.  We were there, and we didn't grab it.  And the kids nowadays don't know what the Civil Rights Movement was all about.  They could care less about shopping at my store than the store upstairs.  Who can support me?  Who, who can supply my needs?  Instead of saying let me help him.  He looks like me, and maybe later on when I need a need for a group or organization, I can come back and get a donation.  But we just got to get closer together in so many ways.  And we just have not gotten over the edge of that.  And that's one thing that I feel good--that's why I feel good when a doctor--my own doctors brought me back, all black.  There's something good about that.  Now if they don't work, I'mma go to a white (laughter) doctor.  But it's something good, and I have nothing against white doctors.  But isn't it good that your people brought you back?  Or your people were the ones that supported you when you went through the debutantes.  And it just all comes together.  So we've got to come together as one, as a family, and trust each other.
Story_ID: 64428
Speaker 1: Well, this is in, in Frederick Douglass Junior High School [Frederick Douglass Academy, Harlem, New York City, New York].  I was 14--15 years old.  And that's after I got out of elementary school, and as I indicated, the talent got better.  And this was a--one of the better classes.  I mean I was in there with all these brains.  I don't know what the teachers saw in me, because my grades weren't that great.  But they saw something in me, and they always put me in the good classes.  And this was the, the top Spanish class in, in the school.  And I had great teachers, teachers that cared.  And we had a lot of background, a love for each other at, at Frederick Douglass Junior High School.
Speaker 2: I was considered a legend.  And I went to Newark, New Jersey with other legends, outstanding, great athletes.  And oh, I was in such great--among such great athletes, and they selected me as one of the legends in the, in the country, one of the best legends.  And I think they did that, not only winning the NCAA Championship but hitting the longest shot in professional ball and also because of my, my accomplishments in, in high school, winning the state championship or cross country, third in--the best in the city in the 1000-yard run.  So that started, and of course, winning the city championship in basketball.  So they did everything and, and they took some of the greatest athletes from around the country, and I was blessed to be one of them.  That's just recently.
Speaker 1: Now that picture's from what period?
Speaker 2: The Pacers.  Yeah, that's when I--that's my picture from the Pacers.
Speaker 1: I believe the, the, the biggest accomplishment of my time there, oh, about four or five years ago, I was--the Boys Scouts had my "This Is Your Life."  And they, they had the, the guys from the projects call me.  Oh, it was a great feeling.  And all the guys from Channel 13, people from 13, people from United Way, people from WTLC was there, some of the Pacers.  George McGinnis and Roger were there to, to talk about different segments in my life.  And the Boy Scouts recig me--recognized me--about four or five years ago and, and put my life right out there at the Madame Walker Building.  So that was a good thrill.
Speaker 2: Now we--in the interview we talked about the, the Dunbar Apartments.  I was about seven, eight years old.  And when I used to go for chores to my grandparents, I used to go through this apartment.  And it's a beautiful--it was well put together.  They really kept the grass neat.  They had a garden there.  And the Dunbar Apartments where all of the celebrities--a lot of the celebrities lived within Harlem.  And I just felt good about myself whenever I went to the Dunbar Apartments, because it--I forgot about the poverty, which was two blocks away from there really.  And I went from that into where the dentists, the doctors, the lawyers, the entertainers and all of 'em lived.  And my grandparents, as I indicated, worked awfully hard to be a part of that; paid the rent--high rent--to be a, a part of that, even though they were not recognized as, as a performer or any type.  But here I am standing in the Dunbar Apartments.
Speaker 1: How old are you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I'm seven, eight, eight and nine years old--seven or eight years old I think at that time and just felt real good about myself whenever I was there but was still on welfare.  But it was just a good feeling.  And I was starting to really find a little athletic skills then, not much, but just a little bit athletic skills.
Speaker 1: --graduation picture at DeWitt Clinton.  And the beautiful thing there is that I was selected the Athlete of the Year by Clinton because I was the best at track and field and also the best at--in the basketball team, the top scorer.  So I, I felt really, really good about that.  And that was the beginning of a little big more maturity, as far as my talents.  Rather than boasting about it, I, I, I began to make it better, to im--im--improve my skills and got a scholarship to Loyola right after that.  But I had to stay out a year because I didn't graduate with enough credits.  And matter of fact, I didn't even go to the graduation, even though I got the diploma and all that.  It was a general diploma.  But that was the beginning of, of my talents really starting to blossom, my athletic talents.
Speaker 2: That's my mom, who had sta--decided to start--she moved from Harlem, from the projects, to, to live in Virginia.  She was sick there and we didn't even realize it.  She had been suffering with cancer.  And she had gone through all of that, made sure that I got in college, made sure my sister had everything positive for her, and after that she became ill.  She moved to Virginia.  And in the back is--it was a home that was being built for her so that she could stay down there and, and kind of live her life a pleasant life.  And she never really let us know.  Matter of fact when I'd call her she would hide.  She'd be in pain, and she'd get up enough breath just to talk to me and, and would not let me know that she had cancer and wa suffering really, really bad during that period.
Speaker 1: That's the team that made history really.  I, I guess--you let me know when you're ready--I guess when the, the nation really started to recognize us is when I was coming in to be a senior, and they had anticipated me being All-American and that the team had a shot at being one of the best in the U.S.  They didn't think we could win it all, but the best in the U.S.  And as you could see that we--at that time, that was a no-no to have four black ballplayers, Ron Miller, and then we had Vic Rouse, and Les Hunter.  Ron Miller's the first, Vic, and Les are from Nashville, Tennessee, and the coach, George Allen, who took a chance.  He got tired of losing.  He says, hey, I'mma go with the best players.  And then on that side, of course, is myself, and Jackie, the, the one white player who always was just full of drive and determination, and played a major role in the success of that team.  I'll never forget that team as long as I love.  That's something that you always are proud of that, that particular accomplishment.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Now which one are you?
Speaker 1: Nope, move over, keep going, keep--there, there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: That was when I was in high school.  And I'd tried out for the team as a senior in high school and made it, and not only made it, but we became the, the--we won the, the city championship.  And I was one of the top scorers on the team.  And prior to that, I didn't have the competency.  I was scared to death to go out.  But I'm on the right there up in the--second up on the right-hand side.  It was my first taste of success.  And we went to Madison Square Garden and won the, the city championship, even though we were the underdogs in both games, which has been my life history of being the underdogs and coming back.  We were 12, 14 points down, and we won there.  And that opened the eyes of some people.  And as a result, I started, started getting scholarship possibilities.  But that started it in basketball.  I had left track there.  I left track and field and started to put emphasis on, on basketball in high school.  And that's the team that won it all.  And that's the team that Jackie Robinson told me as a kid that "you've got a little skill in basketball."  And that's all he had to tell me.  And I tried out for the team; I made that team; and this team won the city championship.  We won it all, even though we were the underdogs in mostly everything.  And that gave me the opportunity to, to go to college, Loyola, the beginning right there.
