Story_ID: 8316
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Muriel Duster (ph.). Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Ora Higgins. O-R-A, Higgins H-I-G-G-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 9-24-10 [1910], Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Employment Personnel Director.
Speaker 1: Okay. And that was with the--?
Speaker 2: That was with Spiegel's Incorporated in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you retired from Spiegel's.
Speaker 2: I retired from Spiegel's [Spiegel, Inc.] in 1970.
Speaker 1: Ok, seventy-six [1976]? Seventy-seven [1977].?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date? (pause) Yeah. What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August the 28th.
Speaker 1: 2003. Right?
Speaker 2: 2000.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are in my home at 9424 Parnell [Chicago, IL].
Story_ID: 8317
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oatmeal (chuckling).
Speaker 1: Now ma'am, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is pink.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have a favorite:  Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want."
Story_ID: 8318
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Alice A-L-I-C-E, Laws L-A-W-S.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen aught nine [1909].
Speaker 1: Couldn't be 1909 if you were born in 1910. So what are you--?
Speaker 2: 1902.
Speaker 1: No, it couldn't be then either.  But--.
Speaker 2: Well I don't remember her date of birth.
Speaker 1: Maybe 1890?
Speaker 2: That could be it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Alright.  Well, how far back can you trace her side of the family? What  do you know about her side of the family? Where do they come from and  how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: They came from Birmingham, Alabama. And they worked in the educational system. And she finished the college, Miles College, in Birmingham, Alabama.  And she taught school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know her grandparents?
Speaker 2: No. I did not know her grandparents.
Speaker 1: Did you know her parents, I mean your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about them?
Speaker 2: They were in the educational system. And they taught in the  educational system.
Speaker 1: In Birmingham?
Speaker 2: In Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: All right. Did they teach college or did they just teach--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They were in the college area.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what college they taught at?
Speaker 2: Miles College.
Speaker 1: That's "M-I-"?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) "L-E-S".
Speaker 1: Okay. Miles College.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you said your mother attended Miles College?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 8319
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Reverend Ira McKinney. R-E-V  I-R-A M-C-K-I-N-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your father's side of the family? How much do you know about them?
Speaker 2: My father's side of the family, they were in the ministerial area. And my father was Assistant Minister of Bethesda Baptist Church in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you know his grandparents or--?
Speaker 2: I knew his grandparents. His grandparents were in Birmingham, Alabama. And they were farmers.
Speaker 1: Okay. And did you know your grandparents, his parents?
Speaker 2: My grandparents were from Birmingham, Alabama. And they were in the automotive business.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did they fix cars or did they sell cars, or what?
Speaker 2: No, they were in the manufacturing end of the cars, where they fix cars.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they had a garage?
Speaker 2: No. They worked for a company that had a manufacturing business.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: It was the Yellow Cab Company.
Speaker 1: Yellow Cab Company. Okay. Now is there a story about why your father and mother [Alice Laws] moved to Chicago? Or did they meet in Birmingham? Or did they meet in Chicago?
Speaker 2: My father was a minister and he traveled a great deal. And he met my mother in Chicago. And they got, they were married in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now is there a reason why he chose to live here?  Is it because your mother lived here?  Is that the reason?
Speaker 2: Well, he was interested in the opportunities that Chicago gave to black people. And he decided to settle here, and he married my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember the year that they got married?
Speaker 2: No, I do not remember the year they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 8320
Speaker 1: Now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I had one brother and two sisters.
Speaker 1: And are you the youngest or the oldest? Or--?
Speaker 2: I am the oldest.
Speaker 1: The oldest, okay. Now what are the names of your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Benjamin McKinney and Fannie McKinney.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Of course, my brother is deceased now but my sister is living.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she's married to a Crosby.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Crosby.
Story_ID: 8321
Speaker 1: Can you tell us your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My early childhood memory was very vivid. I lived at 36th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and I attended the church that was at 38th [Street] and Wabash. And I had a lot of friends. And I attended the Sunday school every Sunday, and participated in the Sunday school work. My contact with the people in the area was very vivid. I had a lot of friends, and we all went to church together.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Bethesda [Baptist Church].
Speaker 1: Okay. That's at--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That is at 38th and Wabash.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they moved from there to 53rd [Street] and Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay. And your father  [Ira McKinney] is the pastor?
Speaker 2: My father was assistant pastor.
Speaker 1: Assistant pastor. Okay.  Well, what was the neighborhood like? And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood was a very quiet neighborhood. You never heard of anything happening in the neighborhood where the people had any shootings or anything of that sort. It was a very nice group of people that lived in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay. What do you remember? What did it look like?
Speaker 2: Well, at that particular time, the houses were very nice. They were kept up. The grass was on the front.  And they--the people in the area were very good.  We didn't have any problems, even playing outside. You could play outside without any apprehension.
Speaker 1: Now were these gray stone buildings, or brownstone?
Speaker 2: These were brick buildings, mostly brick, red brick.
Speaker 1: Two story?
Speaker 2: Mostly two stories.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what did the neighborhood sound like? What were some of the sounds in the neighborhood that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, you didn't hear any loud music or anything. People were pretty quiet in the area, and they kept their children under control.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember sounds from sales people or that sort of thing in those days?
Speaker 2: In that particular time, sales people did circulate the area and they made contact with you within your building. They would ring your bell and then you would answer the bell. But other than that, we didn't  have any problems.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well I wasn't asking about problems. I was just asking about sounds.
Speaker 2: No. No sounds.  No loud music or anything of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any peculiar smells in the air?
Speaker 2: No. There weren't.
Speaker 1: (Chuckling) Okay.  You couldn't smell the stockyard or anything from your place? Or--?
Speaker 2: Not exactly. No, you didn't have any offensive sounds, I mean smells in the area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any good smells or--?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody there were very careful with keeping up their property, and controlling every situation in the area. So it was a very lovely area to live in.
Story_ID: 8322
Speaker 1: What kind of little girl were you? And what did you like to do when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I participated in the church activities. And we did skating, and we went to the show. And that was about the extent of our activities as far as the outside.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you do on the inside?
Speaker 2: On the inside, I spent my time mostly reading books and studying, trying to make my grades.  My parents [Ira McKinney, Alice Laws] insisted that I become a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you started school when you were--?  Did you go to kindergarten or did you go to first, start at first grade?
Speaker 2: I went to kindergarten at the Raymond School [Chicago, Illinois]. That was 36th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay. How did you like it when you started?
Speaker 2: Well, the schools were very nice then, very nice. They were mixed schools. And the children were very obedient. The teachers didn't have any problems. Everybody there were interested in doing all they could to learn and they didn't give the teachers any problems.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you went to elementary school, you went to--?
Speaker 2: Raymond.
Speaker 1: Okay. But what about Feldenthal [sic, Felsenthal School, Chicago, Illinois]? What about that one?
Speaker 2: I went there, too.
Speaker 1: Okay. Right.
Speaker 2: I transferred from Raymond to Felsenthal.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, when you were in grade school, what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: My favorite subject was history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Why?
Speaker 2: I was interested in knowing how people lived in the other parts of the world, and their occupations, and whatever they were engaged in. And then I liked to recite in history and that gave me an opportunity to get up before the class and to tell about the history that I had read.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you like being in front of the class, and taking a leadership role sort of?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed being a leader. In fact, I was given an opportunity to head up one of the--.  They had clubs in the school and I was given the opportunity to be one of the presidents of the club.
Speaker 1: Now, which club was that?
Speaker 2: That was the History Club.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you remember your history teacher? Did you have a favorite history teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did. It was Miss Little (ph.). That was the name of the teacher.
Story_ID: 8323
Speaker 1: Were there any other teachers that had an influence on you in school that you remember?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, there was another teacher by the name of Miss Ferry (ph.), who was in the sixth grade in the school. And she took an interest in me. And she would, in the summer, she would take me on her vacation with her.
Speaker 1: Well, that's really special to be able to go on a vacation with your teacher.
Speaker 2: (Laughing) Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, she took a liking for me.
Speaker 1: Where did she take you?
Speaker 2: She took me to many of the places that I hadn't been in Washington [D.C.]. She spent most of her time in the Capitol, and that gave me an opportunity to see the Capitol grounds and to learn more about what was going on in Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now how old were you when you went to Washington?
Speaker 2: I was about ten.
Speaker 1: So was it real exciting to see the White House and--?
Speaker 2: It was very exciting to see the White House and to go through the buildings and the grounds.
Speaker 1: Who was the president when you went through?
Speaker 2: I think that was [Warren G.] Harding.
Speaker 1: Harding, yeah. Okay. So how many times did you go to Washington with her? Did you just go once, or did you go back again?
Speaker 2: No. I went three times to Washington, because you couldn't see everything on one visit. And it was three visits that we went. And this was during the summer months.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the most impressive site in Washington for you?
Speaker 2: Well, the most impressive site to me was seeing the grounds and the burials at Arlington [National] Cemetery. That is where the presidents were buried.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Arlington, okay. So did you think when you were in Washington that a black person would one day serve in Congress or be in, or might be president one day? Did you have those kind of thoughts?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, that was my aspiration. That it's a possibility that this would be an opportunity for another black person to be in Washington and take a major role. Play a major role.
Speaker 1: Did you think about becoming a politician yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, at that particular time, I didn't.  But I remember that [William L.] Dawson, who was in the Chicago area, played a very important role in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay. William L. Dawson.
Speaker 2: William L. Dawson.
Speaker 1: Was he, he wasn't--I think, was Oscar DePriest in Congress?
Speaker 2: Oscar DePriest was our Congressman, yes. 'Cause he was the first black that actually pursued that area, in the political area.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet him in Washington?
Speaker 2: No. I didn't get a chance to meet him. But I had met him before in the Chicago area, 'cause I had gone to a number of the meetings.
Story_ID: 8324
Speaker 1: What else happened in grade school?  That seems like a real big event, you know, to be able to go to Washington [D.C.]
Speaker 2: (Chuckling) Yeah. Well, in grade school there were many things that happen in the Chicago area. Our teacher was always taking us to speaking engagements and places of importance. So we got an opportunity to go to a number of places through the school system.
Speaker 1: Now, who did you hear speak when you were in grade school? Can you remember any of them?
Speaker 2: Well, I heard a number of people speak. And one was Oscar DePriest, who came to the school to speak to the students and encourage them to get a good education.
Speaker 1: Anybody else?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a number of other people. Metcalfe. He was another sports writer that came to the school.  And there were other persons that came in. I don't remember their names right now.
Speaker 1: Now this Metcalfe was a sports writer, you said?
Speaker 2: He was an athlete.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Metcalfe was an athlete.
Speaker 1: You're talking about Ralph Metcalfe [later a politician]--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Senior?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: He was an athlete. But he spoke at the school in trying to motivate the students.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now he didn't speak until much later, right?  Not when you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Right. 'Cause he was younger.
Story_ID: 8325
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about high school. You know, what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended Wendell Phillips High School. And I participated in all of the activities of the school. I was president of one of the  organizations in the school, which was the leadership organization. And there we did a number of things as far as the school concerning in developing leadership roles for the students.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you were a teenager were you interested in music?
Speaker 2: As a teenager, I participated in the dramatics area. And I attended a lot of conferences dealing with dramatics. I even took a course in dramatics in Lyon and Healy in the Chicago Loop.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were you in school plays or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I participated in a number of plays in school. We had plays practically every, every semester. At the end of the semester, we all participated in some type of play.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your greatest role in a play?
Speaker 2: My greatest role was to participate in a speaking area, where I would serve as a leader for the group.
Speaker 1: For the Drama Group?
Speaker 2: For the Drama Group.
Speaker 1: Okay. I was asking if you had a, what was your best role or your favorite role in a play?
Speaker 2: My favorite role in a play was to serve as one of the top leaders in the area, in the dramatic area.
Speaker 1: Okay. What I was asking about is what role in a specific play did you have that you liked the best. What character did you play?
Speaker 2: I played a prime area in the role. I don't remember exactly what the role was, but I always got selected for one of the top roles in the play.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a Shakespearian play that we had in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Can you remember which ones you did?
Speaker 2: No. I don't remember exactly which one.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what other activities were you involved in high school?
Speaker 2: Debating team. I participated in a debating team and was selected as one of the six persons to represent the school.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite--was history still your favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) History was my favorite subject. I spent many, many hours studying history. And I was an authority within that particular area.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that really stand out at [Wendell] Phillips [High School] that you remember?
Speaker 2: I do remember Mrs. Perry and Mrs. Little. Those are the two teachers that took an interest in me and I thought that they were outstanding role models.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. So they were at Phillips High School?
Speaker 2: Phillips High School.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did you get good grades in schools? You were a good student?
Speaker 2: Well, I got good grades at school. Most of my grades were A's, and I was one of the honor students.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did you have a role to play during graduation?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Yes. I did play a role at graduation. I represented the class as the secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any other stories from high school you wanna tell us? Anything exciting happen in high school that makes for a good story?
Speaker 2: Well, there were many things that happen in high school. They were--where I took a leadership role in many of the plays that they gave, because they gave a play at the end of each semester. So my role was to be one of the major actors in the play. So that did a lot to please me.  Because of my selection,  I was able to speak very clearly. And I was selected many times by the class and the teacher to represent the class.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were a senior in high school, did you know what you wanted to do when you graduated? Did you have a good idea?
Speaker 2: Yes. I always felt that I would be in some leadership role with some big company, and that--.  I felt that I should be very successful in that  particular area, because I was interested in business. And I was interested in playing a leadership role in whatever business I was connected with.
Story_ID: 8326
Speaker 1: What happened right after high school? Did you go to school right away after high school?
Speaker 2: I went to--yes, I went to college after high school.
Speaker 1: And then--?
Speaker 2: And then I was successful in college.
Speaker 1: You went to Crane? Was it Crane [Crane Junior College, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was Crane.  I went to Crane. At that particular time they had a very good college. And I attended there for two years before I finished the two years there.  And then later went to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].
Story_ID: 8327
Speaker 1: Tell me about your study habits. We're rolling again, and I wanted you to tell us about this flashlight business.
Speaker 2: (Chuckling) Well, we had to go to bed at a certain time. And if I didn't finish my assignments, I would get up at night after everybody was asleep, and study at the window with a flashlight in order to complete my assignments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how I made the honor roll (chuckling).
Speaker 1: Okay. So the regular study time wasn't good enough for you.  You had to study longer.
Speaker 2: I needed additional time to study.
Speaker 1: Oh.  If your parents had found out about it, would they have been upset? Would they have been--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, they demanded that we go to bed at a certain time (chuckling).
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, now, when you graduated from [Wendell Phillips] high school [Chicago, Illinois], now, when you were in high school, just to go back to high school for a minute, you were on the honor roll for four straight years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you graduated, you were salutatorian, I heard, as well as secretary.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you graduated in 1926. I believe you were sixteen?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 8328
Speaker 1: So you went from [Wendell] Philips High School to--did you go to Chicago Teachers College first or Crane [Junior College, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I went to Teachers College first and then went to Crane.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were at Chicago Teachers College for about a year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. And I guess you started Crane [Junior College] in what, 1927, I guess?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you got a degree in education from Crane [Junior College]?
Speaker 2: No. Crane was only a two year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They gave you what they call an associate degree.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you graduate from the Normal school, the Chicago Teachers College?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't graduate from there.  I graduated--my first degree was from there, and then I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Ill.].
Speaker 1: Okay. So you did get a degree from Chicagos Teacher's College.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then you went to Northwestern.
Speaker 2: The two years.
Speaker 1: Okay. Oh from Crane's[Junior College], the two years.
Speaker 2: I mean the Crane two years.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about Crane [Junior] College. Are there any teachers there that stood out, that were helpful to you?
Speaker 2: There were a number of teachers there that were very helpful to me and they encouraged me. I don't remember their names, though.
Speaker 1: Okay. What did you get your associate degree in at Crane [Junior College]?
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: When you received that degree, did that qualify you to teach in the school system?
Speaker 2: No, that didn't qualify. You had to have a four year.
Story_ID: 8329
Speaker 1: So what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went there to work with--I worked at various jobs when I came out of [Wendell Phillips] high school. I worked in the ten cents stores and a number of stores.
Speaker 1: You did sales work?
Speaker 2: Sales work.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what were things like for a young woman graduating from high school, or either coming out of community college in terms of finding a job and--?
Speaker 2: At that particular time, you didn't have any problem in finding a job within your area, in the area that you lived, because most of the stores around there--you knew the people. And you didn't have any difficulty in getting a part-time job or full-time job.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were the neighborhood stores segregated? I guess they weren't if you could get a job in the neighborhood stores.
Speaker 2: No, they weren't segregated because at that particular time it was mixed areas.
Speaker 1: So black people--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And they weren't segregated. The areas were not segregated at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. But when you were, when you came out of high school during that era, the downtown stores were segregated, right?
Speaker 2: The downtown stores, you couldn't get a job there. But you could within your area that you lived, where the stores knew you.
Speaker 1: But if you went downtown, they were looking for white people only.
Speaker 2: Only. Yeah.
Story_ID: 8330
Speaker 1: How did you get involved with the Urban League?
Speaker 2: The Urban League was conducting a campaign to solicit memberships. And I volunteered to work with this particular group. And we were conducting businesses within the area. And I was one of the persons that was able to get more memberships from the businesses in the area. And that's how I became familiar with the Urban League work.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you were part of a special project of the Urban League, right?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: How did they select you for that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was recommended by someone on their board. And this was Aaron Payne. He knew me.
Speaker 1: Now he was an attorney, right?
Speaker 2: He was an attorney. And he was on their board. And that's how I was selected. I mean, he knew of my capabilities.
Speaker 1: Now what was that project? Can you describe the project for us that you were selected for?
Speaker 2: Well, this project--we were trained at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]--was dealing with advertising and how to make contact with businesses throughout. They had a regular procedure that we were trained in. And we followed their procedure.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the procedure was designed to do what?
Speaker 2: The procedure was designed to make contacts with the businesses within the area to get memberships for the Urban League.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it was like a--?
Speaker 2: It was a training session that we went through for six weeks. They had a regular outline of what you would be covering and all the problems that you would run into.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they would try to train you as--?  I mean it must have been tough for a black person to see the head of a major corporation in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--the main thing was how to approach people and how to discuss the work of the Urban League with them.
Speaker 1: Okay. This was for everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. What did they tell you to do? I mean what was the procedure?
Speaker 2: Well, the procedure was the (unclear)--the Urban League was, at that particular time, an integrated organization. And they worked in various areas trying to get businesses to accept Negro people. And they worked in the communities, in all of the communities.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what happened when you started trying to recruit members?
Speaker 2: Well, we were well-trained. And we didn't have any--.  There were some people, some businesses that turned us down, but there weren't many.  Many of the businesses, after we got through talking with the presidents, we only made contact with the presidents of the company. And we didn't have any problems because of the fact that the Board of the Urban League had sent out letters concerning our introduction into that particular area of contact.
Story_ID: 8331
Speaker 1: One of the people that you made contact with was M. J. [Modie Joseph] Spiegel, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about that. How did that take place?
Speaker 2: Well, attorney Aaron Payne had made the arrangement. So I had been to Spiegel [Inc.] several times, but I was never given an opportunity to see anybody. So he made the contact and I was able to go in and talk to Mr. Spiegel. So Mr. Spiegel, after talking with him concerning the need for integration, he became so interested in it that he invited me back to have lunch with his board. And at that particular time, I did have lunch with the board and I discussed the Urban League work with them, and what we were interested in trying to do.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: (Chuckling) Well, the board, within a week, decided that they would consider our plan for integration. And Mr. Spiegel invited me in for lunch, and at that particular time I discussed the Urban League's plan with the board.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now this plan for integration, was that developed at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] too, or by the Urban League, or--?
Speaker 2: The plan was developed by the Urban League. But the training part, one of the board people arranged for the training to be at the University of Chicago. And we were trained there in the Business Department.
Speaker 1: Okay. So this contact with M. J. Spiegel was not just about membership, but it was about trying to integrate Spiegel--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) To integrate Spiegel.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Spiegel's catalogue house.
Speaker 2: Okay. So what happened now?  The Spiegel Board thought it was a good idea to try this?
Speaker 1: The board decided that since Mr. Spiegel, who was president of the company, was interested, the board members agreed with him that it would be a very fine plan to integrate the organization.  And Mr. Spiegel decided that that's what they would do.
Speaker 2: Okay. In those days, we're talking about the late '40s [1940s], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s].  It was not easy to integrate, because of the attitudes that people had, right?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well--.
Speaker 2: They had a negative attitude about black people.
Speaker 1: The people were not--as far as the employees were concerned, they were not interested in integration of black people into the plant. So, but Mr. Spiegel sent out a directive to all the supervisors and managers in the plant. And then they had meetings after meetings discussing it, how they would proceed with the plan. And many of them objected to them eating in the cafeteria, and using the same toilet facilities and so all of that was discussed.
Speaker 2: Now, the details of this discussion are incredible. I've read some of the memos that you had to write, and some of the questions that you had to deal with.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Like, the question of, there was a question raised about paying black people less money than the white employees. And what did you say to that? When they (unclear)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, we didn't agree on that. And we discussed it with Mr. Spiegel. And Mr. Spiegel stated in his directive that all people would be receiving the same rate of pay, that there would not be a differential as far as the pay was concerned.
Speaker 2: And some of the people asked you, "Aren't you trying to replace whites with Negroes?"
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughing).
Speaker 2: So what what did you say to that?
Speaker 1: Well, we discussed with them and told them that what we were interested in doing is giving a fair opportunity to black people, and since black people were supporting the organization, and buying, using their money to buy products from the company, that they felt that they ought to be given an opportunity to share in working.
Speaker 2: Now, another question that was raised was this:  they said, "Won't we have trouble with the white employees if we hire Negroes? Won't the white employees get mad?"
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, we discussed that because we were, they were being hand picked in following certain regulations. And that the Negro workers would be able to compete with the white workers in production, and that their production would be up to par. They were afraid that they would not be able to comply with the standards of measurements as far as production was concerned.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, it says here that there was an interview conducted of employees, and it revealed that seventy-nine percent of the white employees didn't really, had no objection to working with black people.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were only a few of them that did really--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, Mr. Spiegel said that those persons that did not, if the regulation was to integrate, that they would not object to them leaving.
Speaker 2: Here's another question. These are all--.  Here's another one here. Some of these are incredible questions. This one said, "Will Negroes use the same washroom facilities and locker rooms as whites?"
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay.  Well, the way we combated that question was, the fact is that we told them as far as the washroom facilities was concerned that we would use the paper covered seats, as far as the toilets were concerned. So we would have the paper covered seats, and that that would take care of that. And as far as the locker rooms were concerned, we selected people that they would not object to, that their cleanliness and everything would meet their standards.
Speaker 1: I suppose everybody was happy with the paper toilet seat covers, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah (chuckling).
Speaker 1: Black and white probably. Oh, and another question.  One of your answers to this question about whether Negroes should use the cafeteria or use the restroom was that you said that black people, African Americans, or Negroes, in those days, were domestics in private homes. They were cooks, right?
Speaker 2: Yes (chuckling).
Speaker 1: They were already--.
Speaker 2: (Chuckling) Integrated into their, as far as--they were already integrated into the white area because of their contact with the homes.
Speaker 1: Right. So here's someone that wouldn't want to sit in a cafeteria with a black person, but a black person is actually cooking their food.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Cooking their food.
Speaker 1: But they--.  That's alright. They also asked, "Well, what about Negroes being disease carriers?"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They actually thought that black people carried more diseases than other people.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Than other groups. They felt that they didn't have the health facilities, or not exposed to health facilities, or checking their health, and keeping up with their health.  And everyone that came into the organization had to meet a medical requirement, so that took care of that.
Speaker 1: And this last question here that you had to deal with. The question is, "Aren't Negroes ignorant?" Now how did you deal with that?
Speaker 2: Well, we--the way we combated that was by statistics. And as far as statistics are concerned, they found that Negro people had the same type of IQ [Intellegence Quotient] that any other race had. And that we were selecting people on the basis of their qualification. We gave them a written examination. Everybody that came into the organization had to pass a test, and that would eliminate that.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you can demonstrate clearly that the person--.
Speaker 2: Whether they were qualified or not.
Speaker 1: Right. They either could pass the exam or they couldn't.
Speaker 2: Yeah. If they didn't pass the exam, they weren't accepted.
Speaker 1: Now, did they give exams to all white employees prior to the--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They gave exams to everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean before integration, did they give exams to white employees?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) They did before. In order to be accepted into Spiegel's [Inc.], you had to pass a test. And it was called the Wonderlic test. That was the name of the test that we gave.
Speaker 1: What is it again?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) What did it--?
Speaker 1: What's the name of the test again?
Speaker 2: Wonderlic, W-O-N-D-E-R-L-I-C, Wonderlic Test.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is an industrial test that was used in evaluating individuals who would qualify.
Story_ID: 8332
Speaker 1: You had to integrate--.  Now, this is a big job for the time. I think you're the first person in history to have this job, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first person, the first black person.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah. First black person to design an integration plan for Spiegel [Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes. And this was used in many companies. (Unclear). I don't know if you remember.  You were practically (unclear). It was a (unclear) company down on Michigan Avenue. They had me--Mr. [Modie Joseph] Spiegel permitted me to go to that company, and to set-up an integration program. And at Alden's, Bradshaw (ph.) was selected, and I worked with him in setting up a program at Alden's, the mail order company.
Speaker 1: There were some other companies too, right?
Speaker 2: There were many, a number of companies. Kellogg Switchboard Company, which is the largest switchboard company, on 63rd Street.
Speaker 1: Okay. And so Mr. Spiegel would kind of loan you out as a consultant to these other companies?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, he permitted me to serve as a consultant in any of these of areas, since I was one of the persons that had initiated a total integration program.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.  Now, Spiegel [Inc.] had over 300 stores--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Three hundred and fifty stores.
Speaker 1: In the United States, right?
Speaker 2: In the Chicago area. This is 350 stores in the Chicago area.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is in the Chicago area. And they had stores outside of the Chicago area, which I traveled all over the United States for the Spiegel Company, integrating, setting up their program.
Speaker 1: But the 300 stores were all over the United States, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you traveled to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], Cleveland [Ohio]. What other cities?
Speaker 2: I traveled to most of the cities setting up integration programs.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever, were you ever met with resistance? Did some--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I met with a lot of resistance. But those resistances initiated by the, certain of the employees--.  And then I had to go in and have meeting after meetings with the supervisors of the various departments.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about somebody you talked to that really didn't  wanna do it, didn't want to integrate? Was there anybody, was there somebody you talk to that didn't wanna--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, you find that if the president of a company gives an order, that most of the people will abide by the order. And Mr. Spiegel had sounded an integration note throughout the company. But the most important thing is the selection of the person that's going to initiate the program because each person had to meet a certain standard that is brought into the company.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you helped integrate Marshall Field's and Carson's too, right?
Speaker 2: Marshall Field's, Carson's [Carson Pirie Scott], the Fair Store, the Boston Stores. I helped to integrate those stores, because they didn't have any black people, and they didn't have any clerks.
Speaker 1: Now, had the black community threatened to boycott those stores at all if they didn't do this?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no.
Speaker 1: It hadn't reached that point.
Speaker 2: Boycott wasn't thought of, because they continued to buy in the stores. But it's just the fact is that their policy was not to hire Negroes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you worked for Spiegel for thirty-one years, thirty-two years?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Thirty-seven.
Speaker 1: Thirty-seven years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. And during this time you toured all these cities, and put these integration plans in place.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right. I toured all of these areas and instituted the integration program. But all my contact was with the  presidents of the company then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the president of the company issued the ultimatum that they would integrate throughout their forces.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you also helped to integrate the movie theaters. There was the Oriental Theater.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. The Oriental Theater, they didn't have any black people working there.  And a man by the name of Mr. Hunt, he learned of me. And he decided that they would like to try some black ushers. And the first black ushers that were hired by the company were selected by me, even the uniforms.
Speaker 1: Well how did you select the uniform? What was that (laughing)--?
Speaker 2: (laughing) Well, we selected the various colors that would be complimentary to black folks.
Speaker 1: Okay. Which colors are?
Speaker 2: (Laughing) At that particular time what we used was blue. A navy blue, and a white shirt, a white blouse.
Story_ID: 8333
Speaker 1: Tell me about recruiting students from the universities, too. Now you did that as well, right?
Speaker 2: I did that too. Well, we wanted--Mr. [M. J.] Spiegel wanted some Negro executives. So I went to the universities like Nashville, Tennessee University, Virginia State [Petersburg, Virginia], and--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The black colleges?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: The black colleges, right?
Speaker 2: Black colleges. And made contact with the counselors within the area, and the president for the selection of recent graduates that would be interested in coming to the northern area to work in a company as an executive.
Story_ID: 8334
Speaker 1: When I was hired at Spiegel [Inc.], Mr. [Modie Joseph] Spiegel laid out a plan for me to follow. And I was--worked in every department in the business for two weeks, in order to learn operations of the jobs within all these departments. And that was part of my training to go into the business to the selection of the employees. And this was very interesting. At that time they thought I was a Mexican; (chuckling) they didn't think I was a Negro. So I worked in each section of the department throughout the building and there was more than two hundred departments.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's a lot.
Speaker 1: That you had to learn their jobs.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Now, since you were sort of in there undercover and they thought you were a Mexican, did you ever hear people discussing black people in the workplace? Did they discuss black people?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Not around me they didn't. They, as I said, they accepted me as a Mexican, not a Negro.
Speaker 2: Right. So I just wondered if one time you might walk up and they were all talking about Negroes.
Speaker 1: (Chuckling) No.
Speaker 2: Because they'd probably shut up if they were talking about Mexicans and you walked up, because they would think you were one.
Speaker 1: (chuckling) Well, they thought I was a Mexican.
Speaker 2: But you never heard any derogatory racial stuff about black people?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No. They didn't make any statements. And then they had so much respect for Mr. Spiegel.
Speaker 2: What was he like?  What was M. J. Spiegel like?
Speaker 1: He was a very fine attitude towards black people. And the National Brotherhood Organization [?], he was a member of it. And they were really interested in the integration of black people. So he would be  on their board. He wanted to comply with their wishes.  And these things were discussed in their meetings. So he was very favorable towards black people.
Speaker 2: Now, he's the grandson of the founder of Spiegel [Joseph Spiegel], I think.  Right?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Of (unclear), of the owner, of the people that originally started the business.
Speaker 2: Spiegel was founded after the Civil War by a German man who fought in the Civil War. Spiegel stores are still doing good business, still thriving today.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Story_ID: 8335
Speaker 1: When you went to colleges to recruit students to serve as executives, I guess, in the retail business, what kind of a person, what kind of student were you looking for? Could anybody do it?
Speaker 2: No, not anybody. First of all, I have an insight for determining the qualities of people. I mean it's a gift to me that I could, after talking with a person and reviewing their records and everything from the school,  I could tell whether or not they would qualify to handle the position that I was interested in them being hired for. So that was no problem. As you--I don't know whether you are aware, Spiegel [Inc.]had one of the best organizations in the city--in the country--and black people were in executive positions throughout the plant, and in their stores. So there was no problem. Because they realized they had felt, with my qualifications, that I was capable of making the selection of a person that would meet their requirements.
Speaker 1: Okay. But I was wondering, like what qualities the person had to have?  'Cause I know when in 1948, for instance, when they integrated major league baseball, they had long talks with Jackie Robinson about how to control his temper, and how to, you know, endure, you know, some slights. So that they  can get that foot in the door, you know.  Did you ever have to have those kinds of discussions with people about being patient?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, what we did, we reviewed their high school records. And we got recommendations from teachers who had thirty  students for about four years in high school. And on the basis of that and college records, I was able to determine whether or not the person--.  As I said, it's a quality that you have or you don't have in discerning people. And I was very successful in making the selection of qualified college people that could go into the executive position.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was it just grades?
Speaker 2: No.  No, it's grades, and their background, and the interview, and being able to interview them thoroughly to determine whether or not they had the qualifications.
Speaker 1: What qualities were you looking for other than grades?
Speaker 2: Well, we were looking for persons that had the personality. I had the inquisitiveness of being able to work with other people, and demonstrate their capabilities without offending people. And there were many qualities. I mean, after you talk with a person that you was able to discern whether they have it or they don't have it.
Speaker 1: Okay. So any good stories that come out of this experience of recruiting and training and stuff? You have a good, got a good story for us?
Speaker 2: Well, I found that the individual supervisors, as I think I gave you some descriptions of the supervisors, I would check with the  supervisors every three months to get their thoughts on how well the integration program was working. And, once in a while we would have some flare-ups. But by the whole, these people were hand-picked. So they did not--they did all they could do in order to qualify and to make up the management, because what management was interested in is production:  whether you can make the output. See, because it was a time studied type of job, where you had to make a certain amount of, your output had to be a certain amount each, each evaluation term. So that was one thing that the supervisors were very interested in, was production. And attendance.  Production and attendance.  And whether you could get along with the people in the department.
Story_ID: 8336
Speaker 1: You finished college at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], while you worked at Spiegel [Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that. You went to Northwestern?
Speaker 2: I went to Northwestern University.  And I was, as I said, graduated from Northwestern. There were two blacks in the area when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Now I hear there was some sort of a quota?
Speaker 2: They had a one percent quota for blacks.
Speaker 1: Northwestern University.
Speaker 2: One percent for blacks and five percent Jews.
Speaker 1: This is in the 1950s, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A one percent quota for blacks, and five percent for Jews?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how did you find out about that quota?
Speaker 2: Well, I found out from the persons in the selection department that they were using the quota system. Well, I knew they were using a quota system, because there were no blacks at the university, at that level.
Speaker 1: How did you find Northwestern? Was it a good experience?
Speaker 2: I found that they accepted me. I didn't have any prob--.  In fact, I used to go to some of the white students and we would, on the weekends, we would study together. And they all, the group that I went with, they accepted me. I didn't have any problems.
Speaker 1: Okay. Who were some of the professors at Northwestern that made an impression on you, or were concerned about you?
Speaker 2: Well, one is Dr. Endicott (ph.), and Dr. Hammond (ph.).  He was a very, very interesting professor. He took an interest in his students. And he took an interest in the black students. Of course, as I said, in that particular time, I was the only black in one of the classes. And it was two blacks that graduated, at that particular time, with a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did you get your degree in?
Speaker 2: Business Education.
Story_ID: 8337
Speaker 1: You also taught night school at Dunbar [Vocational High School, later Dunbar Vocational Career Academy; Chicago, Illinois] for--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I taught night school at Dunbar for twenty-six  years.
Speaker 1: Did you teach business there?
Speaker 2: Merchandising, a course in merchandising.
Speaker 1: Alright. And twenty-six years?
Speaker 2: (Chuckling) Yeah, at Dunbar [Vocational High School].
Speaker 1: Well, what was that experience like? Are there any stories from that experience you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Well, working at Dunbar [Vocational High School] was a very interesting school. They were all adults at night, and most of 'em were interested in getting ahead. And all the department stores I had on the board that I used to make the selection were the personnel managers from the department stores. And they--the persons that were accepted for the company, I would send them directly to the personnel manager. And we had no problem in getting them on because they were hand-picked. See, at that time they didn't have any black clerks in the stores.
Speaker 1: So, one, the teaching fed your other jobs, I mean, too, you know, kind of fed the department stores with some candidates for employment.
Speaker 2: Well, they were hand-picked candidates for the stores.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were at Spiegel's [Inc] you said for thirty-seven years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you retired in 1976 or '77 [1977], somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 8338
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do after you retired?
Speaker 2: I worked primarily with the schools, serving as a representative of business for the various schools. And I would have speaking engagements practically every month--every two or three months.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us about the Ora Higgins Youth Foundation. Now, you started that in 1977, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Well when I left Spiegel's [Inc.]they gave me a testimonial at the Hilton Hotel. And there was some money left. I think it was $16,000. And they offered it to me as an honorarium. I suggested to them to take it and use it for students. On the basis of that suggestion, they organized an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation. And we started with the $16,000. And then we, each year they would give a banquet. And we would usually give around ten students, $12,000 for each student. The money came from the banquet. And that's how the Ora Higgins Youth Foundat--this is the twenty-sixth year for the Ora Higgins Youth Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, there's a program within the foundation called, I guess, the Harriet Tubman Family Living Center. Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well the Harriet Tubman Living Center was when I was in high school, teaching in high school at night.  This was a program--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh, so that's different from the youth foundation (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's different from the youth foundation.  This is a program that was set up by the Board of Education for the educating of expected mothers.
Speaker 1: Okay. You served on various boards and committees (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I think it's around twenty-seven different boards. I think I gave you that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, around twenty-seven. All the commissions I served on.
Story_ID: 8339
Speaker 1: What are some of your  hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I would hope that they would have a similar type of program for the integration of black people, because they're having a very difficult time in getting jobs now. Conditions are no better now than they were then for many black people. And the companies are not as liberal as they used to be. So my suggestion would be, if they had a similar program, we would be better off. Because it would be where individual representatives would be going into companies, and talking with the direct--with the president of the board, to get them to consider the integration of Negroes throughout their plants. Because they are not nearly as liberal as they used to be.
Story_ID: 8340
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you about the march on Washington in '63 [1963]. Can you tell us about that? You went down there, and today is the day after the fortieth anniversary of the march.
Speaker 2: I went down there with thousands and thousands of people. And, of course, you know, there were many, many speeches given on this day. And that was to spark the integration and the movement of black into areas, throughout the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay. What's the most memorable part of that day?
Speaker 2: The speeches, the speeches to urge, change the thinking of people towards black people.
Speaker 1: Now, the news media broadcasted that people were concerned that there might be violence at the march.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But there wasn't any violence.
Speaker 1: No there wasn't. Were you concerned that there might be violence? Did that ever--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I didn't think so because everybody was so interested in the march, that we didn't want any violence, because they knew that would retard the progress.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you also met President [Lyndon B.] Johnson on a trip to Washington, DC, too.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Yeah. In 1960--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We met in his Oval Office.
Speaker 1: In 1964?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  Now, you were with a group--?
Speaker 2: There were twelve people that were selected. And there were two women; I was one from Illinois; and another one was from New York. And the rest were men. And these were individuals to discuss with him, with President Johnson, how we could move, the movement of black people into the main stream of life, of working--.
Speaker 1: And you got a chance to shake President Johnson's hand.  And--.
Speaker 2: Well, we got a chance to shake his hand, and to go through the White House.
Speaker 1: Now what was your impression of President Johnson? Lyndon Baines Johnson?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was the most liberal president that we've had. He did more for black people in opening up opportunities than any other president, at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Okay. In what ways did he open things up?
Speaker 2: Well, there were more blacks in the White House, I mean, hired in different positions in the White House. And then he was very vocal about the integration program, which was different from many of the presidents.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now you also spoke before the Labor Department, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I spoke before the Labor Department.  Miss [Frances] Perkins [sic, W. Willard Wirtz] was head of the Labor Department then.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was your speech, did you talk about--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It was pertaining to integration, and the movement of black people into the main force of labor.
Story_ID: 8341
Speaker 1: I have some notes here that indicate that you write a little poetry too. Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (chuckling).  Is there something here--?  Here's a piece here. Could you read this for us? That might be nice to do.
Speaker 2: "We are helped by helping others. If we give, we always get. Seeing others as our brothers, is life's  safest bet. If we give what folks are needing, it will pay us in the end. And we just can't help succeeding, in the game of life, my friend." (chuckling).
Story_ID: 8342
Speaker 1: When you look back on all of the things that you've been involved in, and were able to do, what would you consider, at this  point, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think my point is, what I was able to do, in setting up an integration program that extended throughout the United States, in many areas. And people that are living today have often come to me and said, "Miss Higgins, if it hadn't been for you, I wouldn't have been in a higher position." Many of the persons that are in the school system are the persons that came through Spiegel [Inc.]. And with my encouragement of getting additional education, they've been able to move up into the ranks.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is one last quick question. And it's slightly different from legacy. But, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who has been helpful in moving standards of employment to a higher height, moving the standards of employment, 'cause that's one of the most important things, is being able to get a working base where people can move up.
Story_ID: 8343
Speaker 1: Miss Woods is in there. And I don't know that other lady there (chuckling).
Speaker 2: This Miss Woods?
Speaker 1: This is Miss Woods.  It was one of the foundation affairs. And that was about, I think in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins (left), Miss Woods (center), and  an unidentified woman at an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation event, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8344
Speaker 1: That's Mrs. Spiegel and me there.
Speaker 2: Now this is M.J. Spiegel's wife?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright. Was that taken on the same day?
Speaker 1: No, that was on a different day.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was in the '80s [1980s] though.
Speaker 2: (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah. It was in the '80s [1980s]
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins (left) and Mrs. Spiegel,  wife of Modie Joseph Spiegel, president and executive director of Spiegel, Inc., where Higgins worked as integration planner, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8345
Speaker 1: That was taken at one of the foundation scholarship awards, I think.
Speaker 2: What time frame? What year?
Speaker 1: That was in the '80s[1980s].
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8346
Speaker 1: Those were some of the first students that were--received scholarships.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins (second from right) with Ora Higgins Youth Foundation scholarship recipients, late 1970s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8347
Speaker 1: And that's Attorney Aaron Payne, and that's Mr. [Modie Joseph] Spiegel. And this is the Postmaster, McGhee.
Speaker 2: McGhee is on the right?
Speaker 1: Yeah. That's McGhee.
Speaker 2: Spiegel on the left?
Speaker 1: Yeah. That's Spiegel on the left. That's M.J. And that's Attorney Aaron Payne.
Speaker 2: What's taking place in this photo?
Speaker 1: Scholarship award affair.
Speaker 2: Okay. And the year?
Speaker 1: That's in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins's former employer M.J [Modie Joseph] Spiegel (left), attorney Aaron Payne (center) and Postmaster Henry McGee (right) at a Ora Higgins Youth Foundation scholarship award event, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8348
Speaker 1: That's one of the scholarship awards individuals. Now I don't know what date that would be.
Speaker 2: Okay. You don't know (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know anything. It's one of the high school students.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins and an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation scholarship award recipient, not dated, from the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8349
Speaker 1: This is Father Clements and Marion Hall (ph.) and myself.
Speaker 2: Okay. What's going on here? How come you all are together?
Speaker 1: We are being presented to Father Clements, a citation.
Speaker 2: Oh you're giving him a citation.
Speaker 1: A citation.
Speaker 2: Oh you're giving him a citation.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Father Clements.
Speaker 2: When did you guys get together for this? What year about?
Speaker 1: That's in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay. You're not just saying the '80s [1980s] on all these are you?
Speaker 1: No, (chuckling).
Speaker 2: Okay. Leadership Award.
Speaker 1: Leadership Award.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins with Father George Clements (center) and Marion Hall at an event honoring Father Clements, ca. 1980s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8350
Speaker 1: These are students that were given the leadership award. Muriel, you know what this picture is? This one here?
Speaker 2: That's Congressman [Bobby] Rush and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now can you say that, what she said?  Mrs. Higgins, can you tell us that?
Speaker 2: Congressman [Bobby] Rush and Chico Higgins, and one of the young ladies. And I don't know who that is.
Speaker 1: Now, is Mr. Chico Higgins any relation to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my son.
Speaker 1: [U.S. Congressman Bobby Rush (right), Ora Higgins's son Chico Higgins and an unidentified woman, not dated, from the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8351
Speaker 1: That's one of the annual affairs that we had at the Lexington House [Hickory Hills, Illinois] for the Ora Higgins Youth Foundation.
Speaker 2: Okay. And, you know, I asked you at the other times 'cause that's my job.  But what year do you think this gathering took place?
Speaker 1: Around '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: [Crowd shot at an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation event, Lexington House, Hickory Hills, Illinois, ca. 1990. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8352
Speaker 1: This is one of the annual affairs that we had for the Ora Higgins Youth Foundation at the Lexington House [Hickory Hills, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins at an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation event held at the Lexington House, Hickory Hills, Illinois, 1999. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8353
Speaker 1: That's a group of scholarship winners. Of course, Muriel [Duster (ph.)] is on it and some of the board people are on there.
Speaker 2: Muriel is on the right in the red?
Speaker 1: Yes, in the red.
Speaker 2: And you're the one with the spectacular hat?
Speaker 1: Yes. That's right (chuckling).
Speaker 2: That's a beautiful suit. Okay. (unclear). Now what did you not tell me that you're supposed to tell me each time?
Speaker 1: That's the Ora Higgins Youth Foundation Scholarship Award Affair.
Speaker 2: About what time?
Speaker 1: And that's in the '90s.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins (seated) with Ora Higgins Youth Foundation scholarship award recipients and board members, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8354
Speaker 1: Who's that young woman with you in that photo? Is that one of the awards--people that got the awards, in that photo?
Speaker 2: Yes. That's the one that got an award.
Speaker 1: [Ora Higgins (left) with an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation scholarship recipient, Hickory Hills, Illinois, 2001. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8355
Speaker 1: That's Muriel [Duster (ph.)] and myself, and one of the scholarship winners.
Speaker 2: So Muriel is part of your program, huh? Helps you out with it?
Speaker 1: (Chuckling) She's the treasurer (laughing).
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins (center) with Ora Higgins Youth Foundation's treasurer Muriel (right) and a scholarship winner, not dated, from the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8356
Speaker 1: That's Muriel [Duster (ph.)] and myself.
Speaker 2: What's going on here? What are you guys doing?
Speaker 1: That's at the scholarship award affair.
Speaker 2: Okay. '90s [1990s] again?
Speaker 1: That's in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins with Ora Higgins Youth Foundation's treasurer Muriel at an awards event, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8357
Speaker 1: That's Silas Parnell.
Speaker 2: Okay. Awards ceremony?
Speaker 1: Awards--he was a speaker.
Speaker 2: [Silas Parnell speaking at an Ora Higgins Youth Foundation event, not dated, from the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8358
Speaker 1: That's my father.
Speaker 2: What's his name?
Speaker 1: Reverend Ira McKinney.
Speaker 2: "I-R-A"?
Speaker 1: "I-R-A". McKinney.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: McKinney.
Speaker 2: Okay. How old was he? Or what time do you think this photo was taken? To the best of your knowledge?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That was taken in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Really? He looks pretty young.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously laughing).
Speaker 2: This is your father?
Speaker 1: Yeah. No.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now tell us the real date.
Speaker 1: You know about when that date was?
Speaker 2: (unclear).
Speaker 1: Maybe the '50s.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins's father Ira McKinney, ca. 1950s. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8359
Speaker 1: That's my husband, William Higgins.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now what time period would you say this photo is?  He's still a young man.
Speaker 1: Yeah (chuckling). I think that was taken in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins's husband William Higgins, ca. 1950s. From the collection of Ora Higgins]
Story_ID: 8360
Speaker 1: That's me when I graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: Wow. Okay. What year did you graduate high school?
Speaker 1: That was in '27--'29.
Speaker 2: Twenty-seven.  It had to be '26 [1926].
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Twenty-six (chuckling).
Speaker 2: Yeah. You were sixteen when this was taken.
Speaker 1: (Chuckling) Yeah.
Speaker 2: It could be '27 [1927]. But that's--.
Speaker 1: [Ora Higgins, ca. 1926. From the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8361
Speaker 1: My husband, William Higgins. And Ora Higgins.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins and her husband William Higgins's wedding photo, not dated, from the collection of Ora Higgins.]
Story_ID: 8362
Speaker 1: That's Muriel [Duster (ph.)] and William Higgins, Jr. and myself.
Speaker 2: When was it taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Okay. And why were you all together for this photo?
Speaker 1: The Ora Higgins Youth Foundation Scholarship Award.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins with Muriel Duster (ph.), son William Higgins, Jr. and unidentified man, ca. 1990s]
Story_ID: 8363
Speaker 1: That's my nephew. His name is I--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Go ahead, keep talking.
Speaker 1: His name is Ira Crosby.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my name is Ora Higgins.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's a birthday celebration.
Speaker 2: [Ora Higgins with her nephew Ira Crosby at a birthday party, not dated, from the collection of Ora Higgins]
Story_ID: 8364
Speaker 1: This was a conference in Washington, D.C.,  where President [Lyndon] Johnson invited twelve people to discuss the employment of Negro people throughout the United States. And I was one of the women from this area. And there was another woman from New York. And the others were men that attended this conference, in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: And how does it happen that this is a painting? This is a painting, though. How did that come to be?
Speaker 1: Well, the person that--another person did the painting.
Speaker 2: Okay. Who was the artist?
Speaker 1: Marian Boyer.
Speaker 2: Okay. And tell us this one more time. I know you told us before. But when this meeting occurred, what year was that--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) This was a meeting that was called by President Johnson.
Speaker 2: In what year?
Speaker 1: And that was in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And concerning the employment of Negro people throughout the United States. And I was from this particular area.
Speaker 2: [Painting of Ora Higgins shaking hands with U.S. President Lyndon Johnson in the 1960s, painted by Marian Boyer, 1981. From the collection of Ora Higgins]
