Story_ID: 36200
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm Marcelite Cecile Jordan Harris. And Marcelite is M-A-R-C-E-L-I-T-E; Cecile, C-E-C-I-L-E; Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N; Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the name, Marcelite?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My great-grandmother was Marcelite.  She was the second oldest daughter of a slave who became a free man called Pierre Landry of Louisiana.  He's a very distinguished person in his own right.  Pierre Landry was the first black mayor in the United States after he was freed around 19--I'm sorry, about 1868--that time period.  He later went on into the Louisiana Congress, and then went and practiced law.  And he also became a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 16, 1943, Houston, Texas, Harris County.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now, I'm retired.  I do a lot of volunteer work; working with the--especially with the National Coalition of One Hundred Black Women, doing projects for them.  And, this is a period in history when President [Barack] Obama is running again for his second term.  So I am the chairperson of the Political Awareness Committee.  Though I can't take a side as their committee chair, I sometimes take that hat off and tell people what's going on and the two sides and the issues that are affecting this election.  And, I'm also--it looks as though I'm going to be accepted into the [Jataka?] (ph sp) Circle, which is an organization of professional women who meet periodically, once a month; have speakers in who are able to stimulate discussion and stimulate thoughts and stimulate things and actions that these women can take.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your last position--
Speaker 2: Before retiring?
Speaker 1: Yes, what--
Speaker 2: Okay.  My last position in the [U.S.] Air Force was as the United States Air Force Director of Maintenance at Headquarters United States Air Force in the Pentagon.  My last position, really that I retired from, was as the Chief of Staff of the Chancellor of New York City schools.  However, I was only there for about three months because of an illness of my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan].  But, I did work for three years and retired from that, from the United Space Alliance, and this is the company that ran the shuttle program for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay.  What I'm trying to get you to say is that you were the highest ranking--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: (Laughing)
Speaker 2: Okay, yes.  When I became a major general, it probably even happened when I was a brigadier general.  I became the highest ranking woman in the United States Air Force.  That brings with it a lot of responsibilities other than the job that you have.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were a major general?
Speaker 2: I was a major general.  I was the first African American woman to become a major general in the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 21, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my home, in the basement of my home at 545 New Haven Court, in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 36201
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite food.  Yes.  And it's barbecue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I have a favorite color, and it's blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love fall.  My favorite time of the year is fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I love sailing.  And most of my sailing has taken place--my cruising has taken place in the Caribbeans, so I love the islands that I have visited.  And my favorite thing to do on vacation is to cruise.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I stole a line from a poem, that I read when I was a little girl.  "Let your reach far exceed your grasp, or what's a heaven for."
Story_ID: 36202
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, separately, from you father's side, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: All right.  Her name was Marcelite, M-A-R-C-E-L-I-T-E; Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H; Terrell,   T-E-R-R-E-L-L; Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born January 21, 1917, in Prairie View, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my great-great-grandfathers.  As I've already mentioned, Pierre Landry was the father of my great-grandmother, Marcelite.  Mother was also named after her.  Then we had Terrell, Alexander Terrell, who was the father of my great-grandfather, I. M. Terrell.  Alexander Terrell had two children; one became a doctor, and he was Alex Terrell; and the other, I. M. Terrell became an educator; and he did quite a bit of things in the area of Texas.  He really helped Texas come along.  I. M. Terrell founded the first African American school for children in Fort Worth, Texas.  He went on down to Houston [Texas] after that, and he founded the first fully-equipped hospital for Negros in the State of Texas, and it was called Negro Hospital.  My grandfather, his son, was an architect, and he designed that hospital.  I. M. Terrell went on to become the fourth--at that time they called them principals, but it was the fourth president of Prairie View, Texas, where my mother was born.  My grandfather, her father, my mother's father, was an instructor at Prairie View at the time of her birth.  My grandmother, was as I had said about her father--her father had twelve children.  His first wife was an African American woman; and by her, he had eight; by the second wife, he had four, and the second wife was a white woman.  So that side of my family are all very fair.  They're very Frenchie, too.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is your mother's side.
Speaker 2: This is all mother's side.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we have some information down here about I. M. Terrell, but I did not know about the hospital.
Speaker 2: Oh, Yes.  The Negro Hospital.  When I say he founded it, he's the one who crusaded and got the funds from the power brokers in Houston at that time.  By the way, that hospital still stands today, and it's called Riverside Hospital in Third Ward Texas--Third Ward Houston-excuse me.
Story_ID: 36203
Speaker 1: And, let me tell you a little bit about my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan].  My mother was an outstanding person, herself.  Mother was a valedictorian from her school, up near Dallas [Texas], Huston-Tillotson.  She went on and got her degree in library science from the American University in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. She also studied in Colorado.  Mother, when she started working in Houston, Texas, as a school librarian, she was the only librarian in the Houston independent school district, white or black, who had a degree in library science.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Did your mother talk about--now did she grow up in um--
Speaker 1: Prairie View [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Prairie View?
Speaker 1: No.  She grew up in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know exactly when they moved to Houston.  But, she a--that's where she met my father [Cecil Jordan]--was in Houston, and mother went to high school, Phillis Wheatley High School in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 36204
Speaker 1: Now, that's a rich family history there.  So let me get this--Alexander Terrell was your--
Speaker 2: My [maternal] great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And he's had an interesting story also.  Alexander, from what I've been able to research, was a slave in Charleston, South Carolina when he was a young boy.  About the age of six, the slave owners hired him out everyday.  So he worked in a bakery, but he was constantly running away.  They would catch him and bring him back.  And he went on then to go back to the plantation and he worked with then the slave owner's wife.  The slave owner had died.  And, I can't recall the family, but I do have the family some place written down, and he did some gardening for her.  That lady, though, convinced by her son, sold him to a family that was a slave trader--sold him to a slave trader.  That slave trader sold him to a family in Georgia--Terrell, was the name of that family.  And during the [American] Civil War, that family decided they did not want to stay in Georgia, so they took them and their slaves and moved to Texas, and that's how my roots became to be, in the Texas arena.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's as good explanation of this--of how all this movement takes place.  And it's amazing sometime the people, you know, starting in South Carolina end up in Texas in a few short years, a lot of stories like that.
Speaker 2: Well, let me finish on that.  When he was freed, he borrowed six dollars from his slave owner master and started a blacksmith business, and he was able from that blacksmith business to send his two children to college.  And that's how my great-grandfather, I. M. Terrell, was able to get his start, and of course, Alexander, being able to go on to study to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a history.
Story_ID: 36205
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] talk about what life was like in Houston [Texas] for her growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  Not much.  I'm trying to remember if mother ever said anything.  Mother also finished valedictorian from Phillis Wheatley High School.  She was the only daughter of Wendell Phillip Terrell, the son of I. M. Terrell and Roberta Terrell, his wife.  They had three children.  One was Wendell, who was the oldest, my mother in the middle and their brother Robert.  But she didn't talk much about life in Houston.  Neither one of my parents [Harris' mother and father, Cecil Jordan] did, talk about life in Houston, growing up.  They have talked a little bit about life in Houston after I came along.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36206
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Cecil O'Neal Jordan.  C-E-C-I-L; O'Neal and it's O-N-E-A-L; Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N.
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born November 25, 1915, in a town that exists no more, called Weches, W-E-C-H-E-S, Texas.
Speaker 1: W-E--
Speaker 2: E-C-H-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The courthouse burned down, so he really didn't have the birth certificate.  When he got ready to get a passport, he had to get his birth verified.  And the only place he did that was in Nacogdoches, Texas.  I don't know how he achieved it, but he did get a passport, because he visited me in Germany.
Speaker 1: Now this is--let me ask this question--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Is Weches a black town?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  It might have been, I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: They're quite a few black towns in Texas that were founded by freed slaves.
Speaker 2: It might have been.  I never thought about that.  I have always, one day, wanted to go back and do some research; especially on my father's side.  I don't know much of the history on my father's side.  My grandfather [Walter Preston Jordan], his father, once took me to meet a banker, and he said this banker is your cousin.  He was white.  And he was a descendant of the Jordan--from the Jordan plantation in Alabama.  My grandfather's father, my great-grandfather's name was Jack Jordan, but I don't know much of the history on that side of the family.  My grandfather though, raised his children and worked in the Houston [Texas] post office when the family finally moved to Houston.  The funniest thing about it, when they moved to Houston, they had electricity.  When they were living in Weches, they had lanterns.  And so, instead of being afraid of the fire, my father was afraid of electric lights when they moved to Houston.  My grandfather, Walter Preston Jordan, was working in the post office as a mail carrier, and my father also worked in the post office as a mail carrier and then as a supervisor of the night shift.  His sister went to--both of them went to Prairie View [Texas] and finished school.  His sister became a teacher.  But at that time people in the post office made more money than teachers did.  So she went to work in the post office, and her career--and she retired from the post office.  Her name is Demalester, Demalester Jordan Akens is her name.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: Sure, I will.  D-E-M-A-L-E-S-T-E-R Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N, Akens, A-K-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: You know.  I don't know.  I'll have to ask her children where "Demalester" came from.  It probably is a very interesting story.  They might not even know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36207
Speaker 1: So your father [Cecil O'neal Jordan] went to school.  Did he go to [Phillis] Wheatley [High School, Houston, Texas] too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He went to Phillis Wheatley, yes.  That's where he met my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan], but they didn't get married until after she had finished college and also had her degree in library science.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they both went to Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical (A&M) University, Prairie View, Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, Mother went to Huston-Tillotson [University], and my father went to Prairie View.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.  Huston-Tillotson is there in Houston [Austin, Texas?], and then Prairie View A&M is what it was?
Speaker 2: That's Prairie View A&M.
Speaker 1: So is there--now did your father--you say he didn't talk much about growing up either in Houston?
Speaker 2: No he didn't; no he didn't.  I don't know the background.  If we're looking for that kind of information, I can check with my sister and see if she learned some things from my parents.
Speaker 1: I just want to know if they passed along to you about what life was like or what to do in Houston.
Speaker 2: No.  It was segregated in Houston.  We lived in two wards that were primarily--that were not primarily--they were black.  We started out in an area called Fifth Ward.  In Fifth Ward--right around the corner, they told me that Bonnie and Clyde had lived there.  So Fifth Ward was kind of a notorious ward.  My grandparents stayed in Fifth Ward and died in Fifth Ward.  But my parents moved later to Third Ward.  I was born, and matter of fact, I was twelve years old when we moved to Third Ward.  Third Ward was moving into the middle class of African American people, of Negros.  And their friends around them also had moved into Third Ward area.  But this was all Negro environment.  My father and mother protected my sister and I a lot from segregated Houston.  We didn't know we weren't liked.  We knew things happened to us, but we never put a thing is because of me being a black child.  I remember when I was in elementary school, my sister and I later went to--when my sister became old enough to go to school, we both went to school over there in Fourth Ward where my mother was a librarian at Booker T. Washington High School.  And we went to Gregory Elementary School, which was at least a bus ride away, a three or four stop bus ride.  And we were waiting for the bus one day; the bus would also stop right in front of Booker T. Washington.  So we would catch the bus and ride over to Booker T. Washington and then go home with mother.  We were--my sister and I one day, we got on the bus, and the long seat behind the bus driver, we sat in that seat.  I just remember that bus not moving.  And a Negro from the back came up and got us and took us into the back, then the bus moved on.  We were so used to leadership, following the adult and follow the leader.  And the bus driver was the leader.  So we sat close to the leader.  And when the lady took over, we just went with her until we got to where our mother was.  That probably--numerous incidences where they protected us.  There were ponies in Houston.  We always wanted to ride those ponies, and my parents always had something to do.  One of the things my father would also do is when things, restaurants or public places allowed--started allowing Negros or blacks in, he would go first with his friends to see what the atmosphere was going to be like and to check it out.  If it wasn't what he thought his family could take, then we wouldn't go.  But if he found it was suitable to take his family, then he would later take all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he kind of was a scout for the family?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36208
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, is there a story about how your parents [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil O'Neal Jordan] met that they tell.  Or, how they got together?
Speaker 2: I know there is.  I just can't recall it right now, Larry [Crowe, interviewer for The HistoryMakers].  Let's see.  I know they met--they knew each other in high school [Phillis Wheatley High School, Houston, Texas].  Daddy tells a story of when mother--my mother was a very small lady.  She was 4'11" [four feet, eleven inches in height], and she probably weighed all of seventy-something pounds.  But when she went away to school, she came back and she was a--daddy said she was a little blubber ball.  And he saw her walking down the street. And that kind of sticks in my mind of when they started seeing each other or getting together.  They lived one block apart in Houston on a street called Breckenridge.  They would see each other in the neighborhood, and that's the only way I figured that they got together, and later became, I don't know, later married.  My grandfather [Walter Preston Jordan], on my father's side; I got the impression that because my mother's side was so educated and on my grandfather's side, they weren't as educated, that my grandfather had the feeling that my mother's father [Wendell Phillip Terrell] thought she was marrying beneath herself.  Because he visited me one day, when I was in the Pentagon as a captain, and he said I wish your grandfather, Terrell, could see this now; what you ladies have become.  I know he would be proud.  And so I just thought perhaps there was something there.  But I didn't question him about that statement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36209
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you--do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I had a half-brother, and he--same name as my dad.  Cecil Oneal Jordan, Jr.  His mother was an Emily Proctor in Dallas, Texas, and O'Neal has since passed.  My sister, Elizabeth Lyman Jordan Johnson, became a lawyer, and a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] grad [graduate], who went on to Emory [University, Atlanta] to get her degree in mathematics--masters in mathematics.  She married a doctor, a young man who went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta], and later became a doctor, and they live in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you were growing up, it was you and your sister?
Speaker 2: Primarily, my sister and me.  Often, if Oneal was in Houston [Texas], he would stay with my grandparents.  We lived a block, too, from my grandparents.  When my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] and father [Cecil O'neal Jordan] got married, they lived with some friends until they were able to get their own home out there in Fifth Ward, and it was just a block down the street from my grandparents.  Mother tells the story of when I was about two; I was walking, but I was potty trained evidently, because I was wearing underwear--I could have worn underwear, but I didn't have any on.  But she said I walked out and had to cross a street, it wasn't that busy, to go and see my grandmother.  My grandmother is the one who called and said, "You know, Marcelite is--", and she called me Cecile.  "Cecile is down here by herself, did you know?"  And Mother panicked, of course.  But, no, not too much on how they met, or what really started it, or what got them together.
Story_ID: 36210
Speaker 1: Well, when you think about their [Harris' parents, Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil O'neal Jordan] personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My daddy.  Yeah.  My daddy was free with money, and I'm free with money.  I mean, if I have money, everybody has something.  My daddy was like that.  He would give mother the allowance from his share of working to take care of--the rest of the money that was his, he would blow it.  My father was an organizer; he was a leader; he took keen interest in young people.  He was smart.  I thought him to be a very brilliant man, especially when it came to mathematics.  I also learned a few new words from my father, too.  He was a Boy Scout leader, thinking that--Oneal [Harris' half-brother] didn't live with us; Oneal lived primarily with his mother [Emily Proctor, in Dallas, Texas].  So he really didn't have a son, but he became a Boy Scout leader, and took his troops to the jamboree.  He was a family man, too.  And we did things as a family, a lot--even go fishing, and even gone down to Galveston [Texas].  I didn't pay any attention that Galveston was segregated.  The only place we could go, and I hope I got it right, was south beach or north beach.  I'm not sure, but there was only one area down on the beach where we could go.  So we would go as a family.  They both were religious.  He became Congregationalist, because my mother was a Congregationalist, but I'm not that religious.  I'm spiritual.  I do believe in a higher being, but there are too many religions out there for me to say that this one is right and that one is right, or what have you, but I do think there is a higher being.  But I think, yes, all-in-all, I'm more like my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of the church that they attended?
Speaker 2: Pilgrim Congregational Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Pilgrim Congregational.
Speaker 2: And that's the church that I grew up in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36211
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Let me think.  A memory.  Not something my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] told me.  My earliest childhood memory, I think would be my fifth birthday party, when I turned five.  In that little house over there on Breckenridge [street], Mother had put about, oh, I don't know, 75 to 100 kids in that house.  And I just remember walking over children.  And I remember that what she did is she had little square cakes.  So every child got a cake with their ice cream, this little squares.  That's my earliest memory.  Now, Mama tells me a story, when I was three [years old].  And I think that's when she knew that I was especially boy crazy.  I really liked the boys.  There was a young kid, a teenager in the neighborhood; his name was Marion Curtis Thomas, and he lived down the street from us, and he was a pretty good-looking kid.  But I'm three years old, and we're out on the front porch, and he walked by, and he said "Hi, baby," and Mother said that I said, "Oh, he spoke to me."  I swooned because of that.
Story_ID: 36212
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question:  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: One of my favorite places was the Houston [Texas] Zoo.  I loved to go there.  Also, my family would take us, during Christmas time, through an area still existing today called River Oaks, in Houston. And this is where the rich, white people lived, and they had big houses, and they were always decorated.  It was just a pleasure, and it was very comfortable being with my family and seeing those things.  Another site, I guess, and I can't recall another cite--was the beach.  I loved the beach.  I loved going down to Galveston [Texas].  Now, Houston also--the sounds of Houston, for me, were always children, because of the kinds of activities that was involved.  When I was in school, there were children; when we go to the zoo, there were children; when we go to the beach, there were children.  One of the favorite things, my father [Cecil Oneal Jordan] belonged to several organizations, and one of them was called the Gafftoppers, and they had property in Galveston.  Some had even put up homes--beach homes down there.  It's only probably about a quarter of a mile from the beach; if less than that, probably less than that, a few hundred yards.  They also built kind of a club house.  And every year, we used to go on picnics.  People don't go on picnics anymore.  When they do, the gentlemen would play dominos or cards; the ladies would get together; the kids would play and they had ball kinds of play for the children. But you know, I've never taken my daughter on a picnic, a family picnic, because we just don't do that any longer.  Smell of Houston.  I can remember the smell of oil over by the ship channel that Houston had.  I can also recall the smell of fish, sea things, because Houston is filled with bayous.  And it didn't--I wouldn't say they were bad smells, they were just different kind of smells.  In traffic, you can also smell the exhaust fans and those kinds of things; from cars, buses and those vehicles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36213
Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school at--what was the name of that elementary school?
Speaker 1: Was it Gregory [Elementary School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: No.  It was one right before Gregory.  It was one--my grandfather built quite a few churches, and he also had something to do with that school.  At any rate, that school was located in Fifth Ward.  And Mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] had hired a lady to take care of my sister [Elizabeth Lyman Jordan Johnson] and me.  My sister is about eighteen months younger than I am, so she had not started school, and I was in the first, and I was allowed to walk to school then and walk home.  My biggest memory from that school was this young lady who told me she wanted to beat me up.  I had no idea why she was mad at me. I cannot remember, but I knew I wasn't afraid, and she said she would meet me on such-and-such a corner, and I went to that corner after school.  She never showed up.  So, consequently, I've never had a fight in my whole life.  But I was late getting home and Grimsey, that was the name of our sitter, was especially worried, because school let out at two o' clock, and so I late getting home.  When my sister started elementary school, I probably was in the third grade, and we moved to Gregory Elementary School, near Mother.  Mother would take us to her school, Booker T. Washington [High School, Houston, Texas], we would get in the car of Mr. Montgomery; he had a daughter, who also went to Gregory, and he would drive us over to Gregory, and we would catch the bus back to Mother.  High school--junior high--we then had junior high schools.  And I went to E.O. Smith [school].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm going to try to go back here to maybe the beginning of grade school.  Did you like school, when you started school?
Speaker 2: I must have.  Yeah, I liked school.  I liked the challenge of school.  Yeah.  I don't remember having the option of not liking school.  No. You know, there must have been a time--at some period in there when I must have told my mother that I had a problem with school.  I can recall at Gregory, my fourth grade teacher, a man, said we're not going to have this particular course this day.  I'm going to tell you a little bit about me.  And he talked about himself in the Korean war; about people being wounded and peopled striving to do good.  His message was that, we have an obligation to study; we have an obligation to learn.  Because that really stuck with me and it stayed with me. I'm not sure what the exact message was he gave, but I was astounded by the story that he told.  I had no idea about war; we didn't have televisions then.  It existed, but we didn't have one.  So what war was, and that probably was an instance of me being a religious student.
Speaker 1: A what kind of a--
Speaker 2: A religious kind of a student.  Really sticking with studies and sticking with learning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Serious?
Speaker 2: Serious student, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you got good grades in school?
Speaker 2: I got good grades.  I finished--well, we're still with elementary school.  But I got good grades in elementary school, also.
Speaker 1: What did you like?  Did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Math.  It's always been my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Mrs.--in elementary school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Gosh.  I can't remember the teachers from elementary school.  I guess I didn't have--Mrs. Goodwin, but she was my cousin.  But I can't really remember a favorite teacher.  I don't remember a favorite teacher even from high school or junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36214
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little girl growing up [in Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I would say that I was precocious; I was nosey, and I was what you would call a good girl.  My parents [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil Oneal Jordan] were in charge, and I was obedient.  My sister [Elizabeth Lyman Jordan Johnson] and I both were obedient.  I was just involved; I was happy.  I was a happy little girl.  I remember one time, my brother [Cecil Oneal Jordan, Jr.]; we're still on Breckenridge Street.  I had to be less than twelve years of age.  I did something to my brother, and he said, "You're going to go to hell."  I started crying.  And he knew my mother was in the house, and he kept, "Don't, don't, it's okay, it's okay, you're not gonna go, you're not gonna go."  I said, "But all those other people, they're going to be down there in hell burning up."  He just couldn't quiet me. I was people-interested.  I liked people.  And I'd say that I was just a good girl, a good ordinary girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I read that somebody said you were interested in drama when you were little.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were movies and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We used to go to the theater, and my favorite movie star was Esther Williams.  She was the swimmer and she sang in her movies.  And, so, I would sing a lot.  My cousin, today, tells me that I was very demonstrative.  (singing)  "I would go to the lake, even as--of the moon." And that I would just go around singing (laughing) quite a bit.  But I did.  And later on, I took drama courses and theater courses.
Speaker 1: Now, Esther Williams.  That's an interesting choice, because it seems to me, that I remember, Esther Williams had a certain amount of independence because she could swim and do other things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.  I didn't know her history, her background or anything.  I wasn't into reading up on movie stars, and I'm still not into reading up on them.  But I just loved her in movies.
Speaker 1: But as a movie star, she always swam, and so she had this athletic thing.  I can't think of any other movie star that had that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Maybe that's what got me interested in swimming too.  Yeah.  I later became a swimmer, too.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did you go to the movies a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In those days, Negroes had to sit in the balcony.  And I never thought anything about sitting in the balcony; that probably was the best seat in the house anyway.  But the next door neighbors had a teenage daughter who was a little bit older.  My mother wouldn't let us go with them, and sometimes my parents would take us to the movies.  That was back in the days when you had to change screens or reels for the movie to continue.  And the theater attendant sometimes weren't watching what they were doing, and one reel would run out, and the other one hadn't started so everybody in the theater would start to whistling and booing and hollering, and my father would join right in.  And I just thought that was the weirdest thing. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't realize that; that they would actually let the movie run out.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah; oh, yeah.  [If] they weren't watching that movie--that reel could go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you like music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I took piano lessons.  All the way from elementary school, I took piano lessons.  I always liked music.  My favorite kind of music today is rhythm and blues.
Speaker 1: So in those days, you didn't have a TV, you said, but you--
Speaker 2: No.  We still lived--we still lived in Fifth Ward, so when we got our television.  I don't remember what age, but I know I had to be under twelve [years old].
Speaker 1: [Simultaneous talking].
Speaker 2: You said you were from first to third [grades] in the Fifth Ward [Houston]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 2: So you were about eight [years old], I guess?
Speaker 1: Probably, yeah.  I guess I'm not counting the ages, okay.
Story_ID: 36215
Speaker 1: And we got a television; it was a counsel kind of a television with the doors closed, and my sister [Elizabeth Lyman Jordan Johnson] and I ran in the house, and we ran right passed it.  And so daddy [Cecil Oneal Jordan] called us back and said "You guys better take a look."  Oh, but my grandparents had a television.  I forgot to tell you about that.  And every Friday night, all the neighbors would go to my grandparents house, and they'd watch the fight; always a fight on the television.  And there was this one woman, Miss Crackile (sp).  I won't forget Miss Crackile.  Miss Crackile sat in the first--right there by the ring. And she'd bang on the ring (ph sp).  I mean and just holler what they were supposed to do to each other.  No but my grandparents had their television, then later my parents [Cecil Oneal Jordan and Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] got one when we were still there out in the Fifth Ward.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 36216
Speaker 1: So now in junior high school, you went to--
Speaker 2: I went--
Speaker 1: E.O. Smith [school, Houston, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  E.O. Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to figure out why I was still living in Fifth Ward when I went to high school.  I must have been eleven [years old] when I went to--no, it had to be twelve [years old] when I went to junior high school.  E.O. Smith was the high school.  And my uncle, my mother's [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] brother, her older brother was the vice principal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated from there as the salutatorian from E.O. Smith three years later.  Math, again, was my favorite study.  Also, I liked art.  The art teacher really liked the paintings that I would draw.  I liked volleyball; English was good, I liked that, and I still like boys; I still like boys.  There was a boy that I was interested in that I liked.  Darrell Hickey.  Sweet little Darrell Hickey.  I did something to Darrell.  He sat in front of me, or behind me, or somewhere.  At any rate, I did something to him, and he retaliated.  That's what the teacher caught, him retaliating.  And my uncle had this big paddle, as the vice principal.  And Darrell was sent to my uncle.  And my uncle gave him some licks.  And Darrell Hickey, he used to walk me home.  He no longer walked me home.  He was really mad at me about that.  We later started seeing each other after we had finished college for a short time.  Darrell Hickey is gone now.  He's gone to his maker.  But that was, I guess, my first boyfriend.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, were you involved in the Girl Scouts, or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Matter of fact, mother was a Girl Scout leader too--the Girl Scout troopers at my church, Pilgrim Congregational Church, and I was a leader in the Girl Scouts, as well.  I was also involved in the "Y" [YWCA; Young Women's Christian Association], with activities at the YWCA.  The men's YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] had the swimming pool, and that's where I learned how to swim--well, I learned how to swim at Jack Yates High School out in Third Ward.  But, again it was a boy that got me into the YMCA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were in Girl Scouts and the YWCA, and learned how to swim at the YMCA.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you take a leadership role in these--
Speaker 2: When we went into high school [Kashmere Gardens High School], and I was on the swim team, I was the captain of swim team.  But, let's see, I was also a cheerleader at E.O. Smith, I think.  I'm thinking.
Story_ID: 36217
Speaker 1: You started high school in 1957, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  What happened at E.O. Smith [junior high school, Houston, Texas] too is I went to summer school.  At that time in Houston, you couldn't start school until you were six [years old], it probably is the same way.  And I didn't turn six until January, but they had a mid semester, two semesters.  So I started mid semester, and my mother wanted me to get on track with the rest of the class who had started in September.  So, I went to summer school for two summers and caught up with that class. So, yeah, I went to high school, then, in 1957 and finished in 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: High school was great.
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is Kashmere Gardens High School [Houston]?
Speaker 2: Kashmere Gardens Junior Senior High School.  Later became Kashmere Gardens Senior High School.
Speaker 1: Now, Kashmere Gardens was a neighborhood, or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was.  Kashmere Gardens was a black neighborhood.  The school was a new school, just built when we went in there.  The principal, Dr. Bryant, was the principal from Booker T. Washington [High School], and he took with him some of his premium staff members and teachers.  And he took my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Harris] with him out to Kashmere Gardens.  So we rode to school with Mother.  I was in the drama club; I was the cheerleader; I later became the captain of the cheerleaders; and I was also on the swim team.  I can't remember if I was the captain, or not, of the swim team.  But we always lost every race.  We weren't but (unclear) people on the swim team.  And Jack Yates [High School] was the high school that we swam against, and they had a pool.  Well, we had a pool, too--goodness, Marcelite.  So, but, they had been swimming much longer, and they were much stronger and everything.
Story_ID: 36218
Speaker 1: Now did the black high schools only compete against the other black high schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is segregated Houston [Texas].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Segregated Houston.  I didn't know there was another Houston.  I lived around Negroes; I lived around black people.  And as far as I was concerned, that was the world.  When my father [Cecil Oneal Jordan] died, some white people came.  I didn't even know he knew white people.  So, in growing up, I just was not in contact with them.  Once on television, Ann Landers came into Houston, and some kids from high school were chosen from all over to be in the studio, and be interviewed and ask her questions and what have you, and make comments.  And I was one of the ones chosen from Kashmere.  And that's about the only time I saw other white students.  It didn't faze me as different.  I didn't think of them as being white; I just thought we are people.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the world--
Speaker 2: The world, as I knew it, was black.
Speaker 1: So, were all the black high schools on the same side of town.
Speaker 2: No.  Kashmere Gardens was at least 30 to 40 minutes away from where I lived.  I lived in Third Ward, and Kashmere Gardens was a place--it was kind of like Third Ward but it was--Fifth Ward, but it was it's own entity.  People would say, "where do you live", I live in Third Ward.  I live in Kashmere Gardens.
Speaker 1: So Kashmere Gardens was a separate--so if you look at Houston geographically then were Third and Fifth Ward adjacent to each other?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So there was a separation between Third [Ward] and--
Speaker 2: Third, and Fifth, and Fourth, all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Black people lived in Third and Fifth and then--
Speaker 2: And Fourth and Kashmere Gardens.  Yeah.  They probably lived someplace else, too.  Yeah, they did.  I can't think of it now.  There was a much poorer section that had its own name also, and I can't think of it now.
Speaker 1: Black people lived in pockets in Houston?
Speaker 2: Pockets in Houston.
Speaker 1: Not on one side.
Speaker 2: Right.  Not on one side.
Speaker 1: I read somewhere, I guess, in 'Urban Studies' [journal] or something, that Houston kind of grew, kind of in a haphazard way?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It probably did, I never thought of it that way.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where they said that Dallas [Texas] is more, you know, grew as a plan.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, really.  That's interesting, because that's the way Houston was.  It was just these little areas, where the black people were, and the white people were in the other areas.  I don't even--I can't even remember the names--recall the names.  I know if I heard a name about a white neighborhood, I would recognize it as being part of Houston, but I can't recall any of the names right off the top of my head.
Speaker 1: So, to get from one black community to another, you had to travel through white neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You traveled through white, or you traveled through black.  Basically, you didn't even have to change buses.  It seemed like all buses went downtown, and from there they would go out, the way my memory serves.  To get to church, my brother [Cecil Oneal Jordan, Jr.] used to take us, especially when we lived in Fifth Ward.  My church, Pilgrim Congregational [Church], was in Third Ward.  And so, my brother used to take us to Sunday school.  And so we'd catch the bus, we'd have to go downtown, change buses and then go out to Third Ward to go to Sunday School and church--my parents [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil Oneal Jordan] would join us for church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36219
Speaker 1: Now, I think I asked you before about any favorite teachers, and you said you didn't even have any in high school [Kashmere Gardens High School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I think--a teacher--let me see what favorite teacher would be in high school.  Callie Pride Hill. C-A-L-L-I-E Pride Hill.  She was an English teacher.  She was such a fair teacher, and she was very critical.  Growing up with educated parents, and with their friends being educated and educators, you learned how to speak the King's [English] language.  You know, you just didn't put a preposition at the end of a sentence without being told--"where is it at" is behind the preposition "at" you got corrected.  And you learned new words.  And Callie Pride was one of those--one of those kinds of teachers.  And I thank her to this day.  She was also my mother's [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] best friend.  And her daughter, we all kind of grew up together.  Matter of fact, her daughter was in my wedding.
Story_ID: 36220
Speaker 1: So, were there any stories from high school [Kashmere Gardens High School, Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are.  Hold on, let me think.  Well, I wore braces in high school.  I got them when I was in the eleventh grade, and I didn't get rid of them until I was in Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  So, I had a miserable time in high school.  I was the cheerleader, and our first football game; we lost that game 70 to nothing.  And I just boohooed, and my braces cut the inside of my lip.  So that crying caused my mouth to bleed.  I didn't really have a boyfriend; that was always significant in my life, having a boy in my life, until I was in the eleventh grade.  Yeah, that's the story.  That's how I got to the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  I learned to swim at Jack Yates [High School], and that's how I got to the YMCA.  My sister [Elizabeth Lyman Jordan Johnson] used to go to the "Y", swimming everyday, but black hair, when you swam, it does strange things.  And so I didn't want my hair to be messed up.  I looked out the window one time. In my mother's bedroom, you could look out the window and you could see down the cross street, and she was walking home, and she had this cute boy with her, and they stopped at a neighbor's swings.  I said, "Uh oh."  I got to go see this guy.  So I changed and put on my shortest shorts, and I went down there and met him.  But from then on, I followed my sister to that "Y" and just wore my hair in a pony tail.  And he started walking me home and later became my boyfriend for a year, because he was a senior in high school.  He would come over.  After school we'd do our homework together.  He would help me out; he's very smart.  He would help me out with math.  His name was Elridge Stafford (sp).  He went off to college, and I really never heard of Elridge again until some--I don't know, I just bumped into him, what year?  Yeah, it had to be somewhere around '96 (1996).  I saw him again in 1996.  But he had his senior prom, and Mother--anytime we would go out, Elridge and I, one of my parents [mother or father, Cecil Oneal Jordan] took us because my mother was determined we were going to be debutantes in the strictest sense of the word.  My mother or my father took us.  So we never bothered about transportation because we knew one of them--but this time, for a senior prom, he borrowed the car of his uncle. And I'm sitting there; I'm ironing my dress in the kitchen, and my mother said "What time is Elridge coming over?"  And I told her 6:30.  And she said "Oh, I better get ready."  I said "That's all right.  Elridge borrowed his dad's car."  The school where he had the social--the dance--the prom was two blocks away from my house--three blocks away from my house.  "We're going to drive over there."  Mother said, "Oh no.  No you're not.  Your father and I are taking you."  And I started crying then, and I didn't stop until a week later.  When I saw Elridge again, in 1996, he said, "What was all that crying about?"  That's all he remembers about his prom is me sitting there at that dance, crying, I boohooed.  And so for a week after that, my mother and I didn't really talk.  She would tell me what she wanted me to do, and I would just obey.  That week passed and my father--I didn't know what he said to my mother, but he sat me down.  The whole reason this occurred is because mother wanted us to be debutantes and never have been out with a young man by ourselves, unchaperoned.  And so he said, "I don't know why your mother wants this, and you have to understand something.  She's my wife, and I'm going to support my wife.  Now, I am tired of this cold atmosphere being in the house.  You're going to have to stop.  You've got to stop and pause yourself.  So after that Mother and I became friends again.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 36221
Speaker 1: Now, this was your boyfriend's [Elridge Stafford (sp)] prom you went to?
Speaker 2: Right. For my prom, which was the next year, I went with my cousin.  Mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] took us, because she was one of the chaperones.  That was the other thing about mother.  Mother was the chaperone at every dance, every party, I went to.  I guess she did the same thing with Elizabeth [Lyman Jordan Johnson; Harris' younger sister].  I don't know.  But she was always there.  Sometimes she would embarrass me.  I'd be dancing with some strange guy, who would keep his hat on.  She would walk right onto that dance floor and take that guy's hat off, and say "That is not polite" to him.  I was just livid.  I'd say, "Oh my God" to my mother.  But, that was my mom.  She--her mother raised her to be a proper lady, and my mother was trying to do the same thing with me, and I guess she succeeded, somewhat.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now those were the days when rhythm and blues and rock and roll started to--
Speaker 2: Rock and roll.  The Twist and those kinds of dances were in then, and line dances; all that kind of stuff.  So rock and roll.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and all that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's when we had Elvis Presley, was the thing.  He was never a favorite of mine.  I think I had heard of Ray Charles then.  I know I did, at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], because he really--I guess I had, because I understand that Ray Charles started in Houston [Texas], got his start in Houston.  I think we had done that.  But we used to do the 'Monkey'.  Have you ever seen the Monkey?  Yeah? Those kinds of dances.  And then we would have slow dances, slow dances.  That's what it was when she walked up and took that guy's hat off his head; we were in a slow dance.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a class office?  Did you run for--
Speaker 2: I ran for president, but I didn't make it.  I didn't win, and I didn't have a class office.  I was on the debate team.  I forgot about that part, and I was not in any language clubs.  I had no aptitude for language.  Oh, and I did take drama club.  I was always the lead or the second lead in any plays that we did.  I fell in love with drama.  And I went to Spelman, determined to do drama.
Speaker 1: What were some of the plays you did in high school?
Speaker 2: 'Twelve Angry Women' is the one I remember.  And I can't remember any others.  But it's based the same way on the story--the play of 'Twelve Angry Men'.
Speaker 1: They just make them women instead of men?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Just turned it into women.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, at graduation, did you have any special role, or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was salutatorian at graduation, so I did.  I didn't have to say a speech as salutatorian; the valedictorian got to do that.  So, no, I did fairly well.  And the only drawback I had are things probably that I was weak in, was Spanish.  As I said, I just have no aptitude for languages.  I just can't pick it up.
Story_ID: 36222
Speaker 1: So when you were the verge of graduation [from Kashmere Gardens High School, Houston, Texas], had you chosen a college to go to?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I wanted to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  But Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] and Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] offered these scholarships.  Because of my grades, too, I also got $2,000 a year from Jones Scholarship in Houston [Texas]--from Houston.  It turned out that Spelman--I guess Spelman's scholarship offer was the largest.  So that's how I ended up at Spelman College.  I knew I was going to Spelman when I graduated, because I went to Spelman that summer.  I guess on the test, Spelman picked us up that time from the SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test]--scores on the SATs.  I didn't apply to either one of those schools.  I'm not sure I applied to any college.  I'm not even sure I applied to the University of Michigan.  But both of those colleges picked us up--pick them up because of my scores on the SAT.  And I guess I appeared weak in English and Math because Spelman gave me a scholarship to go to Spelman during the summer before my freshman year.  So I did know where I was going to end up in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36223
Speaker 1: How did you like Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I had a ball at Spelman.  I liked Spelman.  I almost miss my Spelman--my Spelman experience because now, I told you how my parents [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil Oneal Jordan] were, my mother was, with her strictness, and now she wasn't around.  Oh boy, I could just--when I first got to Atlanta, though, I called my mother, and I said, "I'm using this return ticket, Mama, and I'm coming home."  And she said, "No. give it a week."  And this was during the summer months, give it a week.
Speaker 1: So did you go by yourself?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Did you go to Spelman by yourself?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Went to Spelman, by myself.  Well, I went with one other girl, Jeannetta Anderson.  Jeannetta Anderson and I both got those.  And Jeannetta Anderson was the valedictorian from my high school [Kashmere Gardens High School, Houston, Texas].  And so we both went to Spelman that summer, and we were roommates that summer. I immediately got a boyfriend, with my braces and all.  And so, but at the time Spel--I don't know how Spelman is today, but Spelman, for some girls who had a lot more freedom it was very strict.  Of course, the way we went to movies, it had to go in groups of six, to the movies, and we had to be back at ten [o' clock].  So in the middle of the movie, all of Spelman would stand up, and they--you'd hear everybody in the audience say, "There goes Spelman."  (laughing) We had to get back to school.  But--
Speaker 1: Well kind of ex--now school is different these days; there are coed dorms; though not at Spelman, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No. Yeah.  Uh hu.
Speaker 1: But there are things that go on now at school; it's a lot more freedom.
Speaker 2: A lot more freedom.
Speaker 1: Just kind of explain what the--Spelman--the typical black college in those days were kind of--
Speaker 2: Okay.  You had--when you arrived--for that summer, that was a good experience.  And we all lived in one dorm.  And we all took those courses, and everything.  It was ungraded; it was just to strengthen us in those--in those fields.  I have no idea why I was weak in math, because I loved math.  It wasn't so much math, it was reading, and I'm still a slow reader, to this day.  But, when you arrive your freshman year, you have a big sister, and that's usually a junior in the Spelman class.  You didn't go anywhere by yourself at Spelman, until you got to be at least a sophomore.  Yeah.  No.  I think you could go by yourself as a--let me think back now.  Yeah, you could go by yourself in the daytime.  And places were off limits to us.  One of the experiences I had in--I'm trying to write a book on myself; my girlfriend and I, Vera Norman.  And I've asked Vera if I could tell the story.  It's my experience, my first experience and my last--our first experience and our last experience with shoplifting.  We went in an area called the West End.  And West End is still in Atlanta.  We still got the West End, and they had--then they just had stores, now it's the West End Mall and Woolworth's.  I think that was the five and dime store's name.  We went in there, and we picked up these notions--we sewed.  We liked to sew and make our clothes.  Picked up these notions--thread, needles, that kind of stuff, and just stuck them in our pockets.  When we got to the counter, the store detective or somebody, I don't know what his role was; he said, "Okay, empty your pockets."  We were so scared--we were--oh my God.  And we didn't get out the store, so he couldn't charge us really with shoplifting.  And we emptied our pockets.  And he said, "Okay, I want you to pay double for everything that you picked up."  We had the money.  We paid double.  I don't know why we did that.  To this day, Vera and I said, "Maybe it was just for the excitement of it all."   Yeah.  But, we were--we weren't bad, we were just mischievous. We--we bought these outfits just alike--cute little outfits.  And we decided we wanted some beer, and that--at that time, we were under-age to buy the beer.  So we figured if we put these dresses-these outfits on and put some heels, we could walk in the store and pass for being of age.  So we picked up the beer in the--it's just a neighborhood kind of store.  Picked up the beer, went to the counter, the guy said, "If you guys don't get out of here--," he said.  When you think back today, what kind of older women dress alike and decide they're going to go to a store to buy some beer?  But that's about the--the worst things, I guess, that we did in school.  But, this was always a friend, and Vera is my best friend today.  To this day, she's still my best friend, even though she lives in Maryland, we talk all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36224
Speaker 1: So, you majored in speech and drama at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started out majoring in math.  But I got to calculus, and calculus beat me.  So, I changed--I was majoring in math and minoring and psychology.  So I changed my major to psychology and picked up drama--speech and drama as my minor.  My senior year at Spelman, the Atlanta Morehouse Spelman Players [unclear], which I was a part of, took a tour of Germany and France.  And I happened to get the second lead in that.  The name of the play was 'Jamaica'.  And we played USO [United Service Organizations] clubs over in France and Germany.  Because of that, the instructor who took us over, Baldwin Burroughs, was going to be teaching about three courses, or giving us three courses that we got grades for.  I switched my major then to speech and drama, and made psychology my minor.  I should have taken another psychology course because I could have had a double major.  I had twenty-seven [credit] hours in psychology when I switched.  And I had to make up some hours in drama when I got back to have it as a major, but I declared drama my major.  But we were in Germany about to go into France, and we were performing and "B," is what we called him, came on the stage and stopped us from performing and said the president has just been shot, and that was President [John F.] Kennedy.  We kept--we continued on for a little bit, and he came back in about thirty minutes and said, "We're going to stop the show.  The president has died."  And, oh, boy, did we start crying; and not so much because we stopped the show, but because we had lost who we thought was a genuine president for African Americans, for black kids.
Speaker 1: This President Kennedy--John F. Kennedy?
Speaker 2: John F. Kennedy, Yeah.
Speaker 1: This was November 23, 1963?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.  And so the USO--the [U.S.] Army--we were doing Army bases and Army concerns.  They didn't know if they were going to continue us on into France or not.  So they held us right there in this German town where we were.  And we were staying in a hotel.  We took the time, and that is when involve ourselves in activities.  They later let us go on into France.
Story_ID: 36225
Speaker 1: But the reason it [President John F. Kennedy's assassination] hit us so hard--I didn't tell you about earlier, during my freshman year, one of the reasons too I--I not too much missed classes, but didn't study as I should have studied, was that I worked a lot on the Civil Rights Movement, the student movement of civil rights.  I told you already, that growing up, I was not cognizant of the segregation that was occurring in the United States.  But when I came to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], the Student Movement had already started in that year in 1960, March of 1960.  And it was--it was in the air, it was everywhere, and you heard about it, and you understood what was going on.  I would picket, and I also helped work in the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee's [SNCC] office as doing secretarial kind of things, typing out letters, filing and what have you.
Speaker 2: Did you know Ella Baker?
Speaker 1: No.  Who is Al Baker?  What did he do?
Speaker 2: She.
Speaker 1: Oh, she do?
Speaker 2: She was the founder, one of the organizers of SNCC.
Speaker 1: Oh, really.  No, I don't remember too many of the SNCC people except for, I think for Julian Bond.  But I have later met Lonnie [C.] King [Jr.], who was one of the organizers--well, it was three people who organized the Student Movement; the president of Spelman, I can't think of her name now.  God, I'm working so much with her lately.  Julian Bond, Lonnie King and--and this lady, and I'll think of her name as we go on.
Speaker 2: Johnnetta Cole [first African-American female president of Spelman College from 1987 to 1997]?
Speaker 1: No.  No, Johnnetta Cole is much younger.  No--what is her name?  Okay, anyway.  He later told me how it got started, Lonnie King did.  And what he said was that they saw her sitting--he and Julian Bond had been talking about it.  And that by this time the four guys in North Carolina A&T [State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] had done the sit-in in the Woolworth, wherever, the counter, and been arrested. And he and Julian Bond said, "You know, we to support them, we need to do something down here and support them."  And they went and talked to Roslyn--Roslyn Pope, is her name.  They went and talked to Roslyn Pope.  And so the three of them decided they needed to talk to the presidents of the colleges; Morehouse [College], Spelman [College], Clark [College], Morris Brown [College] and Atlanta University.  Those gentlemen said, "You need to know why you're doing it."  "Let us know what its--what your cause is, what you're fighting."  And so, they did.  And about two days, came up with a document and its appeal for--for human rights, I think it was; an appeal for human rights.  And it's a full page newspaper page document.  And Benjamin--oh, God, how can I forget--Benjamin Mays, who was the president of Morehouse, was able to secure the paper, the Atlanta Daily--the Atlanta Constitution Journal [Atlanta Journal Constitution], get a page and publish that appeal.  They later started talking--the Movement.  And they did their first picket and sit-ins in March of 1960.  Those people went to jail.  They solicited Martin Luther King, Jr. to march with them.  And that's how it got started, and so it was at full pitch when I got to Spelman.  So that class--my class, the class of 1964, we were--we were freshman in 1960, and we called ourselves now, the foot soldiers.  We did the picketing, and we did the things that the seniors and leaders needed help in doing, needed us to do.  And I remember picketing once, and I'm picketing and the Klu Klux Klan dressed in all their regalia on the other side of the street picketing.  But I remember them coming kind of over to where we were, and they were going in the opposite direction, because I remember someone spitting at me.  And that just kind of, I thought was weird.  And that's when it hit me; these people are very serious.  They don't like me. They don't like me because I'm black, and I couldn't understand that; that was really baffling me.  So I stuck with the Movement.  In January, I turned eighteen [years old].  I started Spelman when I was seventeen.  In January I turned eighteen, and the organizers of the Movement would not let you go to jail unless you were eighteen years of age.  So I called my father [Cecil Oneal Jordan] and told him, I said, "Daddy tomorrow I'm going to be arrested."  And he said, "No, you're not."  And he talked to me for an hour.  And what I remember most out of that conversation was that he said, there are some people who open doors, but there are other people who need to be prepared to go through those doors when they open.  And that's what we sent you to Spelman for, to get yourself prepared.  And I picketed, and that was my involvement in that movement.
Story_ID: 36226
Speaker 1: I told you that story because it was related to--to what--it was related to something that I had said earlier.  Oh, recognizing [President] John F. Kennedy as the president who was going to try to end this Southern segregation.  The South is still segregated when I'm at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and especially Georgia.  And--but at that Movement, we did at least get restaurants and eating places opened.  Still schools, and what have you, were still segregated, and a lot of young people were the first to go to the Georgia--University of Georgia, the first person--also in Mississippi, Medgar Evers [civil rights activist] was killed when I was at Spelman.  Those kinds of freedom riders existed.  So we had--I was immersed in what was happening to black people.  And albeit, people who didn't like us because of our color.  We were educated, we were smart, and that's the only reason, I guess, we could give for that.  And so to lose this president was a blow, and it was like a blow to what we were fighting for.
Speaker 2: Now, on campus, were there any professors that were supporting students [Student Movement in the Civil Rights Movement]?
Speaker 1: Yes, a Doctor Zen, at Spelman College.
Speaker 2: Z-E--
Speaker 1: Z-E-N.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  He has since passed.  He wrote a book.  I don't have a copy of the book, and I can't remember the name.  But he wrote a book that--that really talks about the Movement too.  And I can't remember what he was a professor of, but he supported the Movement.  And so did Dr. Mays, Benjamin Mays, president of Morehouse [College, Atlanta].  People who were cautious of the Student Movement were some of the African American City Fathers.  According to Lonnie, they felt things were moving along, albeit, slowly, that we were getting segregated.  And didn't want the students to ruffle the waters anyway.  And so they tried to calm the students down, but Lonnie and Julian and Roslyn were hearing nothing of it.  They tell me Roslyn is the one who wrote that appeal for human rights, herself, all in one night.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you meet Dr. King, during this period?
Speaker 1: No. I never met Dr. King.  He did march with them, but that was in March.  And when I was picketing, and when I was involved, I'm not sure where he was, but he wasn't there and involved with us then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He might have been in Alabama, because not too long after that was the March from Selma to Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Well, in '63 (1963) in Birmingham that was in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Birmingham.
Speaker 2: He was in the Birmingham jail.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all of those things.  So he had to be--he was probably in Alabama.
Speaker 2: He was more than busy.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 36227
Speaker 1: Who came to campus to speak to you in those days.  I know they had like a notable--African American figures would come to the campus to talk?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any notable people.  I just remember the students.  I just remember the students speaking to us.  And I don't know, I should have asked Lonnie [C. King, Jr.].  He's back in Atlanta [Georgia], and I should have asked him.  Oh, I guess I could say that too, he's starting a new organization called the--an organization for civil and human rights.  He's doing this because he's finding the Atlanta NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] ineffective.  And we still have a lot of problems as African Americans.  Somehow, I think we've let our children down.  Our children, African American children, minority children, are two to three grades behind Caucasians.  Caucasians aren't doing that great on the world scene.  They're about 26 [in rank].  The United States is about 26 when it comes to international kinds of tests.  The incarceration rate is just astronomical.  If a black person does it, they go to jail.  If a white person does it, they get a slap on the hand.  So there is that kind of unfairness.  This incident that just happened with this young man is another case of that unfairness that white people try to protect each other.  So at any rate, this is why Lonnie wants to start this new organization that he--
Speaker 1: This is Lonnie King?
Speaker 2: Lonnie King.
Speaker 1: Okay, he was the original member of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]?
Speaker 2: Original member of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36228
Speaker 1: So, you had become a speech and theater major basically [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Major at Spelman.
Speaker 1: And what was your plan then.  Did you see yourself--
Speaker 2: I saw myself going to New York City.  But that didn't happen.  My parents [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil Oneal Jordan] said, no.  I wasn't going anywhere without a job.  And I didn't know who to apply to, how to apply.  I wanted to then go to San Francisco [California].  There, my mother's brother, baby brother, was living in San Francisco, and I said I could live with him until I found something.  And she again--they again said no.  So what I did is--
Speaker 1: So, you were actually trying to find a job in theater in Texas.
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't.  I should have, but I didn't.
Speaker 1: You were trying to find it in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: No.  I wanted to go in drama.  I wanted to go to New York and find a job.  Or I wanted to go out to San Francisco and find a job in drama.  What I ended up doing was going to law school at Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  And, oh, I was just tired of studying, so didn't do that well, my first semester in law school.  So I worked the next semester, and I was in--one of the first teachers in the Head Start Program.  And I did that at the Black Women's YMCA.  I held my Head Start classes.  They got a grant and that's where my kids would come, my little urchins.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from Spelman in '64 (1964).  So this is in '64 (1964)?
Speaker 2: This is '65 (1965) I started doing that.  I went to law school in '64 (1964); I did the Head Start in '65 (1965); and I joined the [U.S.] Air Force in '65 (1965).
Story_ID: 36229
Speaker 1: While I'm working at Head Start [Program], my cousin, who lived next door to me, I was visiting her, and she said that a friend of hers was going to be joining the [U.S.] Army out of high school.  And I said, "The Army, that's not bad.   I got to travel overseas, and there were Army people, women, in these USO places they have."  And I said, "You know, I can do one of those."  And I thought, jeepers, I don't like the color of that Army uniform.  And so, and so, I said, you know blue isn't bad, and my brother [Cecil Oneal Jordan, Jr.] had been for a short period of time in the Air Force.  So, I went down and I talked to an Air Force recruiter.  And in those days, you had to take a picture of women who were entering the service. I guess they also, not only did you have to pass the test, you had to look some kind of way or something or other.
Speaker 2: So that was part of the application process?
Speaker 1: You had to have a full length picture; you had to take the ASVAB, the Armed Service Vocational [Aptitude Battery] something kind of test.  And score well on that.  You also took the pilot test, even though they didn't have women pilots--to go in to be an officer--you had to take the pilot test.  I didn't know officer from enlisted.  The recruiter knew because I had finished college that I could be an officer.  That's the only reason I became an officer.  I just wanted to join the Air Force. I didn't get a class, though, until December.  Now this was in the March timeframe.  So I'm still working.  Later, somewhere around June, I get a call that said they had some dropouts in their September class. September, October, I can't remember when I went in.  October class. And so, I--end of September.  I said--and would I be willing to come in then?  Yeah, I would be willing, because I really was going to be wasting the summer away.  So I went in the September class to Lackland Air Force Base [San Antonio, Texas]--Medina, M-E-D-I-N-A.  Medina side [officer training site].  And then they were really training--training officers.  A lot of it they had.  Some were at Lackland side, but the women were on the Medina side and this was the only squadron of women.  Okay.  And I'll finish telling you about that in a little bit.
Story_ID: 36230
Speaker 1: All right.  So you joined the [U.S.] Air Force in 1965, right?
Speaker 2: In 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: September, 1965.
Speaker 1: Now what did your parents [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan and Cecil Oneal Jordan] think of that?
Speaker 2: They were cautious.  They didn't say anything to me until much later.  They had no idea what I was getting into.  Like I said, my brother [Cecil Oneal Jordan, Jr.] had joined, but my brother was a sickle cell anemic, and he had a sickle cell attack while he was in training.  He was so proud of himself, though.  He was the captain of the (unclear) crew while he was in (laughing).  He wrote home about that.  I remember that just as clearly as ever.  And everybody was bragging that Oneal was the captain of the (unclear) crew.  And then he ended up having to come home.  So, they didn't say anything to me. Matter of fact, my grandfather drove me over there.  I could take a car and--my parents had bought me an Opel Kadett.  It was a standard shift, and I had--I learned how to drive on automatic.  So I had to teach myself how to drive a standard shift car.  So you could take a car there as an officer, but you didn't get to drive it until the weekends.  But I--what I did, though, is--it came easy to me, the school.  It's a lot of school work and then it's a lot of training, how to march and keeping you fit, and kind of like in the academy, but not as strict as in an academy.
Speaker 1: So you say you were a swimmer and did you swim in college too or were you a cheerleader in college at all?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh, no, uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were in pretty good shape then?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I was.  I was in pretty good shape.  I was a little thing then.  Really little.  What happened too, is my best friend, a white girl, Angela Vergamini (sp), was my friend.  And the women also kind of set up like the men in that we had our own squadron, even though we marched with the men as part of another squadron.  So they picked this tall white girl to be the commander of the group, and then they picked Angela to be the second in charge, and I was over a flight and got to inspect rooms and what have you.  But Angela, she flunked the first test.  Officers' training school is like divided in two semesters.  You go through this and you're an underclassman and then the nine weeks, you an upperclassman.  And so, I automatically moved up to be the second in charge.  And I--I recall that they asked Angela and I to take the dress regulation and to update it.  So we took that regulation, and we made it the way we wanted it to be.  We didn't want to have to wear gloves anymore, we didn't want to have to carry our purses, we just-we just changed the regulation.  They were just so upset.  We had no idea of what updating it meant.  They meant that we were to update it for things that were going on that weren't listed.  How we were dressing that were not listed in the regulation--to put those things in the regulation; not change it.  So they took that little job away from us.  But Angela and I--we didn't stay in touch.  Karen Houzemyer (sp), who was my roommate, we stayed in touch for a little bit.  But I became the vice of the deputy of commander of the women's.  There was only one other African American young lady, and she--she flunked out.  She failed the test out.  And we weren't close.  I didn't--I can't even remember her name.  She shied away from me.  I'm a friendly person.  The first night at Lackland [Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas] in Medina, I took all these civilian clothes.  I didn't know what it was going to be like.  I thought it was going to be college again--like college.  And so, I'd had laid up in bed, six o' clock in the morning. Somebody's walking down the hall; hollering down the hall, "Wake up", "wake up."  The first thing I do when I wake up in the morning, I have to go the bathroom.  So I head into the bathroom, and this girl says you can't use the bathroom now.  Oh my goodness.  You can't do that.  The upper classmen get to use the bathroom first.  I went and sat on my bed.  I sat on it until she finished--both of them finished what they had to do in there.  I didn't do anything to the bed; I didn't make it coin tight and all that, but I later learned how to do that, where you can bounce a coin on your mat--on your blanket.  Made no sense to me.  You couldn't put trash in the trash can.  I said, what in the world is the trash can for if you can't put trash in it.  And so--(laughing).  Learning how to march, one time I took the whole squadron, and I couldn't think of how to stop 'em.  We were marching and there were bleachers out there.  And they started marching up, and they were laughing too; they just started marching up the bleachers laughing at me.  But I later learned how to lead a squadron, and I was pretty good at it too.  My parents came over for graduation.
Story_ID: 36231
Speaker 1: And my first assignment out of there was the San Francisco [California] area, to Travis Air Force Base up in Fairfield, California, which is fifty miles outside of San Francisco.  I wanted to be a spy (laughing).  That's all that I told them.  I didn't know what--who the spy--I didn't know the spies were the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] or the or the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].
Speaker 2: So you thought that you could become a spy through the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 1: Through the Air Force, yeah. I didn't even know about the intelligence career field--gathering intelligence.  I was just--I don't know--I was out to lunch.  So, anyway, they made me an administrative officer.  I went to Travis Air Force Base.
Speaker 2: So you were like a second lieutenant?
Speaker 1: I was a second lieutenant.  And my--at that job, I'm walking down the hall, and this colonel coming, "Hey, come here, this is--it's a real live second lieutenant.  Look at this."  And I was just "okay." And they said, one day, somebody said, "Billy Mitchell [William "Billy" Mitchell; U.S. Army general who is regarded as the father of the U.S. Air Force] is coming tomorrow."  I said, "Who is Billy Mitchell?" (laughing)  I didn't know he's the one who lifted--flew the Enola Gay [unclear]. I didn't know any of that kind of stuff, and the one who led the raid over Toll (unclear) Hill.  And they said, "Lord, we are old.  She's so young, she doesn't even know who Billy Mitchell is."  Well, I didn't know who a lot of military people were.  But I later learned what that was all about.  I was at Travis as the Deputy Administrative Officer for the 60th Military Air Lift Wing at Travis Air Force Base, California--for the whole base.  And my supervisor, on my first report, she marked me down.  She said, "You really are performing better, but I have to show growth.  So we're going to start out here, and your next one will be a lot better."  I had no idea what those performance reports were used for.  So, fine.  She--if she was my supervisor, she was the leader, she must know what she's doing, what she's talking about, so I didn't balk at that.  I finally got orders though before--before she--and she had to write a report when I left.  I finally got orders to Germany.  But while I was at Travis, my mother [Marcelite Elizabeth Terrell Jordan] and my father [Cecil Oneal Jordan] both visited me.  And the alarm clock went off, I got up, I got dressed.  And I went to work.  I drove my car to work.  Mother thought that I would have reveille in the morning, and be marched off to work, and it was going to be really what they thought of the military.  I was with all these soldiers and have you, but I was just like anybody else going to work, except I knew what I was going to wear the next day.  So we didn't even have uniform calls.  I mean, you could wear whichever uniform you wanted to, to work, and a lot of it depended on what you were going to do that day.
Speaker 2: How many kinds of uniforms did you have?
Speaker 1: Wow!  We had the dress uniform, we had the casual uniform, we had a fatigue--women's fatigues were not camouflage or OD [olive drab] green, like they later became.  And I'll have to tell you about that, how that also happened.  And I also had what they called the mess dress, and that's the formal uniform.  I can show you pictures, but ya'll don't have pictures.  Y'all won't be able to put pictures of this.  But I'll show you later.
Speaker 2: Well, later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah. Pictures of what those uniforms look like.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: And, I took a picture.  I got the picture up there with my mother when I'm in uniform.  So I just knew what I was going to wear the next day.  It wasn't any different than that.
Speaker 2: So your job was like basic administration?
Speaker 1: An administrator.  That what I was.  I took care of such things as the base post office, where people received their mail, especially if they lived on base.  The base locator, papers that came through for the commander of the base and everything.  But we were like an administrator assistance.
Story_ID: 36232
Speaker 1: And so I was sent to Germany in the same position of the squadron [71st Tactical Mission Squadron at Bitburg Air Base in West Germany].  But it was squadron of all men.  It was a missile squadron.  (Sentence unclear).  That will come a little later.  But that job was so boring; it was so easy.  That's when I got to read 'Gone With the Wind' and other books.  I had three people who worked for me; they knew what they were doing.  I just looked over what they were doing, and they had it.  The worst part, because it was all men, there was no woman's bathroom or latrine.  And we worked in one of the dormitories.  And they wouldn't let me use any of the men's.  So I had to walk up to the officer's club, which was next door to our building.  Snow, rain, whatever.  And by then--oh, I said fatigues.  I got on big coats and marching up to the officer's club.  I lived on base.  And what we did is we had my room was the bedroom and in between there was a living room and then on the other side was another bedroom.  And so I had a little roommate kind of thing.  And I lived at the end of the building.  I'll never forget that part.
Speaker 2: So this is at Bitburg?
Speaker 1: Bitburg.  Uh-huh.  Bitburg, Germany.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now this was roughly like twenty-two years after World War II, and US presence in Germany and basically to watch-this is during the Cold War days--.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  Cold War.  That's what was going on.  And we had the Mace Missile; that was the name of that missile.  The missile squadron was there.  And I guess it was a short-range missile.
Story_ID: 36233
Speaker 1: What was the [U.S.] Air Force like in those days?
Speaker 2: This was--I went in approximately twenty years after [President Harry S.] Truman had segregated the services, so we--
Speaker 1: Desegregation.
Speaker 2: Desegregated the services.  So we still had our issues.  And the issues showed themselves in responsibility for black people, in promotions for black people, in ratings for black people and jobs for black people.  And the biggest crime was the promotion area.  People--some of the enlisted guys could be--would be rude to me; like they wouldn't salute. Anytime you meet somebody of a higher rank or grade than you, in the officer corps, you're supposed to salute, and they wouldn't salute.  Man, I'd stop them, and it's easy to get their names because it's on their uniforms.  But after, you know, a little talking to, they would salute.  And most of the reason they gave me is not so much that I was black, but that I was a woman.  And they didn't have to salute women.
Speaker 1: Now where did they get that notion?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know why they thought that.  There was not a lot of respect.  When I went into the Service, there were only about 500 women officers in the Air Force, and none of them were of high grades.  That was almost a new thing.  My first boss was a woman, the one I told you who downgraded me.  She was a woman; she was a major.  She was recalled.  She was in World War II and then she got out, and she was recalled for the Korean War.  So she was--no, she had to be in the Korean War and then recalled back into the Service.  Not particularly for any war.  Alice Pachon (sp).  Never forget Alice Pachon.  But it was still--we had--we did things with white people; but as close friends, it was all blacks and all the whites, were together.
Story_ID: 36234
Speaker 1: And I started seeing a guy, Bob Parrot (sp) [at Bitburg Air Base, West Germany; in the U.S. Air Force].  Robert Henry Parrot.  He was one of the missiliers.  Bob told me that the first night I was there, I went to the club to eat--to the officers' club, which was right next to where I was living, which was the officers' building.  And he said that he stated, "Look what God had sent me."  I didn't know that he was thinking that I was his present from God until much later. (laughing)  Yeah, we're still friends to this day--to this day, yeah.  But I started seeing him as the missile squadron.  We had what they called the maintenance people and the missile people, and what they called a Zero Defects Program.  That meant that you wanted to make sure that our weapon systems, planes--air planes and missiles had no problems, nothing with it.  So they had a Miss Zero Defects campaign, and I won for the base.  I was the Miss Zero Defects.  I beat out all the white people.
Speaker 2: Now, that's something.  That's a--Miss Zero Defects.  Now, how did you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I got a picture up there with that.  I'll show you that.  In one the newspaper articles--the German people asked me over; I couldn't understand a word we were saying on that panel, but I was sitting there with the panel and then they put me in the German paper, and everybody showed it.  But one of those articles--they had me down as "Miss Defects."  I said, "That really looks good."  But--.
Story_ID: 36235
Speaker 1: I was there [Bitburg Air Base in West Germany] for three years.  And I was coming upon the end of my tour in Germany.  And I was trying to apply for jobs back in the United States, but that was most difficult.  After I'd been there about a year and a half or two years; matter of fact, Bob [Robert Henry Parot (sp)] had gone back to the United States, and all my friends too, because they phased out the missile program, and they were all missile folks.  All of my friends had gone back to the base.  And I did have just two friends, primarily who were left, Reggie and Gloria Gibson.  This colonel--when they phased it out, they didn't take me with them when they went back.  So when they phased it out, this colonel came, Web Thompson, asked me, "How would you like to be a maintenance officer?"  Sure.  So he put me down there under the deputy commander for maintenance, and--as a maintenance analysis officer.  I didn't know what they were talking about when I'd go to the staff meetings.  They were talking about a can here and the controls and I said, okay.  I went to about a three-week school on the F-4, so I learned a little bit then about the F-4 and probably the only thing I didn't do well on was what crew chiefs had to do.  When taking a plane--this is what an instructor later told me that I didn't know the marshaling signs that people use on the flight line.  This mean go ahead, stop (indicating), those kinds of signs that people still today use out in civilian airports and military air forces.  And Colonel Thompson came to me one day because I was the maintenance analysis officer, and he said, "I want you to do a study on the BLC phase."  I said, "Okay, sir, all right."  I went back to my (unclear) and I said, "What the hell is a BLC?"  I said the colonel wants us to do a study on the thing.  And so they told me, it was a boundary layer control.  And this is located on the front end of the airplane--wing.  And what it did is on takeoff, it blew hot air over the top of the wing to facilitate--help facilitate lift.  And they were having failures.  So we did that, but after that, I told Colonel Thompson, I need to go to that school.  The guys had gone to a seven-month maintenance officer school.  I said, "I need to go to that school if I'm going to be significant in here."  So I applied for the school.  And the Air Force turned me down.  It was a career field that was closed to women.  No women had--no woman had ever been a maintenance officer.  I applied again.  They turned me down again.  I told Colonel Thompson, I don't know.  He said, okay, what we're going to do is we're going write to Colonel Jeanne Holm [Major General Jeanne Marjorie Holm was the first female one-star general of the United States Air Force and the first female two-star general in any service branch of the United States]. She was the first woman to be a general in the Air Force.  But at the time, she was the director of the Women's Air Force WAF, Director of WAF.  The four services all had one colonel who was the director over women.  Women in that day could not be promoted above the grade of lieutenant colonel.  And if anybody is looking at this, I guess, and anytime and they're not familiar with the services, let me see if I can explain it in our pay grades.  Second lieutenants are O-1, Officer 1.  And then it goes all the up to O-10, which is Colin Powell.  A colonel is an O-5. So you can never get above an O-5; O-6, you have now entered the big leadership of the military.  When I retired, I was an O-8.  But you can never get above an O-5 when I first came in.  And Jeanne Holm was working to change all that.  She was also working with a committee called DACOWITS, Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the Services, who reported their work to the [U.S.] Secretary of Defense--what they were.  And they looked at the utilization and promotions of grades, positions, what was going on where women were concerned.  So Jeanne was working with women and trying to get more career fields open to women.  Women were probably in 30 percent of the career fields.  And for a long time we thought nothing of it.  That's just the way life was.  At one time in my life, whenever you wanted to pluralize something, you said "he".  Now, you don't do that anymore.  And thank goodness, you don't.  You can talk plural and find a way to it being inclusive.  So he said what we're going to do, is we're going to write to Colonel Holm--to Jeanne Holm.  He wrote a letter, and I wrote a letter.  And I applied again through the personnel program for this--for this job--for this school.  I heard back from Jeanne Holm in six weeks and said your class date is class such-and-such, and you go in, in October. Fine, that was great, and I did.  I got a letter from the personnel people saying, "You've been admitted to this class, but we'll allow no other women into it unless they come in the way you did.  They have to have been in the service for a while and they can cross-train."
Story_ID: 36236
Speaker 1: So for a long while, I was not only the first woman, I was the only woman to be in the--in that career field [maintenance officer].  I get to Chanute.  It was in Chanute Air Force Base, Illinois.  Am I going too long here?
Speaker 2: No, no.  You're moving right along with the story.  This is in Rantoul, Illinois?
Speaker 1: Rantoul, Illinois.
Speaker 2: So, you're the only woman in class?
Speaker 1: I was the only woman in the whole course.  Yeah.  And as it turned out, in my class, I was the highest ranking person.  And the highest ranking person is kind of in charge of the class.  So I took that really seriously, being in charge of the class.  And I had no idea what serious was for the military because I'd never really had anybody to supervise except those three people, and always--just about three, I had four people.  And this class has about twenty-five--each--each class had about twenty-five people in it.  But, a part of that were some [U.S.] Navy--two Navy guys who lived--I lived in an apartment--who lived over where I did.  But I thought, you know, it's good if the class gets to know each other.  And social things really let people know who they are and who they're dealing with.  We also had some Vietnamese in our class, learning how to be maintenance officers.  I had a party at my apartment.  And they tell me later, "Ensign, you're really a lot of fun.  We had no idea what to think of you."  And so, I say, "Yeah, I'm just an ordinary person, here."
Story_ID: 36237
Speaker 1: As captain of the class [maintenance officer school at in Chanute Air Force Base in Rantoul, Illinois], I graduated.  When I got ready to graduate, I got orders to Saigon [Vietnam], to Tan Son Nhut Air Force Base in Saigon.  Colonel [Web] Thompson, was at that time, in Thailand, and he had followed my career.  He had followed everything that was going on.  He told me later that he thought that they would not put me on the flight line if I went to Tan Son Nhut, and I would never learn maintenance without having worked with air planes.  Sure enough, what he did is he had my orders changed to where he was located at Korat Air Force Base in Thailand.  And he was the vice wing commander and later became the wing commander.  When he was the vice wing--sure enough, when I got there, the colonel, who was in charge of maintenance, deputy commander for maintenance, did not put me on the flight line.  He made me, kind of like his executive officer in his building.  So Colonel Thompson told him to put me on the flight line.  I asked him to put me on the flight line.  He didn't put--asked him again, he didn't do it.  Finally, when Colonel Thompson became the wing commander, he told him, "Put her on the flight line."  And that's how I got my start in maintenance.  I fell in love with the [U.S.] Air Force, and I fell in love with Air Force people.  Those young crew chiefs, 18, 19 years of age, young folks, they care about the airplanes.  Now, I didn't walk out there; I took over the best squadron--flying squadron (unclear).  This squadron, I think it was 469, I get all those numbers confused.  And, it was top notch.  I trained or was tutored under a guy for about a month, and he finally left.  No he stopped going.  He said, "After a while, you've got to be on your own."  So I didn't go out there and become this whiz kid and immediately make it.  It happened.  I didn't know being the first woman in maintenance was significant.  I--yeah, I just didn't see the problem that was going to occur.  I had about 40 people who worked for me and 45 people were working for me when I took over.  And as soon as the maintenance guy left, the squadron started going--the flying started going downhill.  And I didn't know why.  I had no idea why--what was happening.  My friends, one of them was one of the guys that I trained under, Al Rogers(sp).  I can't remember the other guy's name.  We were talking, and they said to me listen.  Squadron is not doing that great, where the planes are concerned.  You're in charge.  You need to stop being Miss Cutesy out there and start running the show.  You need to lay down some rules, even if you have to use some swearing words.  I've learned how to swear--curse at Spelman.  They had classes, they had to teach me.  So-so--
Speaker 2: Who taught you at Spelman?
Speaker 1: My friends.  Yeah, hey baby, yeah, I would just say--say--you say it all backwards.  You don't do it right.  Yeah, because I didn't grow up around curse words.  So they taught me.  And so I knew what to do and how to do it.  And we used to meet once a day with our squadron commander in the morning, who was a lieutenant colonel.  And we're sitting around their table, we meeting, and after we give him the status of the air planes, which wasn't that hot, I say, "Wait a minute, I need to talk to you guys."  And these are my senior leaders, my enlisted guys who were running the flights.  Guys that have a lot of stripes on their arms, who were really in charge of it.  And so, I told them, I said "Listen, let me tell you something.  When I took over this squadron, it was number one.  This squadron was up tight.  Now this squadron is going downhill.  You guys are not doing your job."  I said, "If you're trying to run me out of maintenance and off the flight line, you're not going to do it.  Because I'm going to run this squadron, even if I run it into the goddamn ground.  Now, if you want to stay here, be on my team, let me know.  Otherwise, I'll find you another place to go."  All of them said, we want to stay.  We want to make it work.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I thought you were going to say something scarier than that.
Story_ID: 36238
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I had just told them.  I'm mo run it, even if I run it into the ground.  Let's see what else happened on that.  We started--I mean, they started flying it.  Flying air planes.  I later got a master sergeant, who came in who was excruciatingly serious about this maintenance business.  And for him, those young teenagers, those crew chiefs, did not appear to be taking their job seriously.  And he was job popping antacids like everything.  Because he couldn't get-they were kids.  And they were kids away from home, they were kids charged with a horrendous job of making--and so they let off steam a lot.  And in the bread truck--we used to ride--they had big vans and stuff.  They look like bread trucks.  So this sergeant--I just knew something had to be done, because that flight was at odds.  Here's the boss over here and here are these youngsters over there.  So what I did is I fired him.  I said this man needs a job with some grown people.  And I talked to the maintenance control officer to see if he could come up and be part of job control.  And job control is where the coordinator for maintenance--they talk to the command post, found out what the air planes--how they were broke.  They would line up this specialist--if it was electrician or engine or what have you, hydraulics were needed, call to the flight line and said these are the things that are wrong with the plane coming in, you know, and these are the specialist I got that are going to come out to you.  So job control coordinated all of these kinds of things.  If I had a problem on the flight line, and I needed a specialist, I call it to job control, and they would call the specialist shop.  So I had him go in there as one of the supervisors of job control.  He told me in three weeks, when I came up to job control.  I was always in job control.  Cause if they needed some sorties, I--I was goin fly my sorties, my planes were goin fly that sortie.  And crew chief staff, they said, oh, here she comes, we got work.  Here she comes.  I'd walk back down there to the flight line.  Because I had just--planes are coming in and I'd want them to turn it right now so it can fly out again, because they need the sortie.  He told me later, he said, I want to thank you.  He said this is so much better.  And I put another Master Sargeant over that flight, and he understood those kids as kids.  And was able to work with 'em and keep 'em in line.  I don't know, as a supervisor, I guess I was pretty good. I'd like--I don't--I'm not micromanager, but I do like to be microinformed so that if we got to make changes, I'm part of  the discussion and I'm the decision-maker on what's going to happen.
Story_ID: 36239
Speaker 1: Well, like I told you, I wanted my planes to fly.  So I--every 50 hours the F-4 had to go in for--not real big inspection but a medium kind of inspection.  Whether to take off panels; take a look at everything that's going on and make sure to do some changes and what have you.  I had ten F-4's.  I probably had everyone--almost all my F-4's, maybe one or two were not grounded.  Meaning they couldn't fly.  I had flown them over the fifty [hours], I had flown them over the grace period, but I shouldn't blame myself, all together, the rest of those people were involved too.  The scheduling people were involved and the maintenance--the job control people were involved, but anyway, I had done it.  And the deputy--the new deputy commander for maintenance, and I'm sitting in my truck, and I'm trying to say, how in the world do I get out of this mess.  How do I get my planes back together.  And this DCM [Deputy Commander of Maintenance]--I'm sitting in my truck, and this DCM  slaunders over to me and he says, "Well, missy, how you goin get yourself out of this fix"  And I was just about to break it down, I just start crying, I don't know, I don't know.  And he patted me on the back and said, "It's okay, it's okay."  You'll figure something out, we'll figure something out.  What I did is I took my flight line people--I had a team who did the major inspection.  Well, I took my flight line people crew chiefs, and I formed them into little teams, and had them do the major inspections on the aircrafts.  So we had them back in commission in about three days.  But it was--huh?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)
Story_ID: 36240
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you, this time you're developing a philosophy, a leadership, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So from what I hear you saying too, that you don't' really get this necessarily from Officer's Candidate School, you have to develop it yourself on the job.
Speaker 2: It was a on-the-job experience and on-the-job kind of action and feedback to see what works.  You start recognizing leadership and what a leader is supposed to do.  That first guy, the guy who put me on the--he had made me his executive--he would get on the flight line, but he'd keep his windows rolled up; I mean he wouldn't speak to any of the people, and the people talked about that.  And so that showed me that this is not the kind of leader I want to be, I want to be with my folks.  I want to be involved in these people.  And I was.  And I was fair to my people.  I had crew chiefs, who sometimes when a plan would come back with these bombs because they couldn't eject the bombs, would sit there and cry, that his plane was broken.  And they couldn't do the mission that they were supposed to do.  And I had one crew chief, and I blame myself some, but I also blame that night shift supervisor.  A wand is a flashlight with a long yellow thing on it.  You've seen them out at civilian airports.
Speaker 1: They direct the flights in?
Speaker 2: They direct the flights in.  And so he was directing--he didn't have but one wand.  And the plan landed and he's directing the plane with this one wand.  And it came time to stop the plane, he didn't have but one wand.  So the pilot couldn't see.  So the pilot ran the plane into what they called a night all.  It was something like these things, lights that light up the planes at night.  And the pilot got in trouble because they said the final person who's really responsible for that plane is the pilot.  But also, my crew chief got in trouble and my nightshift supervisor.  They should have made sure that these kids had the right equipment.  And if they didn't, they should tell me, so I can get it for them.  Also, I would go down there at night to see how things were going on and what have you, and what was happening.  It was a exciting period for me.  I was at one end of that flight line to the other all the time.  We had what we did was max effort.  And I think it was the time, I can't remember the name of the offensive.  But it was in the spring, during the rainy season, and the North Koreans had done this before.  They called it a "tet offensive" back in the early '60's (1960's).  Now we're at '71 (1971), and I forget the name of the mission they called.  And so we--we had max effort all the planes on the flight lines, be it EV-21's or be it F-4's or be it F-105's, all of them were involved.  And it was at night they got their orders, and I was home.  At home!  I was back in my room.  And I got a call, it says, okay, it says it's a lot of activity going on down here.  We got this order and we're going to have to get all the planes in commission and ready to go.  I said, "okay, you need me, I'm coming in."  He said no, don't come in.  We're going to need you more tomorrow when we get ready to launch.  So I didn't go in, but I went in very early the next morning.  Well, that was the most exciting scene in the world to see all those air planes launch.  One of my F-4's didn't make it.  It launched, but it couldn't get it's landing gear up.  And if you go over 250 knots in the F-4 and try to raise the landing gear, they won't go.  So we--all of us out there standing and hollering, "slow down, slow down".  It still didn't work.  So he brought the plane back and it really was that the landing gear, a solenoid was broke.  And the plane had to go upon jacks so this pilot was just fretful.  He wanted to be a part of what was going on where this offensive was concerned.  The pilots took their jobs seriously.  Just as I'm sure these people do today, who are in the services.  They don't think about the politics of what they're doing.  They think about what has to be done.  And it has to be done well.
Story_ID: 36241
Speaker 1: So in those days, in that regard, did you have any feelings about the Vietnam war, as such?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a feeling one way or the other, whether we should be there or not be there.  I had a job to do, and my job was to make sure planes were safe and would take my pilots out and bring my pilots back.  My planes dropped their bombs in--so I didn't think about being there or not.  This was also during the time though when young people, my team--my crew chiefs age were protesting the war back in the states.  And they would, I guess, I can't remember who was president then, I guess it was [Richard] Nixon, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Yes.  In '72 (1972), it had been Nixon.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess it was Nixon.  And so, I had a friend.  One of my friends who told me about my--that I better get down to stop being Miss Cutsey.  They say, you're going to always be cute, so just stop trying to be cute.  You know I (unclear). Anyway, he had gone home on a resting recuperation, and R&R.  And he came back, and he said, I don't know if we should be here or not.  I don't know if we should be doing what we're doing.  And he told us all about the people protesting.  We didn't get that kind of news.  We got arm forces radio and television, but we didn't get all the gory details of what was going on.  He had a mission two days later and when he came back he said, "All I know, I don't know if we're supposed to be here or not, but all I know is I flew out there and somebody started shooting at my plane and flying missiles up to my plane' and he said, 'I goddamn well knew I was going to shoot them down if I could,'" he said. That's the way it is.  We're out here.  You just get on with what the job is.  You know that somebody who doesn't like you up there in the air.  Whether you should be there or not, up to those folks who are dealing with the politics of the war.
Story_ID: 36242
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now the base in Thailand.  In retrospect was the U.S. supposed to have bases in Thailand.
Speaker 2: I don't--Yeah.  We were.  It was Thailand was okay.  It was--
Speaker 1: Cambodia?
Speaker 2: Cambodia.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  I knew it was one of them that was clandestine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cambodia.
Speaker 1: That was clandestine.
Speaker 2: We weren't supposed to fly over Cambodia, but we did.  And we didn't have any basis that I know of in Cambodia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But our guys did fly over Cambodia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long were you over there?
Speaker 2: I was there a year--a year and--oh, when I left there, I went back to Travis.  This time I went to the KC-135; the tanker squadron that was located at Travis Air Force Base.  I wasn't with the wing any longer.
Speaker 1: Now, this is an air refueling squad?
Speaker 2: Air refueling squad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how did you like that?
Speaker 2: That was great.  That was--that was--I really grew there.  I'm trying to think, did it happen there--did it happen.  Oh, yeah.  I really grew there where maintenance was concerned.  I was put in job control.  I  was the job control officer.  And like I told you already what job control does. And because you're coordinating specialists and parts and crew chief and planes, it's kind of a magical kind of marriage that you got make sure or a dance that has to happen.  So a lot of times, I would just get out from behind my desk, go down to shops, make sure if they say they were out of electricians or no more electricians, go down and see; make sure they weren't lollygagging or--and sometimes they wouldn't be.  They wouldn't be doing all of that.  And I would go to supply.  If supply said they didn't have a part or they couldn't find a part, I'd go down to the supply room.  My sergeant and I, we'd find things and we'd put it together.  Oh, I didn't tell you something that happened back in Thailand.  On flight line, I wore the wrap-around skirt fatigues.  Web said, no, that's not going to do.  So he took me downtown Thailand--Kurat, downtown Kurat, and had some OD [olive drab] fatigues made for me.  So I was probably the first woman in the military to have fatigues.  And they later just became common-place for women to have the same kind of dress that the men had.
Speaker 1: So women always wore the skirts?
Speaker 2: We had some blue pants that we could wear, and I wore those too, but it was a mixture of both of them.  Okay.  And like I said, it's a job, I just know what I'm going to wear.  But I loved my job, and I loved what I was doing.  I loved to see things happen.  I loved to see a plane come together and take off.
Story_ID: 36243
Speaker 1: I was doing such a bang-up job that the commander said when are you ready to take over my field maintenance squadron?  The field maintenance squa--well, it wasn't a squadron, because the whole thing is a squadron.  But the field maintenance part of the organization is where the engine maintenance occur, the electrician occur, hydraulics occur as opposed to the avionics squadron where the radars and radios and those kind of equipments are maintained.  And sure enough, I became in charge of the field maintenance squadron.  And I had the best chief in the world.  It will come to me. (pause)  It will come to me.  I'll think of it as we go along.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is now, this is 19--
Speaker 1: This had to be 1971--'70--no, '72 (1972) to '75--'76 (1976).
Speaker 2: So this is still at Travis?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Still at Travis.  Yeah.  And things happened to me that today would be listed as sexist.
Speaker 2: Like what, for instance?
Speaker 1: Like I had my blue wrap-around skirt on one day, and I had some blue nylons on--stockings on.  And I'm in charge of field maintenance.  And like I said, I'm always in the shops; I'm always checking.  And when I became the field maintenance for the same thing.  When we had an unexpected operational readiness inspection, and that's when they--you don't know when they're coming, they'll fly in, and they will give you so much time to get your planes in commission.  You got certain blocks of time, because you have these tankers who are supposed to be in place to meet a bomber.  We had some that were already in commission; they were on alert.  But then I was in charge in the (unclear) from the field maintenance standpoint.  And I'm in the engine shop, and I'm coming out, and the general who's in charge of that thing, said--came in the door in the engine shop, he said, "So that's what black--blue stockings look like on a black woman."  Yeah, today that wouldn't have gone over.  I had one commander who made a stone pass at me.  It was no way I could mistake it as a pass.  I didn't do anything about it.  I just told him, no, and he backed off.  But today, he'd probably be turned in.  I took a lot of things.  Maybe something like that is a compliment, and he thought I was attractive.  And so I just let it go.  As long as he didn't pursue, we were okay.  If he pursued, I'm not sure what I would have done.  I've never had any of them to pursue me where I felt uncomfortable or anything like that.  My whole career, it never happened.  But at any rate, this (unclear).  I mean in--I am running from shop to shop checking to see out there on the flight line; how are my guys doing, you know, with your time.  We had to do it all in a certain amount of time; get those air planes in commission to meet the timing and everything.  Did it, did it!
Speaker 2: One time the real thing happened.  It was during the Israeli war.  Maybe it was the six-day war that Israel had.
Speaker 1: That was '67 (1967), so it wasn't that.
Speaker 2: Okay, no.
Speaker 1: So you would have been--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They had something that brought bombers back from overseas, and my tankers had to meet 'em.  So this was the real thing, and I had kids who I had punished, showing me that they had a brain.  Like when it came to cannibalizing a part.  I would be--I'm sitting in the bread truck, and I have another bread truck just being driven by a kid that I said that I had punished; I didn't think had one brain in his finger, let alone on his head.  And so, we had to can parts with coordination of with job control, I decided the planes take a--can the parts out of.  He would go and take a specialist while--while he took a specialist to the plane that was broken so they can take the broke part out.  He would go and take specialist over there on his own.  I didn't have to tell him.  He was doing it.  I said, you know, this is what these kids need.  I said this is the Air Force; this is what they're doing.  This was still during the cold war, and I'm not sure what commission was.  I'd have to Google that time period and see what was going on--to see.  So in by looking to try to figure this out for history, what have you, I'll find that it, it will be written down someplace.  And we worked most of the night then we decided--most of the night, I said, I think, but then I got rid of my chief, and we started splitting up the shifts to see which way to go.  So I went home and came back in in the early morning hours, around 6 o' clock.  And then let him go and get some rest.  We didn't want to work either us or those crew chiefs.  And you really couldn't by regulation work them more than twelve hours.
Story_ID: 36244
Speaker 1: Do you have like a supervisor's philosophy or leadership philosophy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.  Let me think of what it is so I can put it into words. (pause) Supervisor's  philosophy!  My philosophy, I guess, is that nothing happens without people.  And you need to--to be firm, you need to serious, but you also have to have a soft touch about it.  You need to recognize that people are the same as you.  There is nothing different about them, and you supervise accordingly with equal kinds of mindset that everybody is not superior or inferior or what have you.  Those words are not part of my vocabulary when it comes to managing and supervising people.  And I always, I always expect the best, the right thing, and the dedication out of folks.  When they don't meet that expectation, then I take action.  I had a nightshift supervisor while I was on field maintenance; who was driving a taxi at night.  He wasn't out there on my flight line.  No.  He was down there at--this was at the terminal during the time they were bringing people back now, from the Vietnam War.  And he really had a lot of business going on driving from the terminal to BOQ's and what have you, driving a taxi!  And so I found out about that.  Learned about that.  Went down there one night, and he wasn't there, and so the guys told me.  Well, he drives a taxi.  Next morning--next day, I called that man in, and said you've got one of two choices; I said you can either be court martialed, or you can retire.  And he retired.  Yeah.  Kids that I'd put in confinement for thirty days would come back and thank me; they--they, and they would.  They'd come back and say, "I want to thank you.  I'm fine, I got it, I got the point', said, 'I'm going to be okay, now.'"
Story_ID: 36245
Speaker 1: But you talk about racial incidences that happened.  This is when--
Speaker 2: Sit back a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  You can see me too.
Speaker 2: Yes. Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: With radio wide structure, you look better when you're sitting back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is when riots were happening on military installations.  Because black people weren't recognized as black people.  And nothing was different but that we require other things; for our hair, for our face.  And young people were restless, and they started just somehow acting out.  The Natural was in vogue then.  We didn't consider that in the Air Force.  You couldn't wear your hair in a Natural, but they wore it.  So they had to come up with some standards on how black people--
Speaker 2: For women or men?
Speaker 1: Men.
Speaker 2: Men.  Okay.  So you're talking about the big afro.
Speaker 1: Big hair, afro.  Yeah, the big afro.
Speaker 2: They had a standard for long hair?
Speaker 1: Yeah, for women.  For men too, oh yeah, oh yeah.  Women couldn't wear their hair--women couldn't wear their hair below the shoulders.  So women with long hair would usually put it up.
Speaker 2: So there were no long-haired men in the air force?
Speaker 1: No long-haired men; no bushy-haired men either, because they came over the standard, and they said something about it had to be one inch; couldn't be more than one inch thick or half inch or something like that, thick.  And to make it acceptable, they sent a friend of mine, a black guy around; he was a one star, sent him around to talk to the various bases.  His name was Tim Body(sp).  Tim Body(sp) was baldheaded.  They had him talking to people about how to wear their hair.  He said, "I didn't expect it to go over--go over well."
Speaker 2: I think era too, a friend of mine was in the army, and she said that she had to fight charges of--for wearing her hair in braids.
Speaker 1: Probably.  Yeah.  You couldn't wear em in braids.  Yeah.  I hope she won.
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: Okay, uh-uh.  Women, who had their hair in braids, wore wigs.  And at night, when they weren't on duty then you could see the braids.
Speaker 2: Well, couldn't a black woman wear her hair natural?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she could wear an afro, but it couldn't be long.  It couldn't be Angela Davis big, something like that.  We still had hair--hats that we had to wear.  Anytime you're outside, you had to have your head covered, unless you were under cover like in a building or in an awning or what have you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You had to have a hat on your head.
Story_ID: 36246
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the--
Speaker 2: '70's (1970's), be in the '70's (1970).
Speaker 1: Yeah, where the black airmen and soldiers were doing the dap and doing the various--
Speaker 2: When I was in Korat, they would stop in the middle of the street and do the dap.  And so the base commander said, "What can we do?"  I said, I don't know.  Then what I did is I formed a group.  This is at Korat, I formed a group of my enlisted--black enlisted guys, and I said, "I need your help.  I need you to tell me how we can curb some of the activities, not trying to stop the dap, but you can't stop traffic out there."  And so they helped me out.  I don't even remember what we came up with, but we announced it to the base.  They were so precious, bless their heart.  They said, okay, we're in an organization, we've got to have a name for our organization, and that's when Sly and the Family Stone had come out with "We Are Family".  And so that's what they wanted to name their organization.  I said, "Okay, We Are Family." (laughing).  All of their respect--all.  And we, excuse me, that's all right, folks, I'm listening to my dog.  We did curb it somewhat.  But it was the dap and big afros and they--they were not being recognized.  They were not being recognized, and they wanted some attention.
Speaker 1: Amazing.  The red, black and green wristbands.
Speaker 2: How do you remember all of that?
Speaker 1: I knew a lot of the people.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  Let me see.  It was something I was going tell you that led up to that.  Let me think, what was that?  (pause).  This is it.  Okay, I'm at Travis, and that's when I get called to go work in the Pentagon, but it was something before that.  I know, it was in "70--when did they start bringing back the troops, in '73 (1973)?  Start bringing the prisoners back, '73 or '74 (1973) or (1974)?
Speaker 1: '74 (1974), I think.
Speaker 2: And so, I was--they knew they were going to have some black people, officers coming back.  And they called me over to be in the receiving line to welcome the guys in.  And one of those prisoners was a guy called Fred Cherry(sp).  Fred was probably one of the longest held POW's.  He was put in solitary confinement because he wouldn't talk for over eighteen months.  And so I got to meet Fred, and we later became friends.  Yeah, I sure could give you guys some history people.  You probably already have Fred Cherry, though.
Speaker 1: I don't think we do.  But we did interview one that was in prison for seven years.
Story_ID: 36247
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a story about your first tour.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A singing story.
Speaker 2: Right.  It says, since the administrator job wasn't that challenging, I'd get involved in other things. So I signed up to be "Cops and Blues", and that was a singing group that the air force would send around to all the installations fashioning, or showing off the talent in the air force.  And so I went through the tryouts, and I got all the way to being of the finalist who's making it and then I just was so tired, I could not sing the song.  So I didn't win.  I won a couple of trophies along the way to get there.  Well, that's what I did in school, I did musicals at Spelman [College].  But we were talking about [Daniel] "Chappie" James, and I told you about being in the receiving line.  Well, there was a guy who said to Chap--Chappie was in charge of operation homecoming back in Washington, D.C. and the Pentagon.  And he said that he had gone to Chappie and said, "Chappie, we have a guy who's coming back who's going to be coming into some stuff.  His wife is with another man, and she's had a baby by this other man."  And that was Fred Cherry.  And that guy was Clark Price, who said this.  And so Clark was at Travis to meet Fred.  And Clark and Chappie were best friends, good friends, even though was a lieutenant colonel and Chappie was a one-star general.  But he got Chappie on the phone, and that was my first introduction to Chappie.  It was later, though, in my career that I really got to meet him and to be with him and--in a way that he would really know me.  But, now, let's see, let's go back.  I'm in the field maintenance squadron, and I get this call from a colonel, a lieutenant colonel who was in my squadron back in Korat.  And he said, "We're putting together an ad hoc group back up here in Washington, called the Air Force Management Improvement Group, its acronym stood for "AFMIG", Air Force Management Improvement Group.  "We'd like for you to come out here and be one of the members in their group."  And, heck, yeah!  I went out there and worked for three months, and got to travel.  I worked a major program.  During the Vietnam war, crew chiefs were young; they were E-3's and E-4's.  But we also felt that they were too young to have that kind of responsibility that they did have, and that we needed to groom them a little better if we were going to do this.  So we worked on a way to--to make--what we ended up, let me just say it that way then.  What we ended up doing is splitting the E-4 grade.  And for the first year, you would E-4 with no star in your stripes or blued out star.  After one year, and you had passed an evaluation, you'd pass a test for going to school, and your supervisor or your commander thought you were ready, you could have a ceremony and be upgraded to a E-4 who then have the white star in that.  So that was one of the projects that I worked on.  But in doing that we traveled a lot, and we talked to people trying to sell this concept, because these were people who just come from the Vietnam War, were E-4's, did have a lot of responsibilities.  And trying to sell them that we were try and groom em for that kind of responsibility.  One of my trips was to offer the air force base in Omaha, Nebraska. I talked to them about being assigned there.  Leaving Travis, so when I get off of this ad hoc group, I can go offer it.  I had bought a house and everything.  They looked me up.  They looked up my record and everything and said, "Okay, we can bring her up here."  I get back to Washington, and the general--the three-star in charge of generals, is also the guy in charge of personnel in the air force.  And he said, "We like you, we think you'd be good; we want you to continue this project over in personnel, here in the Pentagon."  But I just orders to (unclear).  He said, "Don't worry about that."  I said, "I just bought a house."(laughing)  He said, "Well"--and I did tell him though, I had a 30-day grace period in case of orders.  And so, I was able to get out of the contract for the house, and of course, being the director of personnel, he just automatically summoned my orders to change to the Pentagon.  And therefore, there I was as a captain in the Pentagon, working in personnel.  Didn't know a thing about personnel, have no idea what it was supposed to do, but I worked that program, and I worked a few other programs.
Story_ID: 36248
Speaker 1: So, you were still a captain?
Speaker 2: I was still a captain.  Yeah, we haven't gotten anywhere.  We just got--I got a long way to go before being a general.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So this is 19--
Speaker 2: That was 197--it was the same--no--
Speaker 1: It says '70's (1970's).
Speaker 2: Same year, yeah that [Richard] Nixon resigned.
Speaker 1: Yeah he came out--I think he resigned in '74 (1974), I believe.
Speaker 2: I think so, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Cause I--yeah, it had to be '74 (1974) or '75 (1975) or '76 (1976)--somewhere in there.  Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, I--and there for a while, in Washington [D.C.], working this project, a friend of mine, who I met over in Korat, Thailand, Fran Stevens.  Fran was the funniest little southern girl.  She said, "My mother would never believe that one of my best friends is a black girl."  I said, "Oh, Fran, please."(laughing)  Anyway, she was a White House social aide.  And she said, "Marci, you need to become one of those."  And I said, "Okay.  Fine."  Whatever they do.  And so I was interviewed and looked at my records and everything and I always had clearances and always was screened for clearances, so that was no problem on that.  And I became a White House social aide under [Jimmy] Carter--under the Carter administration.  And I did that for a--it took a year almost for them to check me out and grant me in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is--so this is by 1975 by now?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Is that when Carter was President?
Speaker 1: No, it's '76 (1976), '76.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean to say, that's when Carter was president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you haven't been promoted yet, you're still a captain?
Speaker 2: I'm still a captain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do get promoted during this time frame, because I'm still in the Pentagon, and--you're not supposed to leak the list, but the promotion section in the Pentagon, had the list for major.  And this major said, "Come here, come here."  And he said, "Look at this."  And I saw my name.  "What is this about?"  Then he pointed to major's list.  (making astonishing sound) No!  Really!  I said, "Wow, now I can retire."  So I'll just go on until retirement in year '20 (2000).  And he said, "but you can't tell anybody, you know that you can't tell anybody involved."  So it was a while, so I became a major in the Pentagon.  The command-the guy who was over personnel was a three-star general named Ken Tallman.  Ken Tallman, who got me into the Pentagon in the first place, went to the Air Force Academy to be the superintendant, now that's the same thing as the president of a college, is the superintendant.  So he became the superintendant.  And this had to be in '77 (1977) that he went out there.  Cause in '76 (1976), they opened the door for women to come in.
Story_ID: 36249
Speaker 1: Well, in '78 (1978), Tallman--I called Tallman--I'm getting orders out of the Pentagon to go to--oh, heck.  It's the base out of San Antonio, about three or four hours out of San Antonio.  I didn't go there; I didn't go there.  So it's probably not  on your list.  So I called Colonel Tallman and asked, if are they trying to bury me--General Tallman.  And he said, "No, it's really a nice base, but it is kind of a family-oriented base."  And I said, "All right."  A week later, he called me back.  He said, "I need to talk with you.'  'When can you come out here?'"  And I told him that I had a temporary duty assignment to California, and that I could come back by and see him on Saturday.  And he said, "Yeah, that'll do."  So I went in, talked with him, and he said, "I want you to come here."  This was on the third.  "I want you to come here. I want you to be an AOC."  And I said, "Okay, all right.  If you need me, I'm here."  I got back to the Pentagon, not only were there orders on my desk to go to the Air Force Academy, I asked somebody, "What the hell is an AOC?"  I mean, I didn't even know what I was going to go and be.  He said it's an Air Officer Commanding, and what it is it's just a commander over cadet squadron.  And what General Tallman had told me was that the women are catching hell from the class of men--from the classes of men.  When the first women went in there in '76 (1976), there were three classes that were all male.  And they did not want their academy opened to women.  So they were doing horrible things to the women.  And he said these cadets need to learn that they probably one day might be working for a women.  And need to be under some woman's supervision.  And--so one month later, I was out there.  I was working on a masters' degree, and I was once course shy of getting that masters' degree.   And I couldn't get it in; they had had me out there at the academy so quickly.  Tallman had said--you know Tallman had said, "I want you to work up here with me for a year, so you can learn the academy, get the hang of the academy and everything."  And things, I guess, had gotten so bad, he said, no I need you to go--about two months later, he came and said, "No, I need you to go down to the cadet ring now."  And I went down there.  And Michelle Jogettic(sp) and I became the first two women to be commanders at the Air Force Academy.  Into the training year at the Air Force Academy, mind you now, I had been a supervisor. I knew--I knew what to do, and although I hadn't been a mother, I had been a supervisor of teenagers, and that what those young people were, teenagers in college.
Story_ID: 36250
Speaker 1: That college is a little bit different, because they were told what to wear everyday.  It's announced every morning, "This is the uniform of the day," and such and such, and such and such.  But I--they had to keep their rooms clean that had to be inspected; they had to march to lunch.  So, and not only did they have military things that they had to do, they also had academics; some of them even had athletic things, football, basketball, those kind of--a whole athletic department.  Now we're at the collegiate level of things.  And so about three weeks after the school year started, my cadet squadron commander came into me and said, "Major, you're all right.  This is going to be fine."  And I'm thinking to myself, I know it is, because you want what I have.  And so, we definitely gone make it out good.  And I--and I also listened.  And mind you, I had not been with the academy very long.  So I'm learning my way as I go here on what happens.  Michelle, on the other hand, was catching all kinds of hell from her cadets.  They weren't listening to her; they weren't obeying her; they weren't doing anything.  And she told me, she said, you know, I have talked to Major Harris about what's going on.  I told her then--about her problems--and I told her then, I said, you know, I'm having problems with my boss, Colonel Gibbs, he was lieutenant colonel.  I would get my cadets or write them up for something that they didn't do or did do.  And every geek sheet had to go to the front office with the group commander.  And would up it; he would increase it.  He wouldn't talk to me; he wouldn't find out the extent of it--of the punishment.  I guess he just figured that I was weak and wouldn't--I don't know what Gibbs was thinking about.  At any rate, I was telling Michelle, you know, I don't know how to do this.  So I went over--so she said, "Why don't you talk to Major Harris?"  So I called Major Harris and made an appointment to go cross the terrazzo(sp), which is a big rock quarry kind of a thing that sits in the middle of one dormitory and the  other dormitory where we AOC's [Air Officer Commanding] are located in the dormitories.  And so I went over to see him.  And Major Harris started--I started telling him what was going on and then he started talking about his problems, and a year later, we got married, and a year after that, my daughter comes.  So that was my world wind romance with Maurice.  And Michelle, even though she was a little older, she was accepted into pilot training.  The pilot school had just opened to women.  Flying schools had just opened to women.  And she was probably in the second or third class, and she was the first to crash.  She crashed and died while at pilot training.  And I haven't heard of any other women that--of that happening to.  I guess maybe they--they said because of her death was because she had lost orientation and that she flew the plane into the ground.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 36251
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now we're about in 1970-8-9?
Speaker 2: 8 or 9 (1978 or 1979).  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you got married in 1980?
Speaker 2: Got married in 1980.  Maurice and I started seeing each other in 1980.  Yeah, in '80 (1980). And started seeing each other in 1980.  He was still married at the time, yeah.  Uh-huh, but he and his wife had separated.
Speaker 1: So you met in 1980, but you--
Speaker 2: Well, we met before then, because we were AOC's [Air Officer Commanding], but we didn't start dating until 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1980.  And his divorce was final in October, and we got married in November.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, okay, now that same year, you go to McConnell Air Force Base?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Yeah. In the summer of 1980, he gets assignment to McConnell Air Force Base in Wichita, Kansas.  And so I--I worked with the personnel system, and I got me an assignment.  They said, "Okay, what we'll do is to send you joint spouse."  We weren't married then.  "We'll send you joint spouse."  And I--they said you older people tend to stick together--we don't ususually do--you older people tend to stick together.  They have since changed that policy.  They'll send cadets to the graduate and get married, they'll send them joint spouse right now, even though they didn't want to do those kinds of things then--back then.  They wanted to send them where they were needed.  Yeah.  And so, I'm again--now I'm a little bit over job control, I'm over maintenance control.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're maintenance control officer?
Speaker 2: I'm the maintenance control officer.
Story_ID: 36252
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So in the same year, you were promoted to lieutenant colonel?
Speaker 2: No.  Uh-uh.  '81 (1981) I was promoted to lieutenant colonel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that's a story.  That's interesting.  But I'm in maintenance control, and they--my commander of the squadron is the same kind of thing in Witchita.  The K-C135's were tenants and Maurice was a Pilot in Wichita--at McConnell Air Force Base on the 135, and I was the maintenance officer.  My commander thought I was pretty good and said I need you to take over the avionic squadron.  That's where you do the instrumentation of the air plane that goes into avionics.  And by this time I'm pregnant, and I'm showing pregnant.  But I go down there and I take over the avionics squadron.  I'm still the kind of person that go out on flight line see what's going on, be with my folks, go back in the shops, ride the bread truck; I was doing all this stuff.  It didn't phase me being pregnant; that didn't--some reason I didn't feel pregnant until much later, when I got a little bigger and it was really a nuisance.  But I worked up until the day before I had--I delivered.  And probably the only reason I didn't work that day is my mother was there with me and insisted that I stay home and lay down on the couch.  Tanecia was not turned around right, probably the week before, and so the doctor wanted to wait and see if she'd turn around on her own, or she could have been breach birth.  And that day--the next day, I go the civilian hospital and not only that was the first of October, 1981, that's her birthday, and that's the day I pin on lieutenant colonel.  And so, after everything is over and this baby is born, I asked my husband, I said, "Did you get my lieutenant colonel (unclear)?  He said, "How can you think of the military at a time like this?"  He never could understand my attachment to the military.  And I was attached to it.  I was attached to it during the Vietnam War.  We became one.  I bonded with it because of the people.  And so I was a lieutenant colonel who was having a baby--a 05.  And so I have to go and get my maternity leave cleared by the doctors and the attendant said there's a lieutenant colonel out here who needs your permission for maternity leave.  And he said, "We have a lieutenant colonel whose had a baby?"  I said, "Yeah, me. I've had one."  And that little baby is now thirty years old.
Story_ID: 36253
Speaker 1: Then, let's see from McConnell--Then the commander later puts me over in the field maintenance squadron because he was having trouble there too.  And the guy was leaving, and I worked at--my performance reports are getting a lot better now.  They really are.  I didn't tell you folks, but back in Thailand with Webb, he rated my performance report, but he rated me down some.  He said the same kind of thing, "we need to show growth".  But now my performance reports are really getting good and getting to see some attention.  And so the services want to move me, and they want to move me to Okinawa, Japan.  And that was in--let's see we had Tenecia in '81(1981)--that was in '82 (1982) around the summer--it was in the winter of '82 (1982), because we over there for Christmas.  We got there for Christmas.  I was able to do Thanksgiving in the States in '82 (1982) and got there at Christmas.  But Maurice didn't have any orders, my husband.  And that's when the turn in his career took place.  Instead of trying to find a good job for himself, he had went ahead and accepted anything just so we could be together as a family over in Okinawa, Japan.  And I became the first woman to be the commander of the--of the Pack Aff Aircraft Logistics--Pack Aff--what was it, the PLSK, Pack Aff Logistics Support Squadron, PLSK.  And we were kind of like a depot.  I had all the engines for the F-4 aircraft, all the engines for the Y-5 aircraft, and all the avionics equipment, and we just kind of formed it out like a big supply.  And I would try to make sure that I kept the units stocked to their level that they were authorized, and I'd have the extras.  So when one unit had to be used--when one thing had to used, I would just immediately ship another unit there and especially when it came to engines.  My boss got so mad at me one time because I decided on the J-79 engine that they were in horrible trouble.  Every J-79 in pack affs broke, it seemed.  And so they--we had a team, a civilian team, come in and try to catch up on it.  Once we caught up, I made sure that every unit in Korea, in Japan and the Philippines had had their compliment of engines, and I had the rest there on base.  And he had no idea I was doing this.  I've never really learned the secret of keeping your boss informed.  I learned to be informed.  But I didn't learn the secret of keeping your boss informed.  And he came in and we were talking about it one day, and he was just shocked.  And I went down to see--he went back to his office, and I went down to see him.  I said, "You're kind of upset, aren't you?"  He, "Yep".  I said, "I just think it's best."  I don't know why you don't send them to the units.  I said, "Because they won't take care of them; they don't need to have access.  When one breaks, and they need to get an engine, I"ll ship one to them, and they'll have it the same day."  He understood after that.  And my performance reports, now, was going up to the four stars.  I'm getting really good endorsements; they were really good, the things said about me.  Maurice didn't get promoted to colonel; he came up and was viewed.  The next year, he doesn't get promoted again, but I get promoted to colonel.  And the personnel people came over, and they asked me what I wanted to do.  Mind you, now, I have not gotten a master's degree.  While in Japan, I worked--was trying to work on a master's degree from the University of Oklahoma, but Maurice always wanted us to do--get a MBA.  They didn't have such a course in Japan, but they did have a business course from the University of Maryland University College in--of course, in business management.  So I enrolled in the course in business management, I'm still enrolled in the master's degree I'm working, I'm a mother, I'm a wife, taking care of a house.  Something had to give.  And so, I gave up on the masters.  And so they asked me, you know, what I wanted to do, and I said, "I want to get a master's degree."  They said they're not going to send me to do that.  I said, okay.  Then I don't know, I'll go wherever you guys say, so long as my husband can come.  So they sent us both to Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: This is 1986?
Speaker 1: Yes.  1986.
Story_ID: 36254
Speaker 1: There was a place you could go to school in Biloxi [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: No.  They did send me to school.  They sent me to work.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: That's when I became the first woman to be a deputy commander for maintenance in the air force.  (pause)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At Keesler, I had the AB triple C aircraft that was used in the Vietnam War and that means the air borne commander control air craft.  And also, I had the hurricane hunters.  The aircraft that flew into the eye of the hurricane who measured what was going on, how fast it was and where it was going and direction and all those things--kinds of things.  And these were both 130 aircraft--C-130 aircraft.  And so I was the deputy commander for maintenance.  I got outstanding inspections, I got everything in those ORI's [Operational Readiness Inspection] they talked about; everything was excellent.  And so I got fantastic reports out of that job.
Speaker 1: C-130's were huge?
Speaker 2: They're huge.  Yeah, they are, they're big aircraft.  They are big cargo planes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Cast a shadow.  They used to fly over my state.
Speaker 2: Oh, Really.
Speaker 1: They looked like they were about to fall on you.
Speaker 2: That's the C-5, I bet you.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it's C-5.
Speaker 1: Big greenish plane?
Speaker 2: Yeah, C-5.  I don't know, C-130's are green too.  It might be the C-130's; they were green, uh-huh.  Yeah.  And we changed two stars.  My boss was a two star general.  And so we checked--he left and a new two star came in.  Oh, gosh, Paul Harvey was his name.  And Joe Harvey said--called me in one day, and he said, "How would you like to be a general?"  I said, "I had no thoughts of becoming a general."  I didn't have a master's degree. And I told, yes.  He said well--and I can't remember the three star's name of the air training command, is looking--has been looking at records.  This was a time when general officers were made by hand-written notes.  The four stars told the board who they wanted to be generals, and my name wasn't on the list.  But, this general looked at all of colonel's records, and he said, "Marci" this is what I was called in the Air Force.  "Marci has a tremendous record, and she has endorsements from the right people, and they said the right things about her.  Why isn't she on my list?"  Well nobody could answer that.  Probably because I didn't have a master's degree, and I had no promotions under the zone--below the zone.  I'm at the tail end, so it looks like a lot of my promotions were below the zone.  I'm on time for everything.  Just made it--made it when I was supposed to make it.  So he invited--my two-star General Harvey says, "When you make it--if you make it, you'll be the first African American woman to be a general in this Air Force.
Story_ID: 36255
Speaker 1: 1991 you were a brigadier?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, now, let's go back to beginning to being brigadier.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When Paul Harvey is talking to me, and he says, "This is not only going impact you, it's also going impact your husband [Maurice Harris] and your little girl [Tenecia]," and she's just nine year's old at the time.  Well, history will show, yes, I did get promoted.  And it did impact my family.
Speaker 1: But it makes you a historical figure?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  People came to interview me, they interviewed my husband, and they took my nine year old off and interviewed her.  Oh, boy, she felt special.  When she had an interview, all by herself, without somebody sitting there saying, no, don't say that or what have you, and they ask--they asked my husband how it feels to be married to a general, I don't even know what he said.  All I know is what he told me.  "Why do they keep asking me that stupid question?"  And he said, "She's my wife, I don't feel like anything."  And he already enrolled in LSU to go to law school.  And he was going to retire and go to law school.  And he had been accepted by LSU [Louisiana State University].  They asked my daughter, what is it like to be a daughter of a general, she said, "It just feels so great, my mama is going to be a general, my daddy is going to be a lawyer, and I can just do somersaults all over the room."  That's in the paper.  I said, okay.  And they took pictures of us going to work, and they did all kinds of things which made her feel very special.  She--and so I did--I went to--I pinned on colonel at Keesler Air Force Base, and I pinned on general at Keesler Air Force Base.  And that happened at a parade.  That was very exciting.  And I got to review the troops, and it was a beautiful kind of promotion to do it in a very traditional military way.  They car--my daughter--the car that came to pick Maurice and I up--pick Maurice and me up was--Maurice called her and let her get in it too, and so she did, she felt really great.  I was assigned--the reason I put that story on it is because I got assigned to an air logistics center to be the first woman to be a vice commander at air force air logistics center, and this is still in '90 (1990), I was frocked, and I didn't start getting paid until '91 (1991).  I went to a course right before going to Keesler called Capstone.  And it's a course with general officers to indoctrinate them on world events--the military's issues, what's happening with the air force.  And we traveled to major commands.  And we traveled to embassies, and knowing what happens in NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization], what happens in Iran, those kinds of countries.  So I had had that experience without my family.  But here I am now, at Oklahoma City at air logistic center in Oklahoma City as a vice commander.
Story_ID: 36256
Speaker 1: But I'm also a woman who has some unique demographics.  My career was nontraditional career field for women, I'm African American, I'm a woman and I'm a general.  So I was called to sit on so many promotion boards.  So many promotions boards that when it came my time to go up for two stars, my boss knocked me down.  Here I get started again with my boss knocking me down on my performance report.  And he said, "I did that because I think you need to stay under me a year longer because they pull you away from so many things."  And I told him, I said, "You just don't work the assignment system with the promotion system. If you wanted me a year longer, don't block my promotion--block my promotion to keep me there."  Well, the next year had to be '93 (1993), yeah, had to be '93 (1993), I guess.  Anyway, that year, he came again when I'm supposed to be rated for general, two-star general, and he calls the four star and said, "Okay, you can promote Marci this time." And the four-star general said, "You killed Marci last year."  So he tried--this is Joseph Spiers(sp).  I'll never forget him.  And so he gets me assigned under a four-star general at air education and training command in '93 (1993).  And I worked for General Visoyal(sp).  I had worked for him for three months, and he called and he said, "You're really good', he said, 'but you haven't been here long.'"  So he rated me number three out of his six generals--six brigadier generals.  He had more generals. But six brigadier generals, one stars.  I didn't get promoted again. And I just couldn't take it.  I said, "Okay.  I'm going, I'll get out."  He called me and he said, "I can't make you any promises, but why don't you stay in, and let's see what happens."  Well, the next year, he rated me number one, and I got picked up for major general, even after all those strange reports I got in my records.
Speaker 2: So this was 1995?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think I pinned on major general in '96 (1996).
Story_ID: 36257
Speaker 1: I went to the Pentagon, though as a brigadier general.  And I got promoted--my promotion announcement came out when I was at the Pentagon.  And I went to the Pentagon as the Director of Maintenance; the first woman to ever have that job at headquarters air force under the deputy chief of staff for logistics.  And the next year my promotion is announced.  However, I am selected because now I'm a brigadier general in the Pentagon; I'm selected to go and be a member of the Committee on Women in the NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] Forces.  My first meeting was in Canada with this Canadian one-star woman general.  I felt--this feeling of the committee and how it worked and what it was doing; I couldn't believe it.  You know, I said, I got a lot more important things to do than sit around having tea and crumpets with a bunch of women.  I just hated being a member of that organization because it didn't do anything.  It had absolutely no clout; it had absolutely no standing with NATO. Sure, you make a report, but it was all perfunctory, the report you made to the NATO folks.  The next year the meeting was at NATO, and I--I can't remember the year--the years on this--we'll have to do some research, I guess.  But at any rate, the meeting was in NATO.  The chairmanship of this committee wasn't a thing that was selected, what it did is it rotated between countries.  It rotated between the United States, the British, the Canadians.  So after the Canadians, the United States was to have it.  The United States, my United States' boss is the secretaries of defense folks wanted to have that committee meeting in the United States.  Well, the Turkish delegation wanted it.  I don't know how I convinced everybody, we're going to have it in the United States, but we did; we had it in the United States.
Speaker 2: It was 1997.
Speaker 1: '97 (1997).  I retired in '97 (1997); couldn't have been in '97 (1997).
Speaker 2: So it was earlier?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It had to be.  It probably was '96 (1996).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  Had to be '95 (1995).  Because I was chairperson for two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  I convinced them that they were going to come to the United States.  And I decided that I'm going to make this thing a little bit different.  We're not going to meet in Washington, D.C. in the Pentagon.  We're going to meet out in San Antonio [Texas].  I kept them together as a group.  See, when we would go to--when I went to Canada, the Canadian folks who were hosting it just went on home, and left us on our own.  I said this group needs to learn, if you're going to be in a country, learn some of the culture of the country, learn how some of the things happen.  We going to work together as a group, we're going to play together as a group.  And that's what I did; I organized it so that it was like that.  Meantime, I'm still upset with the way the whole committee is organized.  It's--they organized themselves according to services.  Air force, army, navy.  Those were the three subcommittees.  Let me get some water.  Let me just take a break to get some water.  Okay.  They're organized by service.  Well, that was ridiculous to me.  I had worked with DACOWITS [Defense Advisory Committee on Women in the Services] quite a bit. I was even, at one point, the Air Force's liaison with DACOWITS.  And DACOWITS was organized according to fluxus (sp) and things, utilization of women, assignments--women assignments.  Basically, they all center around utilization of women with certain kinds of categories.  So I reorganized--what I planned to do is reorganize the whole committee--the whole committee and the subcommittees that function with like kind of things.  All the women had the same kind of problems in their services.  So they might as well have all the services together.  Some countries were more progressive even than the United States.  They could talk about those kinds of progression in that category--in that functionality.
Story_ID: 36258
Speaker 1: I went to NATO.  I met quite a few people; especially African American and women officers.  And I took my women officers to NATO with me, took Tenecia with me, and there in Brussels; sat around the table, and I kind of outlined what I wanted.  I didn't fill in the middle, because that is what I wanted the committee to do, was to fill in the middle of it.  So when we had the meeting in NATO that next year, that's what I had them do.  I broke everybody up, and I let them decide, "which committee do you want to work on?"  Well, the British girl, who wasn't even a part of the committee anymore, the colonel from Britain, was all upset with me because I had--she  wanted to--she had a way that she wanted it to be, but she was no longer on the committee; I'm in charge.  You know, we gone(sp) do it my way.  She wrote this letter about how Britain is abstaining from everything, and the British don't like this, and the British--and she passed it out to everyone of my members.  I was livid.  I told her--I had a closed meeting.  The meetings in NATO were open, and you could bring as many military folks or civilians, or what have you, in there.  So I just had a closed meeting, and I talked to those young ladies, and was older than all of them; they were so young.  All the other services have women who are so much, you know, that are new to this function of air force, and the Portuguese are probably the latest to come in in the utilization of women.  So I talked to them, and I told them about what was happening, what was going on and about loyalty, and what we do here.  Everyone of them said, we don't feel this way, you know, general, we don't feel this way.  I said okay.  So we organized that way.  And I was concerned about the treatment that the American women receive from countries where NATO was located--NATO forces were located and from some of the countries that NATO--the NATO--the U.S. people would be working with.  Some of those countries, women are still subservient, and not in the progressive position that we are in the United States.  And the expectations for my women, the U.S. women, probably would be a lot higher.  So what I did is I got the United States to establish a pay-for position in NATO that would look after--it's kind of like the Committee on Women in the air force, the services, WAF [Women in the Air Force] and the WAC [Women's Army Corps] and all of those kind of ser--of things.  They would look at the issues that impacted the women in those various countries and see what can be done, and to work with the NATO senior officers there to see if they could do some influence.  I got all kind of kudos from the commander there from NATO on what we had done as a committee and what I had done as a committee.  Got to go to Turkey.  That was--the Turkish finally had it--had the committee, and got to go there.  My trip to Turkey, I was still in charge, for some reason, I was retired then, though, on my trip to Turkey.  But the Service paid my way--brought me in and paid my way and everything, because I was still a (unclear) and took me back.  And we finally led the U.S.  Got another U.S. delegate in for the remainder of the conferences.
Story_ID: 36259
Speaker 1: Retirement occurred in 1997.  January of 199--my ceremony was January of 1997, and my--my actual retirement was February of 1997.  I pinned on--I was frocked to major general in--what year was I frocked?  I must have been frocked in--
Speaker 2: Could be '96 (1996), right?
Speaker 1: Six, yeah.  Must have been frocked in '96 (1996).  No, it was before '96 (1996).  Must have been frocked in '95 (1995).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And I pinned on somewhere before '95 (1995) too, because I went to--I was on the Board of the United Services Automobile Association, and I went to one of the meetings, and I had a horrible time there.  I almost died.  I stopped breathing.  And as you see, I didn't die, but they did call my husband [Maurice Harris] and tell him that he better get down to San Antonio [Texas], because I wasn't going to make it through the night.
Speaker 2: So, this is due to high blood pressure?
Speaker 1: Yes.  What had happened is, and my cardiologist told me later, he said, "We did this to you."  I have had high blood pressure problems ever since I was a captain in the Pentagon, and been on high blood pressure medication ever since then.  And this doctor determined that my blood pressure was under control, so we're going take you off your diuretic.  And when she did that, that was the wrong thing to do.  What happened is my heart--a chain where my ventricle--the left ventricle there had--it was too thick, and it couldn't process the blood--oxygenated blood, so it sent it back into my lungs, and my lungs shut down.  So, yeah, it was due to high blood pressure.  And they put me back on my diuretic, and I got a channel blocker and a beta blocker, and also potassium because of the diuretic.  And I was told never let anybody take you off this diuretic again, because you have essential blood pressure problems, not just stress-induced, not those kind.  He said, yeah, it might induce it also, but yours is all functional, you have to do that.  And so that--that year it was in Octob--that was in November.  And January of '96 (1996), I lost my husband.  He died of a massive heart attack.  And so I generally became disenchanted.  My whole life outlook went down.  I wasn't able to--to be as strong as I thought I wanted to be.  And I wanted to be strong, but I wasn't making it.  So, I retired the next year, in 1997 on a medical retirement.
Story_ID: 36260
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  You went on to volunteer for other things, right, and you.  Let's see.  So you were on a number of boards.  You received awards from Spelman [College]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got an honorary doctorate degree from Spelman.  I--
Speaker 1: Women's International Center, Living Legacy, Patriot Award.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's one in here.  It's a big one.  The Ellis Island Medal of Honor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was still in the service when I got that, because I got to wear my mess dress, and I took my mother to that.  They had gave that award at the Statute of Liberty, at the buildings over there, and Vic Damone or Vic Diamond--Vic Damone, I think that's his name, the singer.  Yeah, he got his at the same time.  So I was in some pretty good company.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was that for, Ellis Island?
Speaker 2: What they recognize is people who came through.  Descendants of people who came through Ellis Island as immigrants.  And the reason I got it, even though  we didn't come in through Ellis Island, we still came into the United States.  And they wanted to recognize African Americans, even though they came in as slaves, and what have you.  But to say you came in, you help build the country, and you are also doing things for the Country now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Tell us about the United States Alliances.  It says here you enjoyed the United States--
Speaker 2: The United States Alliance.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What happened, I was off for about a year, and that wasn't good for me.  Tenecia should have asked me, "Mommy", and this is just Tenecia and me right now.  Tenecia and I.  Well, we--the two of us, and so since she asked me, "Mommy, please, let's don't move.  I want to finish high school here."  I let her finish high school.  She enrolled in the University of Virginia.  I took her to the University--I had a friend of mine, Miss Robin Perry--Perry!  Robin Perry is my cousin.  Robert Parrot (laughing)--Bob, who was my friend, who was my boyfriend back there in Germany, was working for United States Alliance, and he called me and told me they were looking for someone for logistics.  And he told them about me and had me send in my bio and everything.  And so I sent it in, and they brought me in and interviewed me and hired me to go out to be their floor to sight director and also their logistics process auditor.  As a sight director, I was the company's face to the people in the workforce, and also to the community there in Coco--Coco Beach, Melbourne, that whole area, down there.  As a logistic process auditor, I was charged with looking for better ways that we can handle logistics and to streamline it, also to see if we can get it less expensive.  The shuttle program, now this company--let me explain a little bit about the company.  The company was the shuttle program--was NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  People might have thought NASA people were mission control, launch control; those were all company people.  The company people, USA company people, also trained the astronauts for the missions that they were going to have to do in space.  And so this was--the shuttle was this company's only contract, and it had over ten thousand people working for them with this contract.  And I worked there, doing that kind of job, traveling in those positions back and forth between here and--between Florida and Texas.  And I had an opportunity, then, to go to New York the as the chief of staff to the chancellor of New York City Schools--.
Story_ID: 36261
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about?  That seems like a departure from--
Speaker 2: From everything, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: Accepting some big management responsibility.
Speaker 2: Well, you know what, it's really being the man's right-hand man, right hand, right arm.  And you gotta keep up with where he is, what's going on, what's going on in the organization, and keep people informed, keep him informed.  But I was only there for about three or four months, so I didn't get my teeth into it really as I had wanted to.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: My mother was ill.  And New York, for me, I was not happy at all in New York City, and that was another reason my teeth didn't get into the job as it should have.  So I really wasn't fair to Joel Kline in working that job.  I was just unhappy.  New York turned out to be an inside city.  You can't drive a car in New York; I didn't know the subway system, the bus system, I couldn't  get taxis.  They weren't picking up black people, and it was--having to walk back and forth--I did live close to work.  I lived out of Battery Park.  I bought and apartment, a condominium down in Battery Park.  And so, in combination of my mother being ill and my unhappiness, I went back to Florida.  But I didn't get back in time.  My mother passed before I was back--I got back.  But I had already resigned from the job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was in 2003?
Speaker 2: That was in 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what have you been doing with your retirement since?
Speaker 2: Various things.  My sister--the reason I'm in Atlanta is because my sister and brother-in-law were going to open walk-in-clinics.  And so, I was living in Florida, and I was living with David, my friend.  And I said, "You know, I need to have a place of my own--that", and I said, "If anything should happen to David or anything happens down there in Florida, I'm going to go where my sister and brother-in-law are, or living."  So I came up here to Atlanta and bought this house, and we were all going live in it, and we did live in it together.  But then they change their--they became disenchanted with the walk-in-clinics, and they moved back down to Florida.  So I'm still here.  I worked with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for a while as their treasurer.  I didn't--okay, I was also on a board of a charter school, working at charter school, it was Peach Tree Hope Charter School.  I now am a member, like I said on the National Coalition of 100 Black Women, and I'm the chair of the Political Awareness Committee.  Those activities I've done.  We've done legislative day, I've done a speech at a senior center, talking about the importance of voting.  I'm doing a voter registration next week at another senior center.  Georgia is one of those states where you have to have voter ID.  So we're going to work out ways that we can get seniors, especially seniors.  I'm going to work with the colleges to see what I can do with those students who are voting age whether they want to vote at home or here in Georgia and get that squared away.
Story_ID: 36262
Speaker 1: Now is this an initiative of Sunny Purdue?
Speaker 2: No, it's Deal, now as governor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Yeah, Deal is Governor.  Republicans are in right now.  So I don't know if Georgia's law is going to be called back the same way South Carolina's and Texas was.  But in the meantime, I can't work that way, I gotta work on seeing about getting everybody--as many people as we can voter ID's.  So we're looking at doing a massive voter ID drive with--there are about five chapters of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women here; same kind of thing with the National Coalition of 100 Black Men.  So we want to do a combined effort, and I'm trying to set up a picnic thing or burgers and hot dogs voter drive for folks, and so that's one of the things we're going to set up and do.  And the other thing that I'm planning, that I have in the works is taking our folks, my chapter to Washington, D.C. to become involved in the Congressional Black Caucus agenda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I have a note here that in 2010 you were appointed by President Obama to serve--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I forgot about that.
Speaker 1: as a member of the Board of Visitors for the United States Air Force Academy?
Speaker 2: They sent her to the Board of Trustees of a University.  So I am now one of the members of the Board of Visitors for the United States Air Force Academy.  And we meet four times a year, we look at character, leadership, education, diversity.  What else do we look at?  We don't look at finance, although they do brief us on that.  And infrastructure; we take a look at infrastructure.  Our next meeting is in May; it's going to be in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 36263
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Erasta Government Services is a company that I have formed with a young man who owns the company called Erasta.  And what we're doing is trying to use my background to get contracts to do government work.  The way it works is I assume a part of a company, and they don't pay me--I don't get paid unless we get a contract, and I get a certain percentage of that contract.  But I also, from the government--while the government will look at it is I also take a look at that company and its ability, its performance, its capacity, can it do what it says it's going to do kind of a look.  So the company benefits from my experience and my connections with the Air Force or with the services.  And the services benefit from my expertise.
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, my concern is this election that's coming up.  Let me just--I guess I'll go what if--I hope that we, as African Americans can be appreciated for what we are.  I kind of get upset when people say, "I don't look at color."  Well, I don't want you to ignore my color, I am black; don't--you don't have to do that--go that far.  Or just recognize me as a person who is a part of your community and a person who's a functional part of your community.  You don't have to treat me special, but don't treat me rudely; don't ignore me.  And I want that to be as simple as breathing; that that is just a part of individual makeup.  I also want that for other minorities.  I want people to be able to be appreciated for the culture they bring, and I also want them to be appreciated for what they do as far as us combining.  As far as the election is concerned, I'm sincerely worried that this will be a tight and close election.  And that's why I'm doing this voter registration, I'm also speaking at--I have a panel I'm doing this Friday, and it's primary focus is on women, but I take every opportunity I can to talk to people about the importance of getting out to vote and getting your friends and neighbors out to vote.  I want to see President Barack Obama be a president again; not because he's Barack Obama, but because he is Barack Obama, and he's a smart man, and he's doing a bang up job, as far as I'm concerned, of being president.  And I think he needs the opportunity and the time to be able to finish a lot of programs that he started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36264
Speaker 1: Now, when you look--looking back on your career, do you think the double bind of being black and a woman in the Air Force or the Armed Services is getting to be less of a burden?
Speaker 2: No.  It's a burden.  I'm concerned about the diversity in the United States Air Force, and you can see it when you look at the diversity of the Academy.  And it's especially bad--the Air Force just promoted it's first four-star woman general.  We did have one woman to get three stars; so this one had to have three stars too.  The army has promoted a four-star black woman general.  But I think it's still a burden on women. I don't think women are getting equal pay for equal work. I think women are being ignored as they go through the ranks.  The whole promotion thing centers on certain positions.  If you're going to be part of the power brokers for the United States Air Force, you have had to serve as a commander somewhere.  They don't put women in there; they don't put blacks in there.  That's the problem that we have.  I think those are the kinds of things that need to be change.  People just automatically, like this gentleman who shot that poor child, automatically assume, if you're black, you're bad, and especially if you're a black man or black child.  That should not be the assumption.  The assumption should be, there goes a person who probably has a talent I can use.  And if they don't, then they've changed; they've not met your expectation.  So that's what I want to work for.  That's why this organization on civil and human rights; that I'll be a part of that, to try and work that.  People have their rights and their rights protected.
Speaker 1: You started to tell us how you really got to know [Daniel] "Chappie" James.  I don't think we even got to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Chappie.  Okay.  We go back to this AFF [Armed Forces Foundation] meeting.  Chappie was out in Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, at Peterson Air Force Base, is where he lived.  He got his fourth star, while we were out there.  A young man, a black guy, a colonel, well, he was major at the time, came along with me.  No one knew he was a captain, along with me, called Chappie to be his aide, when he got his fourth star.  And, really, nobody else volunteered except Kato.  And them people told him you shouldn't take a black man to be your aide, he said, "why not, you take white kids to be yours", so he took Kato.  And so he was in and out of Washington, D.C.  And so Kato was my friend; Kato introduced me to Chappie, and we became very close friends with Chappie James.
Speaker 1: Kato, what's his name?
Speaker 2: Kato Reeves.
Speaker 1: What rank is he, at this point?
Speaker 2: He retired as a colonel, but he was a captain at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he was brought up to be Chappie James' aide?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So they actually criticized Chappie James for bringing a young black man in to be his aide?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Chappie had a white executive officer.  Yeah, they did.  And I got to know Chappie.  And Kato could never be found sometimes.  When we went to a Tuskegee airmen thing out at Tuskegee, and I don't know where Kato was; he was out for off--every time Chappie needed something, all he could see was me, and it was, Marci, I need this, and Marci, where is Kato; I don't know where Kato is.  But I could work as his aide, too.  When Chappie retired, he told me, he says, "Marci, if you need anything, call me; these four stars move mountains."  And I was ready to do that, and a couple of months later he died.
Story_ID: 36265
Speaker 1: Now, is there an organization of--
Speaker 2: Women?
Speaker 1: Well.
Speaker 2: There's an organization of black women.
Speaker 1: In the air force?
Speaker 2: No.  In the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I haven't been to one of their meetings in a while.  I was a guest speaker at their meeting.  I don't belong to the organization; I guess I should belong to it, but I've got a full plate with these other volunteer things that I'm doing.  However, I will take a look into that, and see if they do need my help or anything.
Speaker 1: I know police officers have organized their executive level of people into a group.  Is there any kind of organization of top officers?
Speaker 2: Functional, we have the logistics officer group that we formed.  And I haven't been participating in that in a while, in a long while.  We've got the Air Force association, which--not just officers, also enlisted people belong to it.  And it's a--what do you call those people who go and petition congress?
Speaker 1: Lobbyist?
Speaker 2: Lobbyist.  It's a lobbyist kind of group.  But I can't think of any particular officer group that we found.
Speaker 1: All right.  I thought maybe you retired into some group too.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me.  When you look back on your career, and your years of service, what today would you consider your legacy?
Speaker 2: Opening of doors for women in nontraditional career fields, proving that women are quite capable.  The decision that the president has just made to open more career fields, especially combat career fields for women, I feel that I had a part in that. That I stood on somebody's shoulder, and no they stand on mine--we stand on mine.  So I feel good about it, like the woman who made four stars, I feel that I had a part in opening that door so that she could get her four star.  She came through--I don't know how she came up through maintenance, but she came up through logistics, and that was the first woman to do that; to be--to open that door.  So, yeah, I do feel I'm leaving a legacy for women, not only in the air force, but for women in foreign countries.  I opened the door in so many eyes of those men at NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization].  It was just too bad that I wasn't able to follow through and make sure those things stayed in place.  But, one day we'll see.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you take another work, is there any major thing that you would go back and change if you could or do over?
Speaker 2: In part of my life, you mean, as what I did and everything?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would do Spelman [College] over.  I would pay more attention to academics.  I didn't graduate, really, in good standing.  I graduated at the top of my class from the University of Maryland.  I had one "B" out of the whole thing.  All "A's".  And they later made me the distinguished graduate in year 2000 from the school.  But Spelman, they were sweet to give me that honorary degree.  But it was from what I achieved.  I'm a member, of course, Delta Sigma Theta.  I'm not an active member, but I'm a life member.  But I need to get financial with the organization that I am a member of here, and that's the Atlanta chapter of Delta Sigma Theta.  And most of my work though, is being with this one group of Black 100 Women.
Story_ID: 36266
Speaker 1: I know it's hard to cover everything, but I know you went to the Harvard--
Speaker 2: School of Government?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Kennedy School of Government?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to two--I went to three courses at the Kennedy School of Government.  And the last course I didn't finish because I got ill, and I had to be put into the hospital to have an operation.  But three, yeah, three courses at through Kennedy School of Government.  Got to hear Jesse Jackson.  I always wondered about Jesse Jackson.  I don't guess I want this for history or a period of my thoughts--my real thoughts, but he's a hell of a speaker.  He's dynamic.  He can really capture a crowd.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family, now.  Were your parents surprised at your career?
Speaker 2: My father became senile, Alzheimer, and I kept him for a month.  And this was the month that I--what happened, I pinned on colonel?  I was going to be a colonel, and somebody asked my father what--back in Houston--he was back in Houston.  Somebody asked my father, "What are the girls doing?"  And he said, "one of them is a general and the other is a lawyer."  Neither one of us were there at the time he said it.  Yeah.  And so, it was like he prophesized it.  Mother relished my promotions.  They treated her like the queen mother.  And she felt--she felt very special, she felt very honored.  I don't think she was surprised, I think it was all so new and (unclear) circumstance, it happens in the military, it's mind-blowing.  And for her to be a part of it, was just wonderful for me to be able to bring that kind of joy into her life.
Speaker 1: You said, before, your daughter turned somersaults?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I can tell you this story.  She was nine years' old, and she would do exactly what a general was, evidently, because she said, "mommy"--I would take her to the day care place; even at nine; the recreation center had a care that they would do for kids before they went into--started school that morning and also when they started in school in the afternoon, their parents would come and pick them up from there.  And I forget the lady's name, I'll just call her Miss Jones.  Mommy will you talk to Miss Jones about, whatever the little girl's name is, I'll say Brittany.  She's got Brittany in punishment, because Brittany did such-and-such a thing.  I said well, Tenecia, that sounds like a mommy problem to me.  She said, "But you're the general."  I said, okay, I got it.  I said, "But generals don't go and handle other mommy's problems."  She was a--Tenecia was a blast.  I was explaining to Tenecia about color-blindness.  Mind you everybody is white around us; all my officers are white, and so talented people can't see colors; they can't distinguish colors.  And so, I told her Colonel Ziegler, who was one of my colors at the time, Colonel Ziegler is color blind.  And she said, "You mean he doesn't know I'm Black?"  I said, "Yeah, I think he knows."  But that's been a joy of my life, is having my children, both of them, Steven and Tenecia.  And now I have grandchildren.  I've got a granddaughter, 10, and a little grandson, two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there anything we haven't talked about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything Larry.  We've covered the waterfront.  What's your last question?
Speaker 1: Similar to legacy, but it's a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a mother, as a wife, and as a professional, and that I achieved, and I excelled in all three areas.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you guys for coming.
Story_ID: 36267
Speaker 1: This is my mother and father, my sister and I.  My mother Marcelite Jordan, my father Cecil L. Jordan, my sister Elizabeth Lymon Jordan, and me, Marcelite Cecile Jordan.  That was during World War II, when my father was in the Navy.  This me with my cadets at the United States Air Force Academy.  We'd line up to go to a graduation, a football game, or some other function.  And this is a picture of me with some of the students in my air craft maintenance officer class.  If you notice, there is the sign that tells this is the course.  This is a picture of me with my two friends from Korat Air Force Base, Thailand.
Speaker 2: About the year?
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't remember the year for this one.  This is Marcelite Cecile Jordan and Elizabeth Lymon Jordan. Off Camera Person:  Setting up pictures.
Speaker 2: This is me, Marcelite Cecile Jordan and Elizabeth Lymon Jordan, and we must have been about five and four.  This is my three men in my life, my son Steven, when he was a boyscout, my husband Maurice Harris and his father, Harriban Harris.  This is me at Thailand in my party suit.  And some more Thailand pictures at another function.  We had parties almost everyday.  Again, in another party suit; I had about two or three party suits for all kind of parties.  My grandmother Roberta Lymon Terrell, my mother's side.  This picture was taken in Washington, D.C., and Marcelite and Elizabeth are getting ready to go someplace.  Again, we're in Washington, D.C.  I didn't tell you about my grandfather, who's in that picture.  This grandfather, Wendell Philip Terrell, was one of the first graduates of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and also one of the first African Americans to work on the aircraft program in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And the children?
Speaker 2: That Marcelite and Elizabeth.  This is my mother, me--me first there, and my mother Marcelite.  This a family picture of my mother and her family.  From left to right, we've got Robert Terrell, his mother Roberta Terrell, in the back there is Wendell, in front is my mother Marcelite and on the end there is Wendell Phillip Terrell, Sr.  This picture is a change of command, when I took over the wing.  I'm taking it over from Colonel Thompson.  This is a parade in which I addressed the audience after getting my first star, and telling them how proud I was, and how glad I was.  I'm receiving an award here from General Chris Mann and, she was a colonel in the military personnel center when I sent my applications in for aircraft maintenance officer school, and she said they literally balled them up and threw them in the trash can.  These are the four contestants for the "Miss Zero Defects" contest.  One of them; the one I can remember is my roommate from there at Bitburg Air Base, and that's Vivian Amboy.
Speaker 1: And which one is she?
Speaker 2: She is the one on the far left.  I'm so glad you can't tell it in this picture, but this is me pregnant with Tenecia, after I had taken over the avionic squadron and we're with one of the components.  I had to go to Uruguay.  They too, had done away with their draft and were having to take in more women, just as we did in the air force.  I took an aide along with me, who worked for me.  As I said, at Keesler Air Force Base, where I was the deputy commander for maintenance, I had 135's.  You couldn't keep me off of air planes or in air planes, or doing things with air planes, and there I was.  This is me in a style show.  You could have things made over there in Thailand, in a day.  So we put on a style show in Korat, Thailand.
Speaker 1: Was that an Air Force thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Another picture of me with my classmates at the aircraft maintenance officer course.  Okay, that's me in one of the first uniforms we no longer have in the service.  I was second lieutenant, and that was taken in Houston, Texas.  We three there, in that picture, were the only three women generals in the air force at the time.  From the left that's Jean Clip, Pat Hennenburg and me.  Tenecia as a nine-year old with Jeannetta Cole at Oklahoma City Air Logistics Center.  I guess you see Tenecia in that picture; sneaking in that picture.  She just has to be in all the pictures.  But there we are with Jeannetta Cole at Oklahoma City Air Logistics Center.  These are Spelman [College] graduates.  Jeanetta Cole is the--was at that time the president of Spelman College.  And this is the Spelman alumni club--alumnae club, excuse me at Oklahoma City Air Logistics Center, taking a picture with Jeannetta Cole, plus Tenecia.  Bet you can't find me on here, but this was taken at my minister's home for his daughter's birthday.  I know most of the names, Carna, Moore, me, in the back, Elizabeth, my sister, don't know the young lady over her eyes, but Brenda and Arlette and Joe Boone.  That's a picture of me in our church, at Pilgrim Congretional Church.  They're on (unclear).  Sitting next me is perhaps my best friend, even today, Robert Scott Jackson, I call him Scotty.
Speaker 1: Okay, which one?
Speaker 2: Okay.  He's sitting at my left.  This is just me on the outside of the church holding one of the member's daughters.  This picture was also taken at church.  In front I think you recognize me, my sister Elizabeth and in the back, my father Cecil Jordan, my mother Marcelite Jordan, my mother's mother Roberta Terrell and my aunt Esa Marie Terrell, and my uncle Wyndell Terrell, Jr.
Speaker 1: In 1946.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's the three of us at church, and I have no idea what the ages are, but from left to right, that's Carna Moore, me Marcelite and Elizabeth--Elizabeth Jordan.  Well, that's the three of us again.  That's Elizabeth in front, Carna Moore in the middle and me in the back, and I'm mad because I'm always in the back. (laughing)
Speaker 1: That's what you get for being taller.
Speaker 2: Yeah, older. (laughing)  Girl scouts.  I was a girl scout.  Let's see.  If I get up a little closer, maybe I can tell you who these people are.  I know  one of them, on top there, at the left is Sue Kemper, Arlette Jones, and I'm standing right in front of Arlette Jones, and I don't know who that is to the right of me.  Tenecia is going to be very upset with this, but that's my daughter Tenecia Marcelite Harris in her senior year picture from high school.  My family came to pick us up from camp that year.  That's a bunch of us, my father, my mother, my aunt Esa Marie, my uncle.
Speaker 1: Can you name them?
Speaker 2: Let's see if we can name them, and see if we can get them in order here.  I don't know the young girl in front, but my mother is Marcelite then I'm standing next to my mother Marcelite, and next to me is Elizabeth, and I don't know who the young girl is.  In the back, that's my uncle Wyndell Phillip, my father Cecil Jordan, and my aunt Esa Marie Terrell.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you name these?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can name those.  Okay.  That's me at Capstone, right before getting my first star.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which one is you?
Speaker 2: I'm standing right there in front.  And I fell for it upstairs, he did that to me. (laughing)  My mother Marcelite Jordan, my sister Elizabeth Jordan, me Marcelite, and my father Cecile O. Jordan.
Speaker 1: Great!  Here's some guy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's me talking with Colin Powell at a function of the Tuskegee Airmen in Washington, D.C.  And they called it the "Generals".  This is me at Bitburg, Germany, right after it was announced that I was "Miss Zero Defects".  (laughing).  We haven't seen this picture?  Okay, in the front that's my mother and her  family, Wendell Phillip Terrell, Jr., my mother Marcelite Terrell, her brother, younger brother Robert Terrell.  In the back that's my grandmother Roberta Terrell and my grandfather Wendell Phillip Terrell, Sr.  That's me as a debutante.  During my story you'll see that I paid dearly to be a debutante.  In that year I had my braces off, and I couldn't stop grinning.  This is me as a one-star general.  Again my grandmother as a young woman, Roberta Lymon, Roberta Lymon Terrell she later came to be.  My mother Marcelite Jordan, well, she was still Terrell on her wedding day.  There she is "Miss Zero Defects".  That's me as a two-star general, a major general.
