Story_ID: 7998
Speaker 1: y name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Joel Hall, J-O-E-L, H-A-L-L, born as Joseph Lewis Hall, J-O-S-E-P-H, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, H-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have any nicknames or--?
Speaker 2: No, that's about it.  Joel is the, is the nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, I was born in Chicago, Illinois at Cook County Hospital on April 20th of 1949.
Speaker 1: Now, I neglected to ask you, now, is there a sign--is there a--we would assume that Joel Hall is more of a theatrical name.
Speaker 2: It is a theatrical name.  Yes, I was born, I was named after the boxer, Joe Louis.  My father named me after the boxer, Joe Louis.  And as I went into the artistic field, I kept my first name and took the initial my last--of my middle name and made it a short name, which is Joel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how I became--it's actually "Joe-L", people call me Joe-L, meaning Joe, "L" for Lewis, Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a choreographer, artistic director of Chicago City Theater Company [Chicago, Illinois], Joel Hall Dancers.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 24, 19--2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently in my office at the Joel Hall Dancers in Chicago, Illinois at 1511 West Berwyn on the North side of Chicago.
Story_ID: 7999
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions that I am compelled by management to ask you.  They only require a short answer.  It's kind of warm-up, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken, period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is my favorite food, and, of course, salad.  I love, I love eating salad.  Those are my two favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is teal.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is summer and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Hawaii, the island of, the big island for Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, that I would have to think about that, there's, there's so many phrases and sayings that I'm always coming up with, but I believe that my favorite would be to 'live life fully, richly, honestly and enjoy every single second of it'.
Story_ID: 8000
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  I'm gonna start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's full name is Emma Lee Hall, E-M-M-A, L-E-E, Hall is her marriage name.
Speaker 1: And what's her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Hanzibraugh, Emma Lee Hanzibraugh, H-A-N-S--H-A-N-Z-I-B-R-A-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, H-A-N-Z-?
Speaker 2: Z-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: B-R-A-U-G-H, Hanzibraugh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and is that a German name?
Speaker 2: I believe it is, yeah.  I believe it's either German or Dutch.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was the granddaughter of a white--she had a white grandfather.  So her, her grandfather was Dutch.  So I believe that's how the name trans--got to her.
Speaker 1: He was probably Dutch, and then--.
Speaker 2: Right, it was Dutch.
Speaker 1: Hanzibraugh, okay.  All right, well, what do you know about that side of the family?  Now, you told us a hint, and here's a peek here, but what--how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's very interesting.  I haven't been able to trace it back very far.  I, I've looked on my mother's side of the family, and I've met several relatives from that side of the family, a nephew by the name of Carl, of her's, a brother by the name of Harry, and that was the extent to which I knew my mother's side of the family.  Now, I meant to preface that by saying, my mother, when I was born was institutionalized for what is now called post-something when women want to commit suicide or something when they're pregnant.
Speaker 1: Post-partum depression?
Speaker 2: Whatever it is, yeah.  Yeah, well, that was in 1949, and at that time, they institutionalized women for that.  So my mother spent the bulk of her life institutionalized.  And I did not really meet her until about seven or eight years ago.  And then I was with her in her final couple of months of being on the planet.  So, I was able to nurture her and take care of her and comb her hair and bring her things and bring her flowers.  And, and after she passed away, I had her cremated, and I took her to Hawaii, which is my favorite place of being, and spread her ashes there in a very, very beautiful place in Hawaii, where ancestors of those taken there come to meet them and, and take them.  So it's off of a point in Hawaii that's very near where I reside--I have a place over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's a, sort of a sad story.
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's, it is sad in a way because I never really got to know her during my lifetime except for, you know, at the end I did a chance to know her, and I felt that I knew her better than knowing her all of my life because I was able to share a very important part of being with her, when she needed me most to be there.  So it was sad in that I didn't have the opportunity to really know her all of my life, but it was great in that I got the opportunity to meet her in my life.
Speaker 1: I think the thing that's disturbing, reflected on the--well, you just wouldn't think that someone would be institutionalized their whole life for post-partum depression.
Speaker 2: That was amazing, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's, the thing I think that really--.
Speaker 2: That is amazing.  Yeah, I find that pretty amazing myself.  I do recall an instance when I was a teenager--I think I was thirteen, that I had gone to see her, on my own, at the institution in which she was, in which she was put.
Speaker 1: Where, where was--?
Speaker 2: It was here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Where was she institutionalized?
Speaker 2: At the Illinois State Hospital here.  It was located on Irving Park at that time many years ago.  And I remember my father telling me where she was.  And I took the initiative to go myself and find her, to seek her out.  And I went looking for her to visit her, and finally was able to get in to see her, and, only to realize that she did not recognize me because she hadn't seen me when I--you know, since I had been born.  So she knew my stepbrother [sic, half brother], Frisby, who was her son by a previous marriage, prior to my father--much, she had a much closer relationship with him.
Story_ID: 8001
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, did you--I mean you were telling us about some of relatives, but did you, do you know much about her origins and, you know--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What part of the country she comes from?
Speaker 2: She was from Marks, Mississippi, as my father was, and my stepmother.  They were all from the area of Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Marks?
Speaker 2: Marks, Marks, M-A-R-K-S.  And that was, at that time, located near Clarksville, Mississippi.  And my parents came up here in the early 1940's, my mother and father and started a restaurant on the South--on the North side here in Chicago in an area that is now called Cabrini-Green
Speaker 1: Is that prior to the building that (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: That was prior to the building of the big buildings, but the small projects were there, I believe, at that time.  I believe they might have been built in the early '50's [1950s] or maybe late '40's [1940s] or something like that, the row houses.  And I remember growing up in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you give us, do you know much about how your mother grew up?  Now, did she--she grew in Marks, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And did she have a chance to go to school there and--?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother went to school in Marks.  I'm not really familiar with that much of her history other than the fact that the relationship that she had after she married my dad, because it was never really anybody from that side of the family to have these discussions with.  And when I actually grew up, I grew up with a stepmother who really, I thought was my mother until later on when I, you know, was told that she was my stepmother.  So it was an interesting journey.
Story_ID: 8002
Speaker 1: So you knew your birth mother primarily through your father and your brother, I guess, and--?
Speaker 2: Right, I knew my mother through my--my real mother, through my father and my stepbrother. And little conversations every now and then from my father's side of the family or my aunts and uncles on his side would mention my mother, but not to any great extent because she was always institutionalized.  So that was always something that was always kept quiet back in those days, you know.  They would say people were funny, and, you know, they put them away and, and you wouldn't hear about them.  They'd be locked away somewhere.  So that was what happened with my mother.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a decent relationship with your stepmother?
Speaker 2: I had a very decent relationship with my stepmother.  Actually, she was the person that really, I think, defined me as a person today.  She was very adamant about teaching me proper etiquette, how to speak, how to write, how to tie my shoes, how to count, how to take of myself, what to and not to do, how to--she used to work with me every day after school with homework to make sure that I was able to, to get through my school work.  So she--we had a very passionate relationship.  We still do to this day.  My mother and I are--distantly close, but we are close.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Annie Young, Annie Laura Young.
Speaker 1: And she's also from?
Speaker 2: And she is also from Marks, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 8003
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us your father's--can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Hall.  And my father died in 1980--or 1992.  And he was seventy-four when he passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, he was eighty-four when he passed away, and my mother was seventy-four when she passed away.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I can trace my father's side of the family only back to his, to his immediate family.  I mean his brothers and sisters.  I knew all of my aunts and uncles, and outside of that, there was very little talk about, when I was growing up, about anything prior to being in Chicago [Illinois], like they never told--I mean they would tell stories about, you know, being down home and talking about going out at night and ghosts stories, you know, about the well, being around the well and haints coming to the well, and all this kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Haints, they--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but, but never really any story--any social stories about the community in which they grew up in or the stories about the, the times in which they lived.  There was never, ever any discussion about that.  And even later on when I talked to my aunt, after my father passed away, who's, now, she's about ninety-eight now, and trying to talk with her about, you know, who her mother was and who her grandmother was, and there's not really any information that she really can give, can give.  So our family really, was really blocked off and separated, really from the rest of our family, as it was cut off and moved to Chicago.  So we have not really developed any real history.  I went to a, a family reunion two years ago, three years ago.  And I had some old photographs that my stepmother had had and--of my mother.  And I showed those photographs around, and people were amazed to see her picture, a picture of other family relatives.  I have kept a lot of those things for myself, but I have this--there were whole generations of young children that never knew their aunts and uncles or never knew their, never knew the, the relationship between--from one person to the next or where they fit into the scheme of things.  It was really a very, very wonderful experience to be able to share that information with them, you know what I'm saying.  So that was a, a highlight for me actually, that, that first family reunion that I had gone to.  That was our first family reunion.  I am now fifty-five years old.
Story_ID: 8004
Speaker 1: Now, do you suspect, you know, I mean, most of us can surmise that our, when our relatives left the South they were trying to, you know, have a better life in the North.  But are there, is there any or story or anything that you--is there, do you, did you ever get any inkling as to any specific thing that made them, you know, leave the South and why they were so reluctant to go, even talk about it?
Speaker 2: They had just wanted to get out of the South.  I know that, and my father came first to Chicago [Illinois] and got a job here working for, I can't remember who he worked for at the time, at the time that he came.  But later, I remember that he was working for a Greek family that owned a, a tamale factory, a hot tamale factory here.  And that's where I grew up in, with him.  But I know that my father came first, and then my mother came after that.  And they opened a restaurant.  And--.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the restaurant?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  But I do have a, I do have a picture of them in the restaurant and prices of food and this kind of stuff.  So there's not really much family history or information that I would have about that part of my family.  It's really interesting.
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a thing though, to open a restaurant.  It's just quite an accomplishment, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, for black people at that time to open a restaurant, I think, yeah, especially on the North side, it was quite a thing.  So my father had always had a very entrepreneurial spirit.  And when I grew up, he was always one to make sure that we were provided for and that there was always--he always was involved in trying to make things work somehow for the family.  So he and my stepmother actually were together until my--about twelfth year.  And then my mother, my stepmother and father separated.  We moved in with my aunt.  And then my life kind of evolved from that point, on my own.  Actually, I left home when I was thirteen.  And--
Story_ID: 8005
Speaker 1: I want to take you back to your earliest childhood memory--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and ask you what that is.  What was, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I think the memory that I have of my earliest childhood is in the restaurant with my parents and having a dog, a black dog named Blackie.  And I used to get on his back and ride him around the, ride him around the, the restaurant.  And I remember the nurturing and, and love and care that I had from my, from my father, particularly.  He and I were very, very close.  So I always had a very, very, very, very good relationship with him.  Other members of my family, on his side of the family, I've had more of a relationship with than I have on my mother's side or my stepmother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of riding this dog around the restaurant, that's an idea that I had as a kid, but I could never get the dog to cooperate.  So this--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, mine was ready to cooperate.
Speaker 1: Did this dog actually let you ride him around?
Speaker 2: He, he did.  He did.  He was, he was really, he was a really sweet dog.  He was very--I think, I don't know what kind he was.  He might have been something like a Labrador or something.  He was a big dog, and I remember I used to get on his back and ride him around.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your earliest memory is of the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of the restaurant.  And I also remember my cousins being-- coming over to babysit for me and take care of me there.
Story_ID: 8006
Speaker 1: Now, what--we always ask this question, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights and sounds.  Well, a lot of tamales cause as I said (laughs), we, we lived in the back of the factory.  We had a first-floor apart--well, the factory was all one floor.  But it was divided, and in the back half of the family was where--of the factory was where we lived, my father and mother and I.  And they had their business in the front of the factory.  So all of the people that I knew growing up were involved with my father's work.  And then there were kids that were in the neighborhood that I grew up around.  But at home, what I knew was the sight, the, the sight and smell of hot tamales.  I knew them backwards and forwards.  I knew how to, to roll them myself and patch them myself and prepare it myself, just by looking.  I remember being on Chicago Avenue and looking down the street and seeing Moody Bible Institute [Chicago, Illinois], seeing all these people coming out of there by the, it seems like thousands every day, coming down the street in front of our place.  I remember the trolley cars on Chicago Avenue, the electric trolley cars that were connected with these lines that went up to an electric line that would let them roll down the street.  I remember the food that my mother would prepare, greens and cornbread and fried corn and really delicious, delicious meals from home.  And I remember my friends, my little friends from around the, the house, which were quite a few.
Story_ID: 8007
Speaker 1: Okay, so what kinds of things did you like to you when you were--I mean what did you like to do as a little kid?
Speaker 2: In terms of playing, you mean, kinds of games?
Speaker 1: Yeah, besides riding the dog (laughs).
Speaker 2: Besides riding the dog.  Well, I guess I used to like to read a lot.  I used to like to--I wanted to become a minister.  So I would hold services in the hallway next door, and all the kids would come to my services that I would have in hall.
Speaker 1: What inspired you to become a minister?  I mean did you have, was there a role model you had as a minister?
Speaker 2: Probably my minister from church, Reverend Bloomingberg.  I had a wonderful minister that I grew up with.
Speaker 1: What was his name again, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Reverend Bloomingberg.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was director of the, or minister of the Triedstone Missionary Baptist Church on the South side [Chicago, Illinois].  So my [step]mother went--and I would go out there every Sunday to services.  So I was very inspired by singing in the choir and, and all of the activities of the church.  And then later on, you know, as I was growing up, I decided that I wanted to be a minister.  So I decided to hold my own services.
Speaker 1: So your, so your childhood friends would come to the service?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the kids in the, in the neighborhood would come.  It was great.
Speaker 1: Did you have a choir?
Speaker 2: --No, but we, we would actually put together songs, and I would teach songs from church, and they would all sing them.  And it was, that was quite, that was quite something else, I remember.  That was pretty wild.
Speaker 1: Okay, were you influenced a lot by music or television or movies (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Always.  There was always music in my house.  We were always listening to jazz, as well as, as church music, but jazz and church were very much a mixture in my, in my youth, listening to artists like Thelonious Monk and Pharoah [Ferrell] Saunders and all these brilliant geniuses, that was all a part of my thinking at that time.  So when I became--later on, when I became a dancer, it was an easy transition for me from the culture in which I grew up to the theater--very easy transition because I had grown up in music and I understood music, although I was never able to read it.
Story_ID: 8008
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school.  What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to several grade schools.  I started at--the first school that I went to for kindergarten was [Edward] Jenner [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], which is located in Cabrini Green [housing projects].  Then for first and second grade I went to a school, a Catholic school called St. Dominic's [Chicago Illinois].  And they had a school and church.  The church is still, still, I believe is still located on the corner of [West] Locust [Street] and [North] Sedgwick [Street].  The school used to be across the street from the church where the projects is now or where that, that Cabrini Green building is.  And then I went to Sexton School [Chicago, Illinois], which was located on Wells Street.  And from Sexton, I went to--.
Speaker 1: So that, Sexton School on Wells Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I know there's A. O. Sexton on the South side too.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So was there was like two Sexton schools?
Speaker 2: This was Sexton on the North side.  I'm not sure what it is now, but the building is still there.  And then from Sexton, I think--oh, yes, then I went to [Walter] Newberry School [Chicago, Illinois].  Now, Newberry was located a little further North.  We had moved out of Cabrini at that time and moved a little bit further North.  So from Newberry, I went to, let's see, from Newberry, I think I went back down to Cabrini to Cooley Upper Grade Center, which was Cooley [Vocational] High [School, Chicago, Illinois], a part of Cooley High--.
Speaker 1: The famous Cooley High that was--.
Speaker 2: The famous school of the movies, that they made the movie about.  And then I went to Arnold Upper Grade Center [now Lincoln Park High School], which was back North again, across the street from Waller High School [also now Lincoln Park High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And then I became incarcerated.  So that was--.
Speaker 1: This was during grade school?
Speaker 2: Just after grade--I told you about I left when I was thirteen, yeah.  So I became incarcerated then.
Story_ID: 8009
Speaker 1: Well, us what happened now.  Did you, you went to a lot of grade schools.  Was it because--well, some you mentioned it was because the family moved, that [Walter] Newberry's [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was because the family moved.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: St. Dominic's [School, Chicago, Illinois] must have been for--?
Speaker 2: Financial reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we--the reason we left St. Dominic's I think was because we had to pay every--I mean I, we had to take these little envelopes to church every morning.  We had mass every morning that you had to go to.  And all the kids had to take their money and give it to the church every day.  So I think that, I think that was the reason that we left.
Speaker 1: And so your parents, we assume, put you in St. Dominic's to give you a better education.
Speaker 2: Exactly, that was the reason that they put me there.  But it ended up being such an expense.  Then, but I did get a very good, sound base and understanding of my education at a very early point.
Speaker 1: Now, was it tough on you as a kid.  Now, here's a kid, you're, I mean you have a stepmother at home that you have a good relationship with, but your, your mother's not at home.  That may not have made that much difference, but you, you do a lot of moving, you know, from school to school.  And it seems like it'd be hard as a young kid to keep a permanent group of friends, and--.
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, it was just the way it was.  And then I was a pretty smart kid.  So moving around was not such a problem for me because I was able to get a base, understanding of how to read and write.  So moving into any situation for me was just transferring my skill from one place to the next.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what was hard, I think, on me as a kid was, I think the separation of my parents, when they decided to separate.  That kind of--.
Speaker 1: Now, that's when you were twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 8010
Speaker 1: But before that, I mean there's a lot of, there's a lot of moving.  Did you have a favorite subject in school or--?
Speaker 2: Well--.
Speaker 1: --or even a favorite school out of all these schools?
Speaker 2: (laughs) Yes, I did have a favorite subject in school, and that was math and music.  However, I was, I was a pretty good student all the way around.  So, but particularly with math, I enjoyed, and that probably is the reason that I choreograph cause choreographers are mathematicians anyway.
Speaker 1: I know they do a lot of counting out loud.
Speaker 2: Yes, we do.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any teachers that stand out as particularly important?
Speaker 2: There was a man by the name of Mr. David Beck, who was a football player with the Chicago Bears, who was my seventh grade teacher, that was an exceptional, he was an exceptional teacher.  Then I had a gentleman by the name of Mr. Candleman, who had me for three grades, I guess--two grades.  And we were in a situation where the school was--I was in a situation where the school was kind of disruptive.  It was a kind of a disruptive environment.
Speaker 1: Which one was that?
Speaker 2: This was, this was Cooley [Vocational] Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois].  And I remember Mr. Candleman coming in and putting down these rules about how we were going to behave and how we were going to act, and how we were going to be able to excel through these grades.  And I remember him taking us through, I believe it was seventh and eighth grade.  And we had him every day.  And he was, made very much an impression in my life.  I later, actually met him in graduate school when I was a graduate student.  He was taking graduate classes, and we were in the same class.  And I ran into my, my seventh grade teacher in a graduate class.  So that was, that was really very interesting and different.  But I remember that he would come in and play musical theater, tunes, show tunes in the morning.  We would have algebra.  We would have calculus, we would trigonometry in seventh and eighth grade so that by the time--before I got to high school, I was doing high school subjects.  But that was only because someone took the initiative to teach us that this could be done.  So that's why I say, there were, that was my interest in math also because I had that influence, I think.
Story_ID: 8011
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was, what was the community like, I guess prior to your twelfth birthday in--what was it, what was it (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: It was, it was wonderful.  It was a community in which everybody knew each other.  No matter where you went in the community, somebody knew you.  And even if you went some place out of the community, it seemed that somebody knew you.  So you couldn't really misbehave anywhere because somebody would tell your parents.  And it would get back to your parents or they would reprimand you themselves and tell your parents.  And then you would, so people were, kids were not as into doing anything that would get us into trouble.  So it was a very loving environment where children were all nurtured.  As I said, everybody knew everybody.  I would go over to my cousin's house or my aunt's house, and, or we would go over to another neighbor's house.  And it was like everybody was family anyway, even though we were not, even though we were not genetically related.  Do you understand what I'm saying, we were still family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a, it was a wonderful place to be.  At that time Cabrini Green [Homes, housing projects] which later all turned out to be--later on turned out to be some place that people didn't want to be.
Speaker 1: Right, right, the projects of Cabrini--.
Speaker 2: The projects, exactly.
Speaker 1: --and the high rise, especially.  Well, tell me this, I've, you know, I think it's--correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that maybe young, black people raised in Cabrini had more access to downtown and other activities than maybe others--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yes, we were.
Speaker 1: Did you hear stories about kids who've never been downtown and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think the Cabrini kids actually--.
Speaker 2: The further West, but it often reminds me of that story, the Emerald City in the 'Wiz', when you're standing off looking at the Emerald City, you know what I'm saying.  I've always--we, at one point I went to church out  West [on] Oakley [Street], and I remember being out on West Madison [Street] and looking East and seeing all those big buildings downtown as being another world.  And it really was another world.  And even in Cabrini [Green Homes, housing project], I mean our world was still very limited as blacks because we didn't really go outside of the community in which we lived, at least very much.  I mean we would go downtown to go shopping.  My mother would take me down there, you know, to go shopping, but most of our experience was going from the North side to the South side to go to, to things, rather than going downtown or further North.  And not until I was, later on, until I moved a little further North, did I really venture any place on the other side of Division Street.  That was my separation point.
Speaker 1: Now, that, is that what separates Cabrini from the Gold Coast too?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the separation from the Gold Coast would be Orleans [Street], Larrabee [Street], at that time, Chicago Avenue and Division [Street].  Those--that was Cabrini, that was Cabrini.  And then anything outside of that was kind of an unknown area, the gray area.
Speaker 1: And the Gold Coast means that, that's the most wealthy part of the--city.
Speaker 2: Yes, I lived, I lived right next door to it.  So when I did start going out on my own, I started going out to the Gold Coast, you see what I'm saying.  I started venturing out of the community, but I ventured East towards the Gold Coast.
Story_ID: 8012
Speaker 1: Now,tell me about what happened when you were twelve?  Now, your parents separated, right?
Speaker 2: My parents separated, yes.  And then I moved--my father and I moved down with my aunt on Chicago Avenue again, on Chicago Avenue.  And then I, I left home after about a year.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, why did you leave?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt that it was--I had always been raised by myself, with my, with my parents.  And all of a sudden I was in a situation where I was with four other people in a bedroom and in an environment that was just very different from, from home--that I had grown up in.  And I just felt at that time that it was time for me to try to find my way.
Speaker 1: Now, you said your stepmother was influential in terms of cultural things. I mean she was--she taught you how to conduct yourself.  I mean she was concerned about, you know, social, you know, you know, habits (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: Mobility
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother was concerned about how I would be able to excel in life.  My mother was concerned about how I would be able to become a doctor, lawyer or an Indian chief.  So she was very adamant about making sure that I had all of the necessary tools, by which I can, could conduct myself in society.
Speaker 1: And this new environment wasn't really bent that way, right, or wasn't headed that way?
Speaker 2: No, it was not.  So I left.  I ventured out on my own, and the rest is history.  I mean I moved from that point, from that point that I left home, I never, I never went back home.
Speaker 1: Well, where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to the street.  I mean I went, I grew up on the street with kids that were about my age.  We got money from people that we knew.  We ate through people that we knew, and it was a very difficult life.  And then I was arrested for, for running away from home.
Speaker 1: So you're like thirteen?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Speaker 1: And where did you sleep at night?
Speaker 2: I would sleep on the street in the park.  I mean I was purely out on my own at that point.
Speaker 1: Did you stay in school during this period of time?
Speaker 2: No, I left school.  That was, every, everything in my community, all aspects of my community was cut at that point.  I got arrested.  I got thrown into the Illinois Youth Commission from thirteen to seventeen.  At that point, when I got out of the Illinois Youth Commission, I graduated from high school with a GED, and went to Central YMCA [Community] College [Chicago, Illinois] to get a, associate of arts degree.
Story_ID: 8013
Speaker 1: What was this, this youth facility like?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a, it was a facility for delinquent boys.  And it was, there were three wings to each, each building.  There were four buildings, three wings to each building.  And it housed about eight hundred, I would think about eight hundred boys.
Speaker 1: Now, you had to go to that facility because you ran or, or--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But the other thing was wrong too cause it seemed like you--did your parents, did either one of them, your stepmother or your father try to get you to come back home or?
Speaker 2: My father [Lewis Hall] tried to get me to come back home.  I mean he would, he would look for me, couldn't find me, but would look for me.  And my cousins tried to get me to come back home.  That's where I was staying.  But I decided that I did not want to do that.  So the consequence of that was ending up in jail.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I--.
Speaker 1: You say, but it was a facility.
Speaker 2: No, it was, it was jail.  When you're locked up behind closed doors with turnkey, it's jail, period, whether you're thirteen or ninety.  It's jail.
Speaker 1: When you were locked in the facility, you weren't locked in your room, were you, I mean--?
Speaker 2: You were locked in your rooms at night.  It was called IYC, the Illinois Youth Commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  So that was a period in which I think I had to go inward and decide at that point, especially when I got out, if this was going to be a pattern or if this was going to be some place that I would continue to be, these kinds of places, you see.  And even in, even in that situation, I was in a situation where the woman who was the cook there was nurturing.  I worked in the kitchen, so she was very--she and I became very close.  And she was very nurturing as a mother figure--.
Speaker 1: What was her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --even in there.  Her name was Juanita.  And she had children of her own, but she would come and cook every day at this place--or serve food.  And then there were kids that would assist her.  And I was one of the kids that assisted her in serving trays.  And she and I became very close.
Story_ID: 8014
Speaker 1: At no time did you ever think about, at that time, going back to live with your mother or your father or did you have a choice like that, and could you--?
Speaker 2: Did I have a choice?  Yes, I had a choice.  I mean it wasn't that I couldn't go back and live with my father.  It's that I kind of chose not to, even though I loved my father very, very much.  But my father, at that time, was dealing with alcoholism.  So this was--I ended up being the person that was taking care of him more than any one because it was just he and I, really.  He had separated from my mother.  So I just got to the point that I did not want to continue to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you--now, here you are, you're a good student in school.  And you had to, you know, so you earn a GED, and was there an option to go--well, I guess there was no option to regular high school?
Speaker 2: Not at that point, I mean I was institutionalized from thirteen to seventeen. So that's, those were the high school years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, educationally, you didn't get really the kind of education you could have gotten had you been--?
Speaker 2: Had I been in high school, no, but I was able to get the education that I needed in, in--once I got to college.  I had had enough preparation prior to high school really to, to get my GED.
Story_ID: 8015
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Central Y [Central YMCA Community College, Chicago, Illinois].  Now, you were at Central Y?
Speaker 2: I was at Central Y for two years, and--you have a good memory, Central Y, you remember Central Y. I was at Central Y for two years.  And there I, was really the place that I got my GED cause I went to Central Y specifically for that reason.  I had been out of IYC [Illinois Youth Commission] on parole.  I got a job working at Community Discount [store] and Forty-Seventh and Halsted [Streets] as a manager for their men's, for their boy's department.  And--
Speaker 1: It sounds like a good job for--?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a great job.  I mean not bad for a seventeen year old that just got out of prison, you know.  But I was able to go in and get the job, and then decided that I wanted to try to move on with my life, you know.  And a friend at that time, Shabazz Perez, Willy Wandich (ph.) was a very good friend of mine, encouraged me to get my GED and go to college.  And that's exactly what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is prior to going to Central Y, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: This is, this is prior to--no--.
Speaker 1: Before you went to Central Y--(unclear) (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Yes, prior to going to Central Y, yeah.
Story_ID: 8016
Speaker 1: When you were a teenager, the arts in the black community, you know, I don't know whether it was going on in Cabrini [Green housing project], but the West, South side kind of blossomed, they had like a black arts movement going on.  On the political scene, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came to town, came to Chicago [Illinois] when you were in high school, I guess.
Speaker 2: --When I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, you weren't in high school.  You were in the--.
Speaker 2: Okay, (laugh).
Speaker 1: --facility, right.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you--were you able to keep up with those events--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --and did you ever (unclear) (simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Very much so.  I mean that, that, that was a part of every--it was part of every, part of our culture.  So it was hard not to keep up with those events.  I mean even in the facility, you would get--we had a television so we could see what was going on in the rest of the world.  And most of the guards at that facility were black, so we had first-hand information as to what was going on.
Story_ID: 8017
Speaker 1: Now, now, this is a tough situation to imagine someone thinking about being a dancer.  Did you think about dance or the arts in, in this facility or did you have any idea-- (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: Not really.  What I thought about in that facility was getting out of there.  I was trying to think about what was gonna happen with the rest of my life.  Dance happened with me very naturally after that because once I was out, there were friends of mine that I had known, actually prior to all--any of this, that I had known when I was much younger, who were taking classes on the North side, okay.  And I happened to go along with them and, well, just to watch what that was all about.  And that's how I got into a ballet class.  I ended up in a ballet class.
Speaker 1: Now, whose class was it that you--?
Speaker 2: There was--his name is [Eldon Day] Ed Parish.  And he was, he had a studio actually up on Kedzie [Avenue] at that time.
Speaker 1: So is this 1967 or '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: This was, yeah, about sixty, '68 [1968], maybe '67 [1967], '68 [1968].  And through Ed's class, I started taking class at, with a woman by the name of Frances, down on Van Buren [Street] and Wabash [Avenue].  She had a corner studio there, Frances Alice was her name.  And that was a modern class.  So I kind of found my way to dance through friends that were taking dance.  And there was always something.  I was one of those kids that could always move well.  I could always dance well.  I could always--in terms of neighborhood dance, I out dance anybody in the neighborhood.  So for me it was a natural, kind of a natural progression to move in that direction, artistically, to the, to the artistic end of dance.
Speaker 1: What were some of the dances that were out when you were a teenager that you could do?  I mean--?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, well, one of the big dances was the twist, of course, the slide, the jerk, and just freestyle, freestyle was pretty, pretty big when I was much younger.
Speaker 1: Now, they hadn't started to [pop and] lock and that sort of thing yet, right?
Speaker 2: No, they hadn't started [popping and] locking yet.  That came, that came a little later.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was wondering if--did you have, did you--were you aware of the dance world, really, as a profession, you know, when you were that age or did you--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really, I mean that was all, that was all very alien to me.  It was all very alien to me.  And actually, I did not really learn about the dance world until I had started taking classes, as I said, with these other people. And found out that there was this whole area of the arts that was called 'dance'.  And that's how I got, became involved in it.  I ended up, actually, leaving Chicago [Illinois] and moving to New York [New York] to study dance.
Story_ID: 8018
Speaker 1: Now, when did you move?
Speaker 2: That was about '69 [1969], maybe '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Now, were you considered pretty good by this time?  I mean did you?
Speaker 2: I had studied, but I wasn't really good.  I wasn't really good until I got back from New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Did you think you were really good (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I always thought I was really good.  It didn't take--I mean, I, I thought I was fabulous all the time.  But--and at that time, I really was fabulous because there weren't that many African American dancers in the city of Chicago [Illinois] who were dancing.  There were three of us, to that extent, who were in the dance arena as it was called at that time and that--who were African American, four of us; myself, a gentleman by the name of Joseph Holmes, who directed Joseph Holmes DanceTheater, and there was a gentleman by the name of the Alyo Tolbert, who directed Muntu Dance Theater [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  He was the original artistic director of that company.  And we were all like very close friends, so we knew each other.
Speaker 1: And all did well too?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: All of you all did exceedingly well, too.
Speaker 2: All of us did well, yes.
Story_ID: 8019
Speaker 1: It's the aspiration of many people that were in the arts to go to New York City [New York].  That's no mystery, but how did you--did you have friends there already or how were you gonna support yourself in New York or did you worry about that or--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't worry about it.  Actually, I had taken--as I said, I had taken dancing with Frances Alice and with [Eldon Day] Ed Parish, and Nana Shineflug here in Chicago.  She had a modern studio that was downtown on Wabash [Avenue].  And there I met Denise Jefferson.  Now, Denise Jefferson was from Chicago [Illinois] also, moved to New York and became the director of Alvin Ailey Dance School [New York, New York].  So she ran the school in New York.  I wanted to go to New York because, to me, the whole essence of dance was Alvin Ailey.  The kind of dancer that I aspired to be and who I really wanted to be like as a choreographer was Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 1: Where did you first see--do you remember when you first saw Alvin Ailey's group perform?  Was it on--was it live or on TV?
Speaker 2: It was here at the Auditorium Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  I saw Alvin Ailey perform, I guess it was in the late '60's [1960s] here.  And I had never seen black people on a stage that commanded the stage in that manner, ever before in my life.  I mean, I had seen it on film with Katherine Dunham in "Cabin in the Sky" and, you know, I had seen a lot of dance on film.  But in terms of live dance, that was my first experience, was with seeing a company that I wanted to, to aspire to.  And I remember all of my early work, even being based upon--I mean I studied Graham.  I went to take Graham classes, and I studied Martha Graham--.
Speaker 1: Martha Graham.
Speaker 2: --just to learn how to move like that cause I wanted to move like that, not necessarily to want to dance in his company, but to move like that, to choreograph my own stuff because I was always a person that liked to construct things.  I think--and it was very interesting that, from that experience I wanted to see everything that pertained to dance.  Any kind of dance that came here, I wanted to see it.  And I saw a lot, lot, lot of dance back in the late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s]. And then, of course, in New York, you get to see everybody perform because everybody's in New York.  And everybody's taking class in New York.  So not only are you seeing them perform, but you're also taking class with these people.  So there was, that was, that was a very, very, very interesting period of growth for me as a choreographer and as a, an artist, and learning to watch and listen and learn as much as I possibly could.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet [choreographer] Talley Beatty?
Speaker 2: I met Talley in about 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a little bit after you, your initial--?
Speaker 2: This was after I had left New York.  I met Talley here in Chicago, and I had met Talley by inviting him here because I had seen his work.
Story_ID: 8020
Speaker 1: How were you supporting yourself when you, in New York, were you--?
Speaker 2: Had a job at Zoom Zoom restaurant in New York [New York], managing a restaurant at 59th, at 58th and Broadway.  And I would work practically all day and take class in the evenings.  That's how I was able to support myself.  I lived at the 'Y' [YMCA], and took class every day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I ended up leaving New York because I--the opportunities for work in that field started to grow, and I didn't want to do that.  I did not want to continue in that area.
Speaker 1: In the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Of restaurant management.  I was one of the very few African Americans that were managing a restaurant in New York City in those days, of that nature.  And that was for a group called, something like Lettuce Entertain You here [in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get a job like that?  That's a--?
Speaker 2: I just went in and--.
Speaker 1: --and you were manager of a clothing store here (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: I saw an ad in the newspaper.  And I saw an ad, an ad for restaurant manager.  And I went in and applied for the job, and the man gave me the job.  Boom, like that.  And here I was up in New York, managing Zoom Zoom res--restaurant which was a German, I think, owned restaurant, okay.  All of the people in this restaurant were white.  All of the employees except for me.  I was the manager.  So that was, that was a, that was a difficult situation to get through, but I managed to get through it pretty well.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the challenges that you faced?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the challenges was white people having to, you know, do what I asked them to do and getting the job done, and making sure that the, the, the--that all of the books were--my making sure that all of the book and, the books and the paperwork were right every day; my making sure that restaurant was run efficiently and, and that customers were happy when they left, and that business was increasing there, which it couldn't help but increase at 58th and Broadway anyway cause it was on Broadway.  But it was, it was a challenge because it was the first time in which I was in a situation where I was managing people that were Caucasian.  And it was, I think initially there was a strong resentment to the fact that this was happening.  They didn't understand where I came from or why I was there or how I got that job, which I didn't either.  But I had, I had the job so I had to make the best of that situation that I could.  And then on top of all--dealing with that all day, I had to go and take class at night (laughs).  So it was, it was, that was a fascinating situation.  So I opted to leave that area of working, and that's when I moved back to Chicago from New York.
Story_ID: 8021
Speaker 1: What year is this when you moved back?
Speaker 2: Let's see, that was about '73 [1973] maybe, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but when you came--.
Speaker 2: No, seventy, seventy--it had to, it had to be '71 [1971] maybe because I had left--it had to be '71 [1971] because I started this in, I started my company in seventy--
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: Four [1974], yes.  So it was about '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when you came back to Chicago [Illlinois], did you feel you sort of had an edge over the Chicago people that were here in terms of having that New York experience or?
Speaker 2: Not an edge.  I felt that I had a, more of an understanding of myself.  I, I've never really felt that I've had an edge or I've never really felt that I had, had a competitive relationship to people in Chicago because I've always been so independently minded in terms of my work.  It has been very, very much about, you know, creating and not what other people were doing, if that makes any sense.  I was more concentrated on learning and putting together than I was on where I was, in terms of status in relation to other people in, in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I felt that there was a kind of status quo here in terms of how people perceived dance, and what they wanted to see.  And I was kind of bucking against that in a lot of ways because, first of all I was an African American man.  Joseph [Holmes] was doing the same thing, but Joseph was a little more traditional because he came at it through modern.  So it was a little more acceptable.  I came at it through jazz, which was not necessarily acceptable.  So--not that either one of us had an easier, easy time because it was a very, very difficult period in Chicago, or any place for that matter.  But I have always felt it very important to stay focused in that direction.  Even though I studied modern, and then I studied ballet to learn those areas, and I studied--well, I studied African.  I studied [Katherine] Dunham, I studied everything that I possibly could to get information and to get material so that I can do my work.  And I felt the more vocabulary I had, the more--the better the work would be because I could speak to a broader audience or I could articulate better because I knew more, many more words.  So my concentration was on what I was doing, and it has been for the past thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--now, the theater scene in Chicago has really just grown, and--.
Speaker 2: Tremendously.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I don't think that, well, Chicago in the, say, in the early '70's [1970s] wasn't quite as known for theater as it is now.  I mean so it's been a lot of growth, and you were certainly part of that growth, you--yourself, Joseph Holmes and Alyo [Tolbert] and other folks involved in dance, Darlene Blackburn and others who were involved in dance in those days.  So, and I was sort of amazed when I came to Chicago in the late '70's [1970s] to see so many dance groups headed up by black people.
Speaker 2: Well, the--my initial--I--my company started as Chicago City Theater Company [Chicago, Illinois].  It was co-directed by myself and Joseph Ehrenberg. Joseph Ehrenberg was my partner at the time.  And he did the theater aspect of the organization that we had created, and I did the dance aspect.  But we concentrated on doing theater that was classical theater using black and Hispanic actors in lead roles.  And we were the only theater company at that time in Chicago on the North side or any side for that, for what I knew, that really used black actors because at that time, black actors were not on stages in Chicago.  I mean if you went down to, to Lincoln Avenue, you wouldn't see black people in those theaters, either as audience members or as, as, as actors.  So there was not really the opportunity in Chicago for actors to act outside of kind of what we were doing at that time.  And the same thing was true of the company.
Story_ID: 8022
Speaker 1: Well, Chicago's [Illinois] a polarized city in a lot of respects, and in those days a lot of the black groups either remained black completely and the white groups remained white basically.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you find yourself in an integrated kind of a setting.  How did that happen and what were the dynamics of that, do you think?
Speaker 2: The way that happened was through the environment in which I was involved because most of the dancers that were taking class at that time were white, that were taking class on the North side where I was taking class.  So a lot of the dancers that I came into contact with in terms of working, in terms of getting jobs or performance, were white dancers.  And then when I started my company, I wanted a company that was not white because I wasn't white.  So I had to find dancers that were not white to put in my company.  And that's where I began to attract to classes that I was teaching, black and Latin dancers that I--were [sic, was] eventually able to put into the company, to train to the level that I could get them to the company.  That took quite, that took quite a bit of time.  I mean it wasn't anything that happened over night.  Now, my organization, after all this period of time, is just that.  It's that slice, that same slice that it was back in the 1970s of putting all of these different people together.  That's what the organization has been representing all of this time and it now represents at this time.
Story_ID: 8023
Speaker 1: So, you start your group in '74 [1974], basically.  How, well, what were some of the highlights of those early days?
Speaker 2: Of the early days?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think the highlights were probably our performances at Francis [W.] Parker [School, Chicago, Illinois], here on the North side to always full houses every performance that we did.  And we would give performances there for a week, and every seat would be sold for every performance.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how--?
Speaker 2: But at that time, there was a lot of dance going on, and people were very excited to go to dance.  It's a very different time now, that we live in.  We live in a more technological period, and people can turn it on and see it on television or go to their computers and log into some company in some other country, you know what I'm saying?  Or they can stre--stream it or whatever they call it.  So it's much more accessible than it was at that time.  And somehow, now the challenge is creating those same kinds of audiences in this technological period.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--were you able to work full time as a dancer and choreographer--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --from '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: From '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I always made a living as a, as a dancer, and as a choreographer and as a teacher of chorus.  And I started the school in '76 [1976].  So that has been a source of income for, you know, for the company and the, and myself because I've been able to teach, and I've been able to hire teachers to teach.  So now we have one of the largest dance facilities in the city with one of the largest student enrollments in the city.
Story_ID: 8024
Speaker 1: Did you know any of the other black Katherine Dunham dancers in the city.  I know Lucy Ellis was here--.
Speaker 2: Lucille, yes, I knew Lucille.
Speaker 1: Tom Gomez.
Speaker 2: I knew Tommy very well
Speaker 1: And the custom designer, I know he's--.
Speaker 2: Wilford Bradley.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Wilford, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew all of them very well.  Ms. Ellis, not so--not as well as I knew Wilbur and Tommy and, well, of course, Talley.  But, and there was another gentleman from Ms. Dunham's company who was in East St. Louis [Illinois].  I can't remember his name.  He passed away.  I knew him also.  He was, he was living--he was coming back and forth to Chicago [Illinois].  But yeah, I knew Tommy very well.  Tommy and I were very close friends also.  I did not know Ms. Ellis as well, but Talley was very, was close with all of them as well.  So.
Speaker 1: So you said that Talley Beatty was kind of, was a mentor of yours--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, Talley kind of, was very encouraging to me because I was kind of very discouraged early on here in Chicago because a lot of the attention I felt were going to white companies.  And I always that I had to like go above the fray and go overboard to prove something.  People were expecting me to prove something by having a company.  And I've always kind of focused at concentrating on what I was doing because people like Talley would say, Joel, you know, you just keep doing exactly what you're doing because what you're doing is good work.  Not a lot of people were saying that to me at that time, who were in the profession.  Certainly, the audience was.  The audience was always there saying that.  But people in the profession were not necessarily encouraging because the profession was so tight, and everybody was begging for the same dollars or the same nothing that was available.  So not that I was looking to them for that, but Talley was just a person that walked into my life at the right time and said--was very helpful.  He set a work on my company that is an original work, that I still perform to this day.  And he's, he was a brilliant, brilliant, brilliant artist that was very, very encouraging to what it was I was trying to accomplish here.  And I think the main reason that he was, was because he, he was from here too and knew how difficult Chicago can be.  And Talley, I identified with a lot because he had the same struggle in going out and becoming Talley Beatty through, in a world that was not looking at black dance at all.  So.
Speaker 1: A lot of his work was performed by--.
Speaker 2: Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 1: --Alvin Ailey--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which provided an outlet for a lot of his creations.  So, now, you say it was difficult for a black dance company in Chicago [Illinois].  Was it hard to get reviewed or was it hard--?
Speaker 2: It was hard, yeah, it was hard to get reviewed.  It was hard to get reviewed.  And then we would get reviews like, well, if they move their hips one more time--what kind of review is that?  Well, black people--that's part of our movement makeup, that we move our hips (laughs).  And I think that--I mean it's really interesting that a lot of people, I think, who were critical or called, were called critics of dance really had no real background or information on what it is they were critiquing, but were hired as more journalist in the area to critique dance rather than people who really studied or knew or who had spent time in the studio or had spent time knowing dance or knowing dancers who really knew these people.  Most, most of these people were people who were writing from the outside of the profession about the profession.  And that's why we would end up with some people that were saying things that had nothing to do with what it was you were doing on stage.
Story_ID: 8025
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts on how--you probably do, about how black dancers have influenced modern dance?
Speaker 2: Well, absolutely.  I think black dance has influenced every part of modern dance because all of the early--Dennis Shawn and all those people were studying ethnic dance in order to create modern dance.  So a lot of the influences of dance generally, even I think in classical ballets in Africa, I think that--my personal feeling is that everything emanates from Africa, the world, people that emanate from Africa, so why not the dance?  Everything is based upon Africa, from the very, very beginning.  Why not the dance?  So when I look at modern dance or I look at Indian dance or I look at ballet, classical, even classical ballet, I'm looking to me at black dance indirectly.
Speaker 1: Now, what you were describing earlier reminded me of a book by Nelson George about black basketball.  He called it 'Elevating the Game', where he talks of--in the book he describes how Nate "Sweetwater" Clifton passed the ball behind his back in a scrimmage when he was hired by the New York, I think Knicks, and some of the white players wanted to fight cause they said, you're not supposed to do that in basketball, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And (laughs), but is there, there's a tendency, I think maybe to--do you think there's a tendency to like codify something, that this is the classical form of this.  And if you go, if you do something else, you're wrong.  Is that what it--?
Speaker 2: No, I, I kind of think--.
Speaker 1: You said, it was hip shaking and dancers (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you all can't do that, right, cause it--?
Speaker 2: I think it's like, well, you know, it's not even, they don't even want to elevate it into artistic level, you know.  It's like, okay, well, is this really dance?  Well, yes, it is dance.  It's, it's dance.  And I have really learned a lot about a lot of different forms of dance enable--to enable me to come to the stage with some clarity as an artist.  So I, it, it has always bothered me that dance has seemed in a specific way as being only what it is, when it's so much more.  It encompasses street, street dance is dance, you know what I'm saying?  And to me, move--that's where movement emanates from, when I see it on the street.  That's a natural progression, that's cultural, that's what the choreographer is representing.  It's representing the culture in which we live.  So that's where I'm coming from as a choreographer and doing my work.  And now, you know, we've, we've involved ballet training, we've involved modern training, we've involved jazz.  We've involved hip-hop.  We've involved all of these areas into a fusion that we feel takes dance to another place, where it's not classical ballet anymore.  It's not jazz anymore, it's not modern anymore.  It's dance.  And, again, I think that the street plays a very important role in that because every commer--certainly, every commercial aspect of street dance is being utilized--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, in terms of the, the commercials that you see, in terms of our music, in terms of the movement that you see on the street with hip-hop or whatever.  It's right on TV, making millions and billions and billions of dollars.  So, that is art.
Story_ID: 8026
Speaker 1: Who were the prominent dance groups in Chicago [Illinois] then, I mean the white dance groups that are, or the, you know--?
Speaker 2: That are still here?
Speaker 1: That, in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, in those days.
Speaker 1: I think it was Gus Giordano or somebody, and I know it was--who else was here?
Speaker 2: Gus Giordano was here.  Shirley Mordene was here.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Of course, Nana Shineflug, the Chicago Moving Company was here.  Let's see, Joseph Holmes--well, that was later that Joseph was here with me.  Let's see--.
Speaker 1: But Chicago did have a number of nationally-known groups that were--?
Speaker 2: Maggie Cass had a company here.  There were--but they were mostly white, white companies.  So--and, of course, Julian Swain had a company too, but nobody ever talked about Julian's company [Inner City dance Theatre].  Do you see what I'm saying?  Nobody ever talked about, not what Najwa [Dance Corps, Chicago, Illinois] was doing, you see.  But those companies were in existence also.  I don't think Najwa was at that point, but I certainly--.
Speaker 1: She was with Julian Swain, I think, at that point.  I think she and Julian Swain were sort of partners.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 8027
Speaker 1: I felt a little battered around by a lot of what people would come and say after seeing our concerts, you know, because they were very popular.  And people loved to come and see what we did.  People were very supportive.  The audiences were very loud, you know what I'm saying?  They, they enjoyed themselves.  They came and connected with what it was we had to say, whatever it was.  And it was seen almost as too much to go to a Joel Hall Dancers concert because people were gonna be clapping and screaming and--"oh, go ahead, child" and carrying on, you know.  And the, the audience was, were--the audiences at that point had this, these rules of being an audience member.  You do not clap during the piece until the piece is finished.  If something moves your soul, you hold that in.
Speaker 2: Hold your soul in (laughs)?
Speaker 1: Hold your soul, keep your soul until later.  Then when you get outside, you can let your soul go.  Well, for me the, the experience of art is soul.  I want to be moved.  If I go to a dance concert, I want you to touch me.  If I go to hear a music concert, I want to be moved, physically, spiritually, I want to be moved.  When I look at a painting of sculpture, I want to be moved by that and have a feeling about it because otherwise, it becomes something detached from my experience.  I want it to be a part of who I am, part of how I identify myself.  And that's the approach that I bring to my work so that when an audience member, whoever they are come in, that they feel that that is something that they can touch, rather than something that they have to look at and be objective about, but something that they can really participate in and be a part of.  So that's kind of why all that hip stuff comes in because (laughs) that is all very natural progression of African movement.  I am African, my choreography reflects my culture.  So if it happens to have four pirouettes in it, and my hips are moving, it's still dance, as I see it, and as my audience would see it.  So, but as I said, it was a different--that, that was a difficult process for me having to, to assimilate that.
Speaker 2: So you have a company that's exciting and popular--?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --but not respected on the level of other companies until you go to New York [New York]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: In the early--?
Speaker 1: Well, and even after that.  I mean I've always felt, but New York really opened my eyes because when I got there--well, my eyes had been opened in New York prior to that, but when I took my company there--.
Speaker 2: And this is, this is '86 [1986]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the '80's [1980s], mid-'80's [1980s].  When I took my company there, all of a sudden people were looking at my company as a company and not as a dance troupe in Chicago.  A troupe of dancers, which has always been very--I've always been terribly offended by that because I think of a troupe as a platoon or something, you know, that you would--and they, I think, at that time, they would call it a dance troupe.  Well, I called my company a dance company because it was a company, and it is a company.  And when I took the company to New York, I remember standing in the Joyce Theater, opening night.  My heart was in my feet with fear.  I was so nervous that I was pacing downstairs in the dressing room before curtain, thinking, this is my opening night in New York.  We went out on that stage and slammed it so tough that the revues were incredible.  They loved the company.  They loved the choreography because it was different.  It was not in the New York vernacular  because I believe that dance is regional.  In certain areas of the country people do different things at different times, all, or at the same time.  There can be three different ways of doing something, East Coast, West Coast, Midwest, South, North, do you know what I'm saying?  So we were taking an approach in jazz that had not been taken in New York, and people were able to recognize it for, for being that, which gave me the incentive to further take my company outside of the United States.  And did a ten-year tour of Europe to different countries.  Dance is a language.  Black dance is a language that speaks our culture to Chinese people who do not speak English, but they understand a feeling.  They understand an emotion.  They understand an expression of movement that is different from theirs, but communicates.  So I--it, it was a real lesson for me to learn that because, you know, being home grown can sometimes stump you and hold you in a place where if you stay in that place, you might not be able to break out of it.  But you musn't let that happen.  We must always be willing to stretch ourselves outside of what we're thinking because usually there's something else out there, other than what appears to be (unclear).  And as I said, in Chicago [Illinois] at that time, there were certain rules.  And even today, there are certain rules.  This coming Monday I'm going to receive an award from the, a life-time achievement award from the Chicago dance and music community which I'm overwhelmed about.  I've been doing this for thirty years, loved it, every single second of it.  I'd do it for another ninety if I have the opportunity.  And this is a very meaningful award in that it's, it's coming at a good time.  But my whole life has been about always seeming to think that other people want me to prove something to them, when I feel that I have to prove something to myself.  And I feel that the people around me, the people that work with me, my dancers, my students have to prove something to ourselves about who we are as opposed to what we have to prove to other people, which is not very much.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're your own keenest competition in that sense then, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I really feel that the, the competition that I have is within me.  How can I make something better or different or how can I challenge myself as opposed to how can I challenge someone else.  I'm not interested.  What I'm interested is in how far I can take my consciousness?  Where can I go in my thinking?  How can I broaden myself, how can I read more?  How can I learn more?  How can I produce more?  How can I give more to other people, as opposed to how can I get more.  And what I've gotten has been a result of what I've been giving, I think.  So my gift is, the gift of what I have received is giving.
Story_ID: 8028
Speaker 1: When you came back from New York [New York], what have been the, I guess the high points in the development of your company since you--that return from New York City and the, and--?
Speaker 2: I think the high points have been that the--there's no real specific point.  I mean every day to me is a high point.  And each day is, each week is better than the last week, even though what happened last week was a fire--.
Speaker 1: Here in--?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I had a fire in which I lost the business completely.  We lost the school, we lost our costumes of twenty years.  We lost the, the, the--all of my records, all of the archives.  We lost all the photographs.  We lost everything of twenty years.  Then the following year, I lost my partner.  So--but even in those losses, there was gain because what came out of the loss was better than what the loss was.  I, I don't know if I can explain, if, if I've explained that clearly, but it gets better, not, not worse.  And even the worst parts are there for a reason.  The reason the worse parts are there is so that I understand when the good parts are good.
Speaker 1: Okay, so nothing's really stopped, stumped you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  No, nothing will, until it's time.  Then, of course, everything stops at some point.
Speaker 1: What are your favorite pieces that you've choreographed?  What are, well, what, can you describe some of them for us and name them?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, one of my very favorite pieces is 'Night Walker', which chor--was choreographed in, I believe '75 [1975] or '76 [1976].  'Night Walker' was a street piece--actually, it was based on street people, ladies of the evening and gentlemen of the evening, but not a--there was, there was no sleaze associated with that as much as period that was associated with it.  And the costuming was actually forties [1940s], and the piece was set for a for--forties [1940s] period; wonderful, wonderful work.  Another favorite piece was 'Why Today', which is a piece based around a nation of people, if you will, of different people, all at a table discussing the world and how, what the outcome of the world will be.  And there's an animosity and an exchange that happens between all of these ga--nations over this table.  And at the end of the piece, they end up in unison in a very dynamic, forceful, fabulous closing.
Speaker 1: Now, when was this piece choreographed?
Speaker 2: That was done actually, I think in the year '99 [1999], maybe.  There are works from, I mean there are works from different periods.  There's a work called 'Moses' that was choreographed in the early '70's [1970s].  There's piece called "Tadien" that was also choreographed in the late '70's [1970s].  A lot of my early works I like a lot, a lot because they were very raw, and they were very in the period of whatever it was that was happening at that time.  A lot of people said that my work had social commentary.  Well, it would have because I, because I'm a social person, being.  So, through many pieces, I, I really can't--you'd have to ask somebody else, I think what their, what their favorite piece would be.  I, I really like all of my works.  I'm very critical of them, and I try to be as objective as one could be about something that they've created and standing back and looking at it.  But I often look at my work and try to be, not the person doing the work, but the person experiencing the work.  So to remove myself so far back, to stand back so far that I can actually look at that stage and see something that's not even me, but see something that an audience person who isn't me, would see is what I try to accomplish.
Story_ID: 8029
Speaker 1: Now, do--I know in those days, you were performing the work as well as choreographing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you still performing?
Speaker 2: I don't perform anymore.  My work now is primarily teaching and choreographing and mentoring young, aspiring choreographers and dancers to the profession.
Speaker 1: Looking back at some of the people that you've worked with--I know you can't name them all, and I don't want to put you on the spot where you name some and not others, but who are some of the people that kind of just stand out in your mind at this moment, in terms of who you've worked with in the past in your company?
Speaker 2: In my company?  Let's see, Senora Richardson, who ended up with Cleo Parker Robinson in Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Denver.
Speaker 2: Will Grant, who ended up at Dallas Black [Dance Theater, Dallas, Texas].  Let's see, Vanessa Truvillion of course, Merrick Mitchell who are members of the company, Nancy Teinowitz who's been with me for many years; Daniel Ruiz, Mildred Rivera, Natalie Rast, let's see, Duwane Pendarvis, oh, god, there's a--you know, they had a, they had a thirtieth year celebration for me last year, a surprise at my concert.  I did a fall concert.  And they had this thing where I thought I was coming to see my work, which I had set for this concert, and I walked into the theater, and I'm looking at the stage, and I'm wondering why these--my pre-set is not set up on stage for the concert to open.  And the dancers had, had put together a reunion of all of these dancers over the past thirty years that have danced in this company.  And the stage was full with, like a hundred people.  Those are not all of the dancers that dance with the company, but a hundred of the dancers who had danced through--with the company over these years.  And all of them ended--they would call their names, and then they would say what year they--no, the person would turn around.  They started with their backs to the audience.  The person would turn around and say, my name is so and so, and I danced with the Joel Hall Dancers in nineteen so-and-so.  That was one of the most overwhelming experiences that I've ever had in my life because all of a sudden before my eyes, I was able to see a  calm--culmination of all of this energy, and all of these people from different periods, all on the stage at the same time.  And it really brought a reality to me that I had actually been doing this for thirty years, which is a very, very long time for anybody to be doing anything.  I'm very privileged and honored to be still doing it.  But, it really put something on my mind about it because it's a bit overwhelming.  I'm fifty-five, so that's over half my life easily.
Story_ID: 8030
Speaker 1: Who are some of the upcoming talents that you've been associated with that you, are on the horizon here?
Speaker 2: That are coming up now?  Well, certainly, Kirby Reed, that's one of my babies.  [Terence] T.C. Carson from 'Living Single'.  I think certainly Vanessa Truvillion who is my associate director, brilliant choreographer. She did--she's done film choreography.  Let's see, chor--choreographers, Angel Abcede is a wonderful choreographer who's come out of here.  And those, those are immediate people, Melissa Thodos is out of my school and out of my program.  She has a company here now in the city that's very well known.  There have been a lot of people that have come through here that either have companies or have started companies as a result of or have somehow come through this, this conduit into the arts.  And that's not only here, but it's like all over the place, all over the country and other parts of the world as well.  So there are many, many, many people that I can't even name, Kim Moke in Germany--there are, there're a whole bunch of people that came through here that, you know, started as--there was one gentleman that started as a beginning student--. (break in tape)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was one gentleman that began as a beginning student with me and, many years ago.  And I was in New York, I kept hearing this name.  I mean this guy was a beginning student, first-level student.  I kept hearing this name about this Broadway, this guy on Broadway who was just fabulous, fabulous, fabulous, fabulous.  And I heard the name, and I thought, well, that's interesting because that's someone that I know or that's someone who has a name the same as someone that I know.  And it turns out to be that person who became a big, an entrepr--well, now, he's an entrepreneur off-Broadway, but did Broadway and now has a--a dance business where he's making dance music, music for dance and selling products related to dance.  Now, a lot of what we do here at the school at this point is teach young people how to move forward in this field.  Even with very simple skills like answering the telephone, which a scholarship student has to do or like taking attendance for class.  They're learning actually the business of how to run a business, a dance business.  So there are, there're, there're a lot of things that I feel that we're doing here at the school besides dance, per se, as a company.  We're training and teaching and really pushing the people as far as we can to make them our next wave of, of choreographers and dancers.
Story_ID: 8031
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite or a favorite dancer, performer or company besides your own, outside of your own?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several.  One is Alonzo King, Lions Theater Dance, in, in San Francisco [California].  Another, of course, Alvin Ailey [American Dance Theater, New York, New York], Cleo Parker Robinson Dance in, in Denver [Colorado].  Dallas Black [Dance Theater, Dallas, Texas], Philadanco [Philadelphia Dance Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is an unbelievable company.  Let's see, the--Jose Limon [Dance] Company is still one of my favorite companies.  And I like classical companies.  There is, of course, New York City Ballet [New York, New York], which I like very much.  There's Joffrey Ballet here in Chicago [Illinois], who I like very much.  There are actually companies all over the world, but those are the companies that can come to mind immediately for me as companies that I really enjoy watching.  As I say, when I go to a concert of dance, I really want to be moved in some direction.  I don't go simply for the line or for the technique, but I go for the enrichment experience of being enriched by the art as opposed to be awed or enthralled by it.
Story_ID: 8032
Speaker 1: Okay, sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my main hope and concern, my hope is that the African community--the African American community will realize that we are, all of us, are a heritage of where we are really from and who we really are.  A lot of times we get lost in where we came from, not in terms of trying to be someone else other than who we are, but from whence we came from.  And we are the originators of all that I think exists right now, that we see on this planet.  We are the reason that it exists.  It is my hope that we realize our greatness, and that we're able to act upon that, and, and know, with confidence that we are who we are.  My concern is that we are, in fact, able to do that.  In light of all of the things that might come at us to make that not happen.  And I'm not speaking about any people, but I'm speaking about the way we've been assimilated here into this culture, you see.  I, I'm concerned that we are gonna go on the past, rather than on the future.  And we need to be thinking about what's next, the next generation, the next idea, where we move from here.  So my hope is that we will be able to wake up and see who we really are, and my concern is that we, in fact, do that.
Story_ID: 8033
Speaker 1: Now, did your--how did your family--now, they probably--did they have any inkling that you'd become a dancer and how they felt about your success?
Speaker 2: No, my mother, my mother [sic, stepmother Annie Laura Young] particularly, never thought I would be a dancer.  She, she thought I would be a doctor.  That's what my mother wanted me to be, a doctor, I'm pretty sure of it--my stepmother.  And I think, in my family, being a dancer was like, that's not anything that you're gonna be able to make a living at.  So what are you, what are you, what are you thinking about, you know.  But I wasn't in dance to make a living.  I was in dance to learn about the art form.  So, I think that's the dilemma really for a lot of young artists now.  Young people who are aspiring to real artists are learning the craft and learning about the art because it is art, and not because they want to make money doing it.  If it's something that people want to make money at, that's something that they should do.  But with the art of dance or anything, I think that it is something that you really have to give yourself up completely and surrender to in order to be accomplished at it because the minute you start doubting whether or not this is possible or, you know, if I, if I--if I'm able to do this, if I can--is this really something that I'm gonna be able to deal with, it's not gonna happen because you have to know in your heart that that is who you are, that is how you identify yourself.  And that is a problem that I've never, I've never, ever had, worrying about being a dancer.  I never had to worry about making money doing it because that was--money was not my concern.  Money was there when I needed it to be, not a lot of it, but enough of it for me to be able to learn my work, that I never really felt pressured for money, although as I get older, I feel more pressure for it now (laughs).  But I feel it in a different way.  My pressure for it now is still in terms of the art.  It's still in terms of how will I secure the dollars that I need to continue my work, to do the, to do the profession, rather than to learn the profession, to be the profession.  So that's where funding comes in, and that's always a dilemma because funders see art in certain ways, traditional ways.  Anything that is new is different, and there is a lot to be said about difference so I think it's a very good idea.  But finding dollars that, enough dollars that can come in to support your ideas for what it is you want to create, is always a very difficult feat.  So that's the concern that I have for money.  My personal concern for money does not exist.  I mean I, it does, but very superficially because I'm most concerned with how do I keep this thing, this, this ecco-system together that, that I'm involved with here, and how does that perpetuate itself and how do we get dollars to actually feed that since dollars is what we need in order to make it work?
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you think that your entrepreneurial background in your family helped you do this?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.  I've never really considered myself a business, businessman though.  I've always considered myself--I mean I'm, I've learned more about business since my partner passed away because he was the one who really did all of the books and handled all that stuff.  And I was able to go out and create the work.  But now that I've had to be at the other end, I think that--I certainly look back to my mother and father's entrepreneurial spirit and realize that was, that probably is part of my thinking and that I don't think it consciously, but subconsciously, I think it would be, and that I'm successful at what I do because of other people, not necessarily myself, and that it is because of pulling the people together in order to make it work is where my success lies, and having the brain power outside of myself in the areas outside of myself, that I'm most not familiar with, that is what really makes it work for me, and being willing to share with that and not be intimidated by the fact somebody else has a better idea, or that somebody else has an answer to the question that I didn't have an answer to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: So, I think that, that, that is what has kept me in business for thirty years as a, as an artist.  And if I'm gonna survive, because I look at every day as a survival, every year, I look at as another year of surviving, that--which I hope doesn't fail at some point.  It's harder to fail now because it's been so long.  It could have failed easily within the first five years of doing it, as every business does, as every artist does.  But it didn't.  So--
Story_ID: 8034
Speaker 1: When you look back on all of these years, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't do a thing differently.  As a matter of fact, I'd repeat the same thing about ten times, magnify it about ten times.  That's what I would do differently.  I would magnify it about ten times because everything that has happened all during this, all during my whole life, has been so wonderful and so--has, has just been wonderful.  There're, there are not--I just can't find the words to express exactly what it is I want to say, but even all of the stuff that we might consider to be ugly, like this thing that I, we talked about, about my mother and, and all the stuff in early childhood growing up, has, that has all been wonderful stuff to help me be the person that I am.  And the reason that I am who I am is because of all that.  So I'm very glad that all of it happened, and if I could be a greater person than I was, than I am now, it is to only have magnified that, all of that, that would have made me greater.  And that's what I'd like to--I think it's a very important point to make, that none of this is--there is noth--nothing negative about it.  If you look up on my wall, it says, "just say no to negativity."  That is a true statement.  I spent a lot of time encountering negative ideas and negative thoughts about being black, about being gay, all of those issues were very constricting things to have to deal with.  But I had switched my mode of how would--how I'd approach it in that I let it be a problem for others, rather than for me.  And if someone has a problem with that, that is their problem, and not mine.  So in training myself to think that way, I think that I've been able to avoid a lot of, a lot of difficult pain that would be associated with both being black and being gay, particularly in the time that I grew up in.
Story_ID: 8035
Speaker 1: Okay, and when you were, then the dance company was at, was at its, was growing to its height, I guess during the, when the, the time when the AIDS epidemic came in.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And a lot of people in the arts were really affected by that.  Do you have any comments about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I, certainly, it has devastated our community completely.  There is a whole layer of people my age level that are missing, who were artists, completely wiped off of the face of the earth.  Boom, gone.  And I feel very privileged to even be on the planet, number one, in spite of any, any medical issues.  I am at this point dealing with prostate cancer in my life, which is a new and interesting challenge.  And fortunately, I caught it at a time that I was able to be able to do something about the fact that it has occurred, but many, many, many men do not have that opportunity.  And I see, through this treatment that I'm going through presently that they just don't ever go to check.  And that's the reason that they don't know.  And by the time they do go to check, they're laying on a slab.  And it's a little bit too late.  So it's, this, this issue with cancer that I mentioned, it had always been a word that was outside of my world in terms of per--anything personal.  I mean my father died from liver cancer, and my mother died from natural causes, my real mother.  But I didn't somehow associate that with, with my ever having cancer.  And all of a sudden, boom, one day you have cancer.  Well, and then what do you do about that?  How will you approach that?  How you--how will you deal with that and how does that affect your work?  How does that affect your art?  It'll be interesting to see what happens over the next several years and how that has affected me.  But I feel stronger as a result of having this experience.  I feel that I have had it, and I'm glad that I had it when I did because I would rather have had it now than had it later when they could not have done anything about it. So my advice to you, my brother, is to go get a PSA [prostate specific antigen] every year, just to know, for your own information where you stand because in African American men particularly, we never go.  The reason we never go is because--well, there are many reasons.  The primary reason is because of the Tuskegee experiments, really.  But we are--.
Speaker 1: And that's among those who should know better.  They know about--they've read enough to know about that, so they don't go, but--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but those who don't know any better never go anyway.
Speaker 2: But they do know better as a result of that.  I mean see, they don't know any better because, because that happened, even though we don't know why African Amer--American men do not go to doctors.  That would be the reason, handed down through generations without even mentioning it, by the behavior of our fathers and mothers and uncles and aunts.  They never went, so why should we go?  So even though, and even if they don't know the story, there's a reason for everything, you see.  So as I said, I was fortunate enough to be able to catch it at a time that they feel that they're able to do something about it.  So I'm, right now in a holding period before I go in for something called implant in which they implant radiated pellets into the prostate and kill the rest of the cancer.  But I've had five weeks or radiation, external, which has been a very different kind of experience for a person to go through.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, again, I'm better--I'm better, I feel, as a result of that experience, just to know that it exists and to know that I can make it through this period.
Story_ID: 8036
Speaker 1: You're still young, really, fifty-five, that's not really very old.  And we, we normally interview people eighty years old and older, when you look back, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that what I am, my legacy will be that of being a teacher, a mentor.  I hope that my legacy will be that of being an artist that is different, that was willing to step outside of the fray and to be who he was regardless.  I hope that it would be that my legacy would be a, an institution that was set to continue to perpetuate itself, that we learned how to support itself, and then continued to support itself, whether I'm there or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my objective now, at fifty-five is looking at how I can begin to make that happen and how I can be-begin to pull those people towards me in my life, that will be comfortable with helping me accomplish that.  I think the Joel Hall Dance [Company] has played a very important role in the development of dance in Chicago [Illinois], particularly, and I don't take any personal credit for that as much as for being just the person that is behind it.  But I give more credence to actually the people who surround me, that helped make that happen.  As I pointed out earlier, I think that no person alone is ever going to be able to do that.  And it's always going to be the people that you, that you bring into your close circle that are, who understand your language and who are on your page, that would be able to help you accomplish your goals.  No single person is able accomplish any goal by themselves, not one.
Story_ID: 8037
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question, and is there anything that we haven't asked that we should--?
Speaker 2: No, I think you've asked everything .  Listen, you got some stuff out of me today that I haven't talked about with, with anyone, I mean other than very close people.  So, this is the--and the reason I felt that it was important to talk about, is because that it is important for people to know the truth, okay, about who I am, and how proud I am of, of the fact that it's the truth.  And as I said, I feel very, very honored to be asked to, to do this.  I think it's quite a privilege.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you for sharing the time--.
Speaker 2: And I hope that people, I hope that people would be able to benefit from this information.
Story_ID: 8038
Speaker 1: Well, we have one last question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is similar to legacy but a little different, and I don't know if you've thought about this, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a person that says, yes, most of the time, that is a person who really cares about the outcome of, not only my situation, but the outcome the world, really, anything outside of myself.  I think that we can cut it right there.  I think that's, that's enough.  I would really like to be thought of as a person that sees something larger than, larger than right here, right now.
Story_ID: 8039
Speaker 1: Tell us about this photo, then?
Speaker 2: This is photo is a piece, from a piece called 'My Love', and it's to the music of Johnny Mathis called 'Life is a Song Worth Singing', and it is a piece that I choreographed--it was one of my very early works, one of my very first pieces that I set.  And I always kept that photograph because it was one of the first works that I did.
Speaker 1: What was the date?
Speaker 2: The date was probably sixty--I can't give you date, probably sixty--let's see, '67 [1967], sixty--maybe '67 [1967], '68 [1968], something like that.
Speaker 1: [Joel Hall in 'My Love', a dance performance he choreographed, ca. 1967-1968. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8040
Speaker 1: Okay, this piece is a piece that was done for my company by Ruth Page called 'Chain of Fools', and that is me dancing with a doll and the dancers are Yvonne Naparalla (ph.), who was with a company from Poland, and Jane Hine.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall in a dance performance of 'Chain of Fools' with Yvonne Naparalla and Jane Hine, not dated, from the collection of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8041
Speaker 1: And this piece is Joel Hall again in, in 'My Love again, it's from the same, the piece that I choreographed, that I mentioned earlier.  I did that piece for several years actually.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall in a dance performance, 'My Love', not dated, from the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8042
Speaker 1: This picture is my partner in crime.  This is Ana Cha Yuen.  She's Ukrainian, a young Ukrainian lady that I partnered with for about ten years, we were dance partners.  And she's a brilliant dancer.  She's a wonderful choreographer, and actually, quite a genius.  And that's a piece that we did called 'Holy, Holy', to Aretha Franklin's 'Holy, Holy'.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall with Ana Cha Yuen in a performance of 'Holy Holy', not dated, from the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8043
Speaker 1: This is a photograph, my very, very, very early years that just is a posed photo-photograph that points out how young I was at one point (laughs), looks like a little boy.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall portrait, ca. 1960s. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8044
Speaker 1: This piece from 'Night Walker', the piece that  I mentioned earlier in the interview.  That's me in the Zoot suit and Senora Richardson at the Francis [W.] Parker [School, Chicago, Illinois] theater.
Speaker 2: Is that in the school?
Speaker 1: That is in that, in that school, right in that school theater.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall performs in a piece called 'Night Walker' at the Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1974-1975.  From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8045
Speaker 1: Okay, and this photograph is a picture of myself and Ann Barzel, the archivist for the Newberry Library and Mr. Gus Giordano of Gus Giordano Dance.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall with Gus Giordano (center) of Gus Giordano Dance and Ann Barzel (left), archivist at the Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 2000-2004. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8046
Speaker 1: This photograph is, let's see, [Joffrey Ballet choreographer] Gerald [P.] Arpino and myself, and I believe that's Frank Chavez, is that Frank?  And Ann Barzel [archivist at the Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall (right) with Joffrey Ballet choreographer, Gerald Arpino (center), Frank Chavez (left) and Ann Barzel, archivist at the Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 2000-2004. From the collection of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8047
Speaker 1: Grandmother on my mother's side when she was a very young woman. And she's absolutely stunningly beautiful.  I can't tell you when that picture was taken cause I have no idea.  It looks, it was, but it's old, and I have a picture of her later too, as she, as she aged, and she's just a beautiful woman.
Speaker 2: Okay, so grandmother on mother's side.  What was her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Emma also.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall's maternal grandmother, Emma Hanzinbraugh, ca. late 1800s. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8048
Speaker 1: That is the photograph of myself and Merrick Mitchell and Vanessa Truvillion.  Both of those are dancers in my company, and we are actually watching an audition of scholarship students.  That photograph was an actual audition--of us observing a scholarship audition.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall (left) with Joel Hall Dance Company members Merrick Mitchell (center) and Vanessa Truvillion (right), not dated, from the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8049
Speaker 1: And this is a photograph, one of my--this is favorite photograph, actually, of my mother and father [Lewis Hall] --well, one of my favorites--there's another favorite too, in a restaurant that they owned down on Chicago Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] in the 1940s.  And if you could look, there you can see what is a hot dog for twenty-two cents,  polish sausage for some, some other amount, a cheeseburger for thirty-one cents.  So, and I think I look like my father actually, very much. He, he's actually holding a cigarette, which I can't believe.  I gave those up--he gave them up too, but he's the reason that I gave them up cause he quit, and I thought, you know, if my dad can quit after all these years, I can do it too.
Speaker 2: Can you get a close up on it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that needs to be probably enhanced in Photoshop or something where you remove that stuff around it.  And that's my mom next to him.  That's Emma Lee [Hall], beautiful woman, very, very sweet.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall's parents, Lewis and Emma Lee Hall in their restaurant on Chicago Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1940s. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8050
Speaker 1: And this is a photograph of my family, on my father's [Lewis Hall] side of the family.  Those are all my aunts and uncles behind us.  That's my step brother on the left-hand side, lower left-hand side, the minister at my father's wedding, of my father's wedding to my mother who's sitting next to my father at the lower level.  That's my stepmother and myself at the very end on the right.
Speaker 2: [Joel Hall's (front row, far right) family celebrating his father, Lewis Hall's (seated, second from right) marriage to his stepmother, Annie Laura Young Hall (seated center), ca. 1950s; All other relatives are unidentified. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8051
Speaker 1: This was a, this is a photograph from, or actually, it's an award that was given for 'Transformations' which was a piece that I did for Northeastern [Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] which was my alma mater.  I went to school there, and the Ruth Page Dancers, they produced a, a piece that I choreographed with, with a solo saxophonist, that--and they gave me this award for doing the piece.
Speaker 2: [Award given to Joel Hall by Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois, September 13, 2001. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
Story_ID: 8052
Speaker 1: And this is a poster, actually from my, I think it as my second tour or third tour of Europe from British Airways.  This is at the Bloomsbury Theater, poster of the Bloomsbury Theater in London [England].  We were invited several years to go and (tape stops).
Speaker 2: [Poster from the Joel Hall Dancers' European tour, London, England, ca. 1980s. From the collection of of Joel Hall.]
