Story_ID: 483910
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Aileen Clarke Hernandez, the Aileen is spelled A-I-L-E-E-N and the Clarke has an E at the end of it.  And it's Hernandez, H-E-R-N-A-N-D-E-Z.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is May 23rd, 1926 and I was born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, were you born in Manhattan [New York] or?
Speaker 2: No, Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Brooklyn, okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well now that's a lot harder to tell you 'cause I've had several along the lines.  Right now I am, I'm an urban consultant, that's my professional background.  But I came through a lot of other things before I got to be this urban consultant.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were at one time the president of NOW?
Speaker 2: I was the second national president of the National Organization for Women from 1970 to 1971, the early part of 1970 to the end of '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: You were on the board of the EEOC?
Speaker 2: I, I was the only woman member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in, when it was first founded.  The law was passed in '64 [1964] and we were appointed in 1965, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you were the first woman and the only?
Speaker 2: The first and only woman um-hm, at that time, they've had women since.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and also the union?
Speaker 2: Yes I actually came to California to work for a union; I was trained by the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union [ILGWU] back in New York, and came to California as an organizer mostly in Los Angeles [California], at that time.  I worked with the union for over eleven years, when I finished; I was the education and public relations director on the West Coast for the union.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: April the 7th, pardon, April the 12th, April the 12th, nine, 2007, I'm going back a ways (laughter).  But it is April 12th [April 12, 2007].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the Af- American Civil Liberties Union [ACLU] office in San Francisco [California], and we happen to be in the office of the person [Dorothy M. Ehrlich] who was the director of the Northern California chapter of the ACLU for about twenty-five years.  She's now in New York City, at a higher level.
Story_ID: 483911
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management require me to ask.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.  The first one is do, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I like food period, all foods are my favorites at this point. I don't have any specific food that I just absolutely adore and don't like anything else no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like red, it's my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I think I like spring best, because things are beginning to open up in spring, and my next best one is, is actually autumn.  So it's in the middle ones not the, I don't like very hot weather and I don't like very cold weather.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I haven't had a vacation in so long (laughter) I can't even answer that question very well.  The last vacation I had was back to my, I guess you would call my ancestors' home, I was in Jamaica.  My mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] and father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] were both born in Jamaica, West Indies, and immigrated to the United States about 1920s.  So I'm a first generation American.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question in this set, set is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well the mot- the motto that came out of my Howard University [Washington, D.C.] class was, let's see if I can get it correct now.  "Ah, but a man's reach should exceed his grasp, but what's a heaven for," [Robert Browning], but I always changed it to, "Ah, but a person's reach should exceed its grasp, but what's a heaven for?"
Story_ID: 483912
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ask about your mother's side and your father's [Charles Clarke, Sr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, Louise Hall, H-A-L-L [Ethel Hall Clarke].
Speaker 1: Hall's her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on May the let's see May the, May the 4th I think it was, May the 4th, 1904.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And what, what town?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I think it was Seville [Jamaica], but I'm not sure what the town was.
Speaker 1: Okay now how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Not very far back because my, my mother's mother died when she was quite young and her father married again.  But I have, I never really got to know that side of my mother's family, because I did not go to the West Indies as an adult until about five years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I never got to meet any of that, that ancestry, on my father's side I did get to meet those.
Speaker 1: Okay, well in your mother's side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's side she had a brother who's--was name was Aubrey [Aubrey Hall] and I did know him, because he moved to the United States too and we got to know him.  And she had a sister whose name I don't know, but who never left Jamaica, so I never got to meet her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She talked about being a girl in Jamaica in those days and wanting things that girls did not do at that point in time.  Especially with a father like hers, she wanted to go on to school, and he didn't think that was useful for a girl.  But I think that had a lot to do with how much she pushed me to do anything I wanted to do later on.  Because she felt restricted by the attitudes of her father back in those days about what girls could and could not do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What, what was her father's name?
Speaker 2: God, I don't know, Ern- I think it was Ernest [Ernest Hall (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That something popped into my mind for some reason, I'm in fact I'm sure it was Ernest.
Speaker 1: So he, he never came to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No he died also, in fact I went back to Jamaica with my mother at the age of about six months, because he died in the same year that I was born.  And she took me back with her to settle his estates in, in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a merchant and traveled all over the world and spoke a number of languages from, but my mother told me about him, and ran a sort of tavern in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so he was, he, he did pretty well he's--
Speaker 2: Yeah he, he was wealthy from that's why we had otherwise I'm sure we would not be going back to settle any estates at that point in time.  So apparently he had some wealth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 483913
Speaker 1: Did she [Hernandez's mother, Ethel Hall Clarke] talk about the, the well--there's gender bias of course, in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That she was to referring to.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what about the racial situation, did she talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, that, I you know Jamaicans are really interesting, 'cause when I went back as an adult, most Jamaicans do not perceive that there's a racial issue.  At least they don't think it's a color issue let me put it that way.  But they did talk a lot about the, well the British control of the island, and why it should not be the British who were controlling it.  And the Jamaicans should, and somewhere in the background everybody says that they're related to everybody in Jamaica.  And my family claims relationships to Manley [Norman Manley] and to Bustamante [William Alexander Clarke Bustamante] too so it's kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, they can be related to Manley or Bustamante?
Speaker 2: Well they, I've, they heard their names but I heard so many other people claim relationships to both of those men I don't know whether it's true or not (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's something that's done quite a bit in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: I liked both of them, I thought that they were sort of interesting to me because they were more Socialists than they were capitalists in those days.
Story_ID: 483914
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] talk about--was she married before she came over to the United States (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No she, but they met in the United States and married; they did not know each other in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Well, well did she have a story about you know tell; tell you why she decided to, to move, or how she came to--
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's father [Ernest Hall (ph.)] married again and he married a woman much younger than he, and she was a, a seamstress.  And there was a Jamaican actress after whom I am named, incidentally the Aileen [HistoryMaker Aileen Clarke Hernandez], well the name comes from her.  I think her name as Aileen Pringle, and, and there was a Jamaican actress who had gone to the United States and this, my mother's stepmother came to the United States to work with her.  To do her wardrobe and to take care of her while she was doing some play in New York [New York] at that time, and my mother came on the invitation of her stepmother.  She was about I guess sixteen or seventeen at that time, and she came and was supposed to persuade the stepmother to go back to Jamaica.  But instead my mother decided she liked to come back to the United States, so she went back home, but then she came back to the United States and worked also in the theater behind the scenes as a seamstress.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right so do you know what theater that she worked for?
Speaker 2: No, I have no idea; probably it does not exist anymore but, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as I said she was a seamstress, one of the things she was brought up in Jamaica, I guess you would call it in the middle class way.  Because they had servants and, she learned all of this, the nice things that girls are supposed to learn like crocheting and sewing and all the rest of it.  So she had a lot of skill in that department, which gave her a, a way to earn a living once she got to the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay now was this a, do you know if this was a black theater or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it had to be it had to be, well I don't think it was a black theater but I think that, I think the actress was very light skinned.  I'd, but like many Jamaicans I'm sure there was some African blood in her somewhere.  But, but I don't, I don't know that it was a black theater as such, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay that would've been in the?
Speaker 2: That would be about say 1918, '19 [1919] about in those, in that era.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I think she was fifteen or sixteen when she first came.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did she, did she have a chance to finish school in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: She finished school but she wanted to go on, but I, I don't quite understand the British system of schooling.  But I think she got through the first standard that you go through; which I guess is something like our, our elementary and, or junior high school.  And she wanted to go to college, but that's when her father said it was wasteful to spend money on sending girls to school, so.  She always regretted that, she always wanted to have gone on to school, and she did do so when she came back.  When she was in the United States, she always took courses in various things, but never got a degree of any kind.
Story_ID: 483915
Speaker 1: Can we have your father's full name?
Speaker 2: His name is Charles Henry Clarke [Charles Clarke, Sr.], as I said with an E.  And he's one of seven children.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: It was that, it was 1901, January, the 8th.
Speaker 1: Okay and where, where in Jamaica was he born?
Speaker 2: I think Kingston [Jamaica] because that's where the family was, so my assumption is that it was in Kingston.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well on my father's, well his siblings he had three sib- three sisters and two brothers, no three sisters and three brothers, 'cause there was seven of them.  His father was a minister, his mother was a homemaker.  And that's about as much as I know about them.
Speaker 1: Do you know what denomination his father was?
Speaker 2: No, I assuming it's Episcopal, just because it was British, British colony and it was probably Episcopal and we were brought up in the Episcopal church.  So I would guess that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  So did, are there any stories on that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah there were always good stories on that side of the family; two of my father's brothers came to the United States afterwards.  So I got to know at least two of them relatively well, one of them was named Kenneth [Kenneth Clarke (ph.)], and he worked, he was in the union.  He was an elevator operator when he came, he was a seaman before that, and then decided that he didn't want to be a seaman anymore.  And when they stopped in the United States, he decided to stay, I'm not sure he was ever a citizen (laughter), as far as I know.  Because I don't think they went through any immigration, but he, he did stay and he was in the United States until his death, so.  All of my father's sisters and brothers were very well educated; they went all the way through.  My dad had the facility of math; he could multiply four digit numbers by four digit numbers in his head.  With, which was always amazing to me 'cause that was not something I could do very easily.  And he was also what I would call a radical of some sort, a very quiet radical, he wasn't the marching type.  But he was a, a Garveyite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He believed strongly in the, the Negro Improvement Association [Universal Negro Improvement Association] approach.  And attended a lot of meetings in the United States.
Speaker 1: Now that's something I, you know, you know, of all people we've interviewed a- and I'm amazed that there aren't many more peop- people whose parents were Garveyites.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Especially in Boston [Massachusetts] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I would think so because the cer- certainly was a movement going in the United States at that particular time.
Speaker 1: It was such a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maybe they just don't tell you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Maybe it was such a huge movement you know--
Speaker 2: It was, it was the most significant movement of that era that's for sure.
Story_ID: 483916
Speaker 1: So your father's [Charles Clarke, Sr.] a member of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the union and you know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my uncle [Kenneth Clarke (ph.)] was a member of the union; my dad had a very interesting occupation.  He came with very few skills he was very bright but he didn't come with any ski- a working class skills.  And so, and it was also by the time he got married it was close to the Depression [Great Depression] era, and so he had a hard time finding a job in the United States.  And went from place to place and finally wind up, saw a sign on the building and finally wind up going in, 'cause they wanted somebody who would just clean up the place, and he went and he got the job.  And did, and did it for quite a while, turned out to be a bristle factory, so my father made bristles all, all his life.  He worked for the Grumbacher art supply company [M. Grumbacher Company] and did all of their brushes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's, yeah I know that name (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a very large company.
Speaker 1: Yeah and its, that's the largest in the United States--
Speaker 2: It's both in Canada and the United States.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the brushes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was quite an expert.  In fact he wound up traveling in many places to help people understand how you handle different kinds of bristles.
Speaker 1: Okay so he started off cleaning up, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah he started out from the ground and because he was very, as I said he was very smart, and very, also ambitious.  And would also want to try something and so as, as they got to know him better in this bristle factory he got to learn more and more about the bristles.  They gave him more and more jobs as he went along, so he didn't start out in the Grumbacher factory but that's where he, he ended his career--
Speaker 1: Now is that--
Speaker 2: --with them.
Speaker 1: --is that, did that kind of open up is where, where he knew a lot of the artists and whatnot?
Speaker 2: Well yeah because the, the when he got to the Grumbacher Company, that was true, that's where the artists were.  The first company he worked for made shaving brushes so, and what's, what was the name of the Mr. Silver [ph.], it was, it was the brussel- the bristle maker was the one who liked him.   And decided that he would you know give him more and more opportunities, and it's a very close-knit little industry.  So everybody got to know everybody and as I said my father got better and better at what he did, and became real expert on how to clean the briss- bristles.  How much you had to put them into lye and other things to get all of the dirt out of them before you could put them into a bristle.  Whether you use sable brushes or what kind of brushes you use, so he became quite well-known in the industry.
Story_ID: 483917
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Ethel Hall Clarke and Charles Clarke, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: The story is what I think probably is true that a lot of people have come from Jamaica or the West Indies, generally.  In those days, the West Indian community was not part of the African American community.  They were not perceived in the same way as people who have been here for a long, long time; they were immigrants, as far as people were concerned.  So there was a very tight knit little West Indian community, and they would meet periodically and they would have dances and stuff like that.  And my mother and father met at one of those dances of, of the West Indian groups.
Story_ID: 483918
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] know Garvey [Marcus Garvey] in, in Kingston [Jamaica]?
Speaker 2: He probably did, he never said he did, but, but I knew that he read a lot of the things about him, and I know that he went to some of the meetings.  So I don't know whether he actually knew him, I'm sure he saw him and, and probably met him in meetings.  But I would not say they were close friends or anything like that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So many Jamaicans and during those days and activists and--
Speaker 2: Yeah and especially around the idea of improvement associations doing for yourself, the idea of you know coming together, and working things, for things for yourself.  Which I think also sort of isolated some of the West Indian communities from some of the things going on in the United States at that time.  Because it was mostly about civil rights at that, in the United States at that time you know, there was so much discrimination going on.
Story_ID: 483919
Speaker 1: What kind of personalities did your parents [Ethel Hall Clarke and Charles Clarke, Sr.] have, who do you think you take after most?
Speaker 2: I probably am a mix of the two of them (laughter). I'm a Gemini and born in the Gemini period.  So I'm one of these people who has a little bit of knowledge about a lot of things.  And I think from the point of view of my personality I'm probably a mix of both my mother and father.  I, I dabble in everything, which is what my mother did (laughter) as well.  But I also have a, a kind of quieter personality in some other areas, so I think I am basically a mix.  What I was really struck by is I look back on my life was how much both of them supported the things that I did.  Even though some of them I'm sure not were not exactly what they thought I should be doing after going through that college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I think they were a little surprised when I decided to become a union organizer that was something new.  Although my mother belonged to the union during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] when she stopped being a homemaker, and, and deiced she had to do her part for the boys who were overseas.  My brother was in the Second World War, and so she went to work in the garment factory 'cause she had real skills in sewing.  And as a result of that, she was a member of the union, so when I decided I wanted to join the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union Training Institute, I had a big plus.  Because my mother had been a member, so this is how I got involved in the union organizations.
Story_ID: 483920
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory, I'm in the middle between three kids, I have two brothers, an older brother [Charles Clarke, Jr.] and a younger brother [Norris Clarke].  And I have memories on both sides of that the, I, I can't think of any memories that I had in my carriage, that's gone (laughter).  I think that one's gone, but I do remember some of the things we did as kids growing up.  My older brother and I were very close in the beginning because he was the big brother, and then I got to be the big sister to my little brother.  So but we, we are been very close family, although we haven't lived close to each other for a long period of time, we stay in touch and have been until my younger brother died a couple of years ago.  But we're, we're very close and have and again because of where we grew up and how we grew up, we did a lot of things together.  The reason I raise that is because I was, my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] and father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] moved from Harlem [New York, New York] to Brooklyn [New York].  And it was in Brooklyn that I was born, and my, my younger brother was also born in Brooklyn.  And Brooklyn in those days was like a country town, right down the street from where we lived, there were cows (laughter) in the street.  And we moved into one of the first, not it wasn't a duplex, small apartment building I would say there were probably six apartments in this building.  They had just built it on this street; so on end was this very large apartment structure, at least very large for those days.  And at the other end of the street, there was a empty sort of lot in which people were, were had cows (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's very most people wouldn't, wouldn't expect that to be true then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very true.
Speaker 1: Rural, rural kind of--
Speaker 2: Brooklyn was quite rural, at that at least the part that I grew up in, it's, the part just that was just as you come over the bridge was probably not like this.  Probably they had apartments and all the rest, but I, I grew up in an area called Bay Ridge [Brooklyn, New York].  Which was very close to the Fort Hamilton [Brooklyn, New York] which was a [U.S.] military base and it was right on the, on the, the bay.  So it was away from the, from what would be the, the most industrial or the most commercial, or the most residential pride of Brock- of Brook- of Brooklyn.  On the way down to Coney Island [New York, New York] that sort of that, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you can get a fix of that where, it's right exactly where they now have the villa, the, what's the name of the bridge, the big bridge that they put there?
Speaker 1: Verrazano Bridge [Verrazano-Narrows Bridge] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Verrazano Bridge, the Verrazano Bridge, it was no bridge in those days, but the, it's very much in that area, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah that is near an [U.S.] Army area.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: My friend who used to live on the base (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, and we were the only black family in our neighborhood, so that was the other part.  So I grew up essentially in an Irish, Scandinavian, Jewish, Italian neighborhood.  Very mixed but we were the only mix that was black.
Speaker 1: Really, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind how you, did, did your parents intentionally do that or they was it just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My parents intentionally decided that they did not want to, to live in Harlem, mostly because it was just too crowded and too busy.  And my mother and father were both from relatively smaller areas and they what and they were talking about a family.  And they wanted to be in a place where they could have more space with the family, so that's, that's why they moved, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that, the, the area's called Bay Rue?
Speaker 2: Bay Ridge, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what, did you grow up in Bay Ridge or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, in different places, but all in Bay Ridge and different streets, we moved several times while I was growing up.  But, but we were always in the Bay Ridge area.
Story_ID: 483921
Speaker 1: This is a question we always ask, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Good Italian food was the smell around, 'cause we lived right next door to a very good friend of mine, who became a good friend of mine as we grew up,  family and her mother was a great cook, in fact I learned most of my cooking in the early days from her.  Because they would always invite me over for Sunday dinner, we ate about five o'clock on Sundays and, and Catholic people ate right after they came home from church.  So I got to eat two dinners on a Sunday, I could eat one at one o'clock with my friends, next door.  And then come back over and eat at my house if I had to, so I can remember that and, and also just the diversity in our neighborhood [Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, New York].  We really had quite a bit of it, and all of us went to school together.  Neighborhoods surprisingly were much more economically integrated as well, I would not say they were racially integrated, 'cause I don't consider one person in the neighborhood (laughter) being integrating the neighborhood.  But, but in terms of the economics, I grew up during the Depression [Great Depression], and so most people were, certainly not in best stages, even the ones that had had money did not have much at that point.  So we had a lot in common, we all went to school together, and my two brothers [Charles Clarke, Jr. and Norris Clarke] and I all grew, grew up in that area.  Went through the same elementary school [P.S. 176, The Ovington School, Brooklyn, New York], separated in terms of high schools, both my brothers went to technical schools.  My older brother went to Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] and my other brother went to something called Straubenmuller Textile High School [New York, New York], which was also a technical school.  I went to an all-girls high school, which was called Bay Ridge High School [High School of Telecommunication Arts and Technology, Brooklyn, New York].
Story_ID: 483922
Speaker 1: --You were talking off, off-camera about I, I guess your family wasn't, I mean your extended family wasn't very close-knit.  And you, you talked about bumping into a first cousin and not knowing he was a first cousin.
Speaker 2: Well we weren't ver- we were not very closely knit because they were not in the United States for the most part.  My, my father's [Charles Clarke, Sr.] sisters came over much later and we lived on the opposite ends of Brooklyn [New York], so we didn't get to know each other.  And my (laughter) also my father's sisters were never very happy that my father married my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke].  So there was this, this sort of tension in between, and I remember my mother telling me at one time when she took me back to Jamaica to get her father's [Ernest Hall (ph.)] estate settled.  That they took advantage of her, they took all of her clothes (laughter) and wore them all the time.  And any time she had a complaint about it they would say, "My, my brother's money bought them, we can wear them if we want to."  So it was a little touchy at that point in time, so I never knew him, but I was invited to a party again, the close West Indian background.  My mother had a close friend who was living on opposite side of Brooklyn and she had a party, and we went to the party.  And I was sitting, drinking a glass of soda of some kind, 'cause we were still kids.  And this young man came by and we stopped to talk for a while, they introduced me to him, had a different last name, obviously.  So we were talking and then my, my friends came by and said, "Ah, I see you two got to meet," and it turned out it was my first cousin.  It was my father's brother's, my father's sister's son; we are very close friends now.  He is in the United States and he lives in very close to California now, he, he just moved a couple of years into California.  He's up in Sacramento [California], but we always laugh about that, 'cause we could've gone right on by (laughter) and not knowing that we were first cousins, if that young woman hadn't stopped us for a moment.
Story_ID: 483923
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of grown up?
Speaker 2: Yeah when we were kids we grew up as Episcopalians and went to St. Philip's Church [St. Philip's Episcopal Church, Brooklyn, New York] wish- which was the neighborhood church.  Went through all the pageants, my brother played in the Christmas pageant and I played in the, in the Easter pageants and we did those periodically.
Speaker 1: Now this, was this a primarily a, a West Indian congregation or?
Speaker 2: No this was a total, this was just a total Episcopalian Church as I said, we lived in the neighborhood where, there were very few people who were not Catholic for the most part.  So it was interesting that we were in the, in the Episcopal church, but we grew up very much with, with that church.  And very, very remember those ministers very well, they were great; I can remember all the positives.  'Cause being in Brooklyn [New York] as the only black family was not necessarily the best situation in the world to be in, we faced discrimination.
Story_ID: 483924
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And I guess when you asked me before, whom do I take after, my--and I said partly my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke].  One part of it is my mother's temper. We had just moved, we had moved from renting in one place and they had just built a new, new set of houses, they in this situation being the bank.  Everybody had a bank that put houses together in those days; it was not developers as we normally see them now.  And we moved from where we were to this new development, it was ex- sort of a single-family home, with a garage underneath it.  And then there was like a row of houses like that, so we moved in, and on one side of me, also moved in my friend from school [P.S. 176, The Ovington School, Brooklyn, New York], Mary Corodo [ph.].  And we got to be real close friends and we were doing fine, and then we, my mother got a note one day, she went to the door.  And there was this note under the door with a long list of names on it saying, "This is a petition that we're putting out in the neighborhood [Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, New York] to have you moved from this area.  We don't want to have niggers in this area." Now my mother (laughter), my mother has a short temper, and she is also very feisty.  So she looked at this petition and it's had all the names and the top name was apparently the guy who had started circulating the petition (laughter).  With the address which was nice, I was still little, so she took me by the hand and we went to this man's house.  She knocked on the door of the house and the woman came to the door and, and when he came to the door, and when she came to the door my mother said, "Is this man living in this house?"  And the woman sa- looked at the name, and she said, "Yeah, why?"  Said, "I want to speak to him," so the woman said, "You can't come in."  My mother said, "I am coming in," so she takes me by the hand and we walked in and walked into the kitchen where this man is sitting at a table reading the newspaper.  And for some reason I don't know why, he had a hat on, and so my mother started talking to him.  She said, "Did you get this petition going in the neighborhood?" And he did not answer her.  She said, "I, I'm talking to you, did you get this neighborhood (laughter), this petition going in the neighborhood?"  And he looked up and, but he went right back to his newspaper, so my mother went over to him and it, I'm gonna do my Jamaican accent now, my mother boxed his head.  Hat fell off his head, and then she said, "When I talk to you man, you listen to me, what I'm saying (laughter)," she scared the man to death (laughter) I think.  And by the time we left that place, my mother had said, "You have no right to do this.  Our family is just as good as any other family in the neighborhood, and we want you to know that," it was a little shocking 'cause we had never had that kind of experience.  And apparently it went around the neighborhood like wildfire because some people signed the petition; a lot of people did not sign it.  The elementary school principal of the school called a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting, called a meeting of the parents in the neighborhood, at the school and he read them the riot act.  And he said to them was, "You may not, you may decide that you don't want the Clarkes to live in your neighborhood, as long I am principal of this school, they will live wherever they chose to live.  And if you don't want them in that house, I will get out of my house and they can live in my house for this time."  So I came away from that situation with two, two images, one that there is discrimination and one that you can't stereotype that everybody white is gonna be discriminatory.  'Cause it was the principal of that school that came to our support and a lot of the other people in the neighborhood, too.  It was obvious a couple of people who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --just, were not ready for the change, that's all.
Story_ID: 483925
Speaker 1: At the school age level did you have any problems yourself?
Speaker 2: No, no, we were kind of, I guess I have to also say, we would be kind of the model kids in the school.  And part of it was because we were the only black people in the neighborhood [Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, New York].  And my, my Jamaican parents [Ethel Hall Clarke and Charles Clarke, Sr.] were always very concerned that we had to be the best, the cleanest, the nicest kids in the neighborhood, we got along very well.  My younger brother [Norris Clarke] who was the third in line coming up through the elementary school probably had the worst time of all.  Because every time he did something bad, they said, "I don't know what's the matter with you, your brother [Charles Clarke, Jr.] and sister were so much nicer (laughter) than you are," so.  No we didn't have any trouble in school we were good students and, and got good grades, I was the valedictorian at my, my elementary school.  And my brother would also did very well in school, so we, I loved school and I enjoyed it all the way (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what was, well what, what was your first elementary school, was at?
Speaker 2: It was, well it was P.S. 176 [The Ovington School, Brooklyn, New York], which as you know is what they called schools in New York [New York], they don't have nice names.  They were just numbers, and it was just down the block from where we lived.  And my mother was always active, my dad worked obviously, but my mother always was at home with us when we were growing up.  And she was very active in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], she would, she did everything.  She went to Albany [New York] and fought for the rights of teachers, and got more salaries for them, and all the rest of that.  So we was, we were sort of the, the nice model kids in the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So did you go, go to that one el- elementary school?
Speaker 2: All the way through.
Speaker 1: Okay, all the way through?
Speaker 2: And the system was that you went to eighth, eight grades in the elementary school, and then you went four grades in col- in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went on to high school [Bay Ridge High School; High School of Telecommunication Arts and Technology, Brooklyn, New York], we, I, we didn't go to junior high, that way it was operating in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went one through eight and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One through eight and then--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --eight then nine through twelve in col- in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite subject in, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I always liked English and history; those were my two favorite subjects.
Story_ID: 483926
Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument or anything like that or have any other kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but I--
Speaker 1: Kind of--
Speaker 2: I was in the drama group (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was very funny because going to an all-girls high school, and being in the drama group meant that you got a chance occasionally to play men in the plays.  'Cause there were no men to play themselves.
Speaker 1: Now this is Bayside High School, right or Bay or Bay Ridge?
Speaker 2: Bay Ridge High School [High School of Telecommunication Arts and Technology, Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: Bay Ridge, Bay Ridge High School.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had a grade advisor in those days all of the students, I was in what I guess you would call now a special, a special class.  What they did was they tested all of us coming into high school, and then they, based on those tests, they established within the high school another school called Turners, the Turner School.  And if you reached a certain level in terms of your, your tests, you, you got into this in this, into this special school.  And so I spent the four years in this special school, and what happened in that, in that area was that we got to do more things than you would've done in other parts of the school.  Again in those days because it was all-girls, it was sort of a three cut, three-way cut.  The girls who were not gonna go on after high school, they were definitely just gonna go and get married so they, they were in one group.  Then the girls who were gonna go to work and probably would go to work as secretarial people, and then those are, the others were the academics, who got the full blast of everything.  And were going to go on to college and do all the rest and I was in that third group.  So we had a lot of opportunities to go out and do things, we went to forums and all kinds of places.  I was the editor of my school newspaper, and also very big in the, in the drama group, as I said earlier in my dem- Gemini instincts keep me moving from one thing to another.  So I was active in everything.
Speaker 1: Now what, who did you, do, do you remember who you played in these?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Lots of different plays, I've had all kinds of plays, let's see in those days, the one that I remember very well was the one I play, I was, an Asian emperor.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) An emperor?
Speaker 2: A Chi- of course (laughter), a Chinese emperor, and I was very, very skinny in those days, and he was very, very fat.  So we, so my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] had to make me something that would make me look fat, so she made me this this, this outfit.  Which would go underneath my robes as the emperor and I had like six inch long nails, because the emperor didn't do anything.  So you had to (laughter), and of course I had a deep voice, so that's why I got to be the guy at that time.  But I played other roles as well and most of them, forgettable (laughter) very quickly.
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of that play, do, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, in fact I'm sure it was one of those plays that was in the public domain because nobody had any money to pay for you know the rights to do a play.  So it's probably some crazy play that was in, in the public domain.
Story_ID: 483927
Speaker 1: Was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Singing, not, not music, I never played any instrument.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brothers, my younger brother [Norris Clarke] played the drums and he was the only one.  My older brother [Charles Clarke, Jr.] played the harmonica.  He said that he was very upset as he grew up because my younger brother got drums, he got a harmonica (laughter).  But he did okay; he was not having any problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you, you could, you, you would sing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were, were you in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We all sang.
Speaker 1: Chorus at school, or choir?
Speaker 2: Well I was in a church choir, and then later when I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I was in the choir at Howard too.
Speaker 1: Now was, was popular culture music a big part of the household?
Speaker 2: Not really, well we had a radio (laughter) in those days, now this is gonna sound very old to anybody who is anything under fifty.  But you know like there was one radio in the household that we all caught together around the radio at night.  Because that's all you had was one radio, so we never got as much of this canned music as you got.  But we all listened to the radio and a lot of those programs were playing on the radio as well.
Speaker 1: Did, did you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We all liked music.
Speaker 1: Favorite shows on the radio or?
Speaker 2: Oh yes including some of the, the soap operas, "Candace, the girl from a little mining town in the West, find happiness as a wife of wealthy entitled Englishman," (laughter).  We heard the radio programs and we had of course to figure out what they looked like, and how they did that, so it was a lot of imaging at the stage of the game.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had 'The Lone Ranger' and all of that and of course the news broadcast, we always did the news, and we got to listen to [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt's fireside chats a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause we were growing up in that period.
Story_ID: 483928
Speaker 1: The tail end of the war [World War II, WWII] I guess was going on when you were in high school.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got to make six inch squares for the boys overseas, that was not my strongpoint, I was not a good knitter.  And we were asked in schools to make six inch squares and then they would connect all the six inch squares and make afghans.  And I made a lot of six inch squares but they really didn't come out six inches, it was like four inches on one side and eight on the other (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's a good thing an afghan can stretch a little bit.
Speaker 2: I, I wanted, I always wanted to see what my afghan looked like when they got ready to put it together, but that was it, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Six inch square this is the first time I've heard that you know okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay, so well did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: I, I, was the vice president of the class.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We all took turns at that so sometimes I was president and sometimes vice president.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the, the Turner School sort of dominated everything that went on in the school because we got this very special treatment.  The only classes that we took with people who were not in the academic image was, was sports.  And I played basketball, I played that, that nice kind of basketball that no longer exists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Only I--
Speaker 2: The half-court basketball.
Speaker 1: Yeah I think they call it captain basketball I think, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You only couldn't go across the middle line, you stayed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah that's all that was going on even when I was in high school I know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is, I mean you see these girls play now, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How well they can.
Speaker 2: Speaking if, speaking of playing, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right after the recent.
Speaker 2: Right the recent issues that have just come up.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was a guard; I was mostly a guard in basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So did that, did they have a regular league with that, with the other girls schools or?
Speaker 2: No, we it was mostly intramural you know we played the other classes in the school and, and I think there were occasionally some competitions across other schools.  But there weren't that many girl, all-girls high schools in those days, so we didn't have too much competition from that level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, now was there a prom and all that for your, for your school?
Speaker 2: There was a prom but of course you didn't have a prom with the girls alone, we had a brother school.  Which was Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York], and so we would, we would all get together and they would take us like in a bus, and we would either one year it would be at Bay Ridge High School [High School of Telecommunication Arts and Technology, Brooklyn, New York].  And the next year it would be at Brooklyn Tech and let's say I was about, I graduated from high school when I was sixteen, so I was I guess about twelve when I started.  And the proms were not very interesting then, not very interesting to me in those days.  'Cause all the girls sat over here and all the boys sat over there and nobody ever got together, until the girls got up and decided to dance with each other (laughter) and that would make the difference.  So I, the proms were never big in my life.
Speaker 1: So they didn't have, you didn't have to have a date or anything like that for the prom?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, in fact it was discouraged that you have a date, it was sort of like a mass movement of, of boys and girls getting together.  And at twelve, neither the boys nor the girls were too enth- enthusiastic about dancing with each other, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: Although we'd all learned dancing in school.
Story_ID: 483929
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Bay Ridge High School; High School of Telecommunication Arts and Technology, Brooklyn, New York] an honor student, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was, I was salutatorian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the second highest grade points in my high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you have you know good counseling about college and--
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I had great counseling; every grade particularly in the Turner School had a grade advisor.  And I had a superb grade advisor, her name was Martha Kakonmo [ph.] and she had gone to an all-girls high school.  She had gone to Hunter College in New York [New York], and she had our grade, and she followed us all the way through the four years that we were in, in high school.  So she was the one that sort of gave us the opportunities to go to all these forums to get involved in discussions with other schools.  We, we competed in spelling bees and things like that as we went along the line, and as we got closer to being ready to graduate, she came, she counseled us on schools.  And she got all of the, the scholarship information for us and brought to us, and we all applied, and I applied to a number of schools.  And I got scholarships to two, to three of them; I got a scholarship to Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts].  I got a scholarship to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] and I had a scholarship to what was the third one, another one of those seven sister schools.  I forgot which one, but anyway so I was trying to decide which and the Mount Holyoke one was the one that had the best opportunities.  And I told her one day, "I'm ready to go to Mount Holyoke," so she said, "Have you thought about this really carefully?"  So I said, "Yes," 'cause I went to Mount Holyoke and I liked it, I had gone on visits.  And she said, "I think you ought to think about maybe going to anoth- another school." I said, "Like where?"  She said, "How about Howard University [Washington, D.C.]?" And I said, "Where is that," again my Jamaican background had very little knowledge (laughter) of Howard University.  But I said, "Well I, I don't know anything about it," so she explained what the school was.  I said, "Well it sounds really interesting," I said, "but I don't have a scholarship to that, and I'm not gonna be able to go to school if I don't have a scholarship."  She said, "Well it just happens that they're gonna give the scholarship exam on Saturday, why don't you go and take it?  And then if you pass it and if you get a scholarship we can talk further about it," so I took the exam and I passed it.  And she gave me some brochures about Howard University and I took them home to my father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] and my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke], and we talked about it.  And they said, "Well why not, you've got a scholarship, if you'd like to go," yeah, so that's the one I chose, I chose Howard University.
Story_ID: 483930
Speaker 1: And my father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] took me down to Washington, D.C. on the train from New York [New York], to, to Washington, D.C.  And having told you that I lived in this all white atmosphere in Brooklyn [New York], what was fascinating is on the way down on the train, we met Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters.  We met dining car waiters, my dad took me to the dining car and we ate in the dining car.  And all of these waiters came over to ask my dad, you know where we they go, where we going, and what was I doing?  And when they found out I was going to Howard, we had these great discussions about Howard University [Washington, D.C.], 'cause it turned out that almost half of them had gone to Howard University.  The people in the dining cars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Working in the dining car?
Speaker 1: They were, this was, this was discrimination (laughter) all the way down the line, this was the kind of thing that was going on.  And they were so excited that I was going to Howard University that they just poured everything out to me.  And told me how great it was gonna be and what good school it was, and all the rest, and, and my father and I were pretty happy going down.  We get close to Washington, D.C. and what, and the, one of the porters says, "I'll get your daughter's luggage, meet you out at the front and where the taxi cabs are.  So that you can go right on up to Howard University," so my dad and I get off the train, we get over the taxi car station.  And my father is by this time a very impatient New Yorker so he walks over to the taxi station and he says, "My daughter and I are going up to Howard University, and we're gonna need a cab.  Can we get your cab to go up to Howard?" And the man who was reading a newspaper looks up at my dad and he said, "You gotta get the black cab."  We were so naive, we thought the color of the cab that went up to Howard University was black, we discovered that Washington, D.C. was totally segregated, the capital of the United States.  You could not go anywhere; Howard was like a little kingdom at the top of a hill, totally isolated from the rest of Washington, D.C.  Because How- it was segregated, you couldn't go to a movie theater, you couldn't go downtown, you go could go downtown and buy something, but you couldn't try anything on.  If you wanted it, you had to just take it and you couldn't return it, so that was it.  No movies, no theatres, none of that, no restaurants that you could go to.  And if somebody came down to visit you, and I had mostly white friends from up in New York, we could not find a place to eat anywhere where two people of different colors could sit down and eat together.  I later found out that there were a couple; one of them was in the [U.S.] Department of Labor.  A woman by the name of Frances Perkins, who was the very first woman ever to be a cabinet member was the, was the secretary of labor at that time.  And she had been the secretary of labor in New York State; her cafeteria was opened to people without regard to race, so you could go there.  And the only other place because it had been a lawsuit filed and it was opened up through the lawsuit was in the Union Station [Washington, D.C.] itself.  You could sit at the counter there and eat together, so that, that was the thing that really changed my life.  'Cause when I got--
Speaker 2: That's only two simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to the university--
Speaker 2: --places in the entire?
Speaker 1: Two places where you could have any kind of integration whatsoever in Washington, D.C., and so it's, it really changed my life.  Because I went down to Howard expecting that I was gonna become a teacher, and I changed my major and became a political science major and a sociologist major, and became very active on the campus.
Story_ID: 483931
Speaker 1: Your father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] was a member of UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] at one time, like I guess the whole.  I don't know if he stayed with, with it after Garvey [Marcus Garvey] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --was deported and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and all of that.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I don't you know, okay.
Speaker 2: Now I think Garvey was what was drew him to it essentially and had, I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Once--
Speaker 2: --he stayed--
Speaker 1: Yeah I know it kind of split asunder--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: After Garvey was arrested and deported and.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah now that, that been about 1927 or so, right, right after you born.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did, did he keep up with; did you get the black newspapers at home and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we got the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] which was the one that was the prevalent one; I don't know that there was a black newspaper in Brooklyn [New York].  But the Amsterdam News we always got.  And he read a lot of the materials and always was a reader, so he kept in touch with it, but Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was not on his agenda.  He had never heard, it wasn't that he hadn't heard of it, I'm sure he had heard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah he probably hadn't paid--
Speaker 2: But he hadn't paid much attention to it 'cause he wasn't expecting that any of the kids were gonna go to (laughter) Howard University.  It was Depression [Great Depression]; it was not a lot of money and so that he, didn't see it in that, in that way.  But I thought that was the best choice that I ever made; I thanked Martha Kakonmo [ph.] several times.  We kept a really close friendship until she died just a few years ago (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 483932
Speaker 1: You decide to major in political science?
Speaker 2: I majored, I started out in sociology, and then decided after I had finished sociology going through E. Franklin Frazier's books and things, that that probably was not what I wanted to do was be a social worker.  And I was very interested in politics since I was in high school [Bay Ridge High School; High School of Telecommunication Arts and Technology, Brooklyn, New York], I liked political science, it wasn't called that.  It was just part of our history and government courses in those days, and so I decided to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, now you mentioned E. Franklin Frazier, in those days Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was filled with and it still is probably filled, filled with some of the greatest black scholars in the world.
Speaker 2: This is why I said that, I, I thanked her [Martha Kakonmo] so much afterwards, you, you cannot believe what a difference it make.  I was very lucky 'cause I came up through high school with, with a great advisor that was that way.  She was just totally giving and so in all these areas, and then I get to college and I'm in this environment which is totally different from the environment I grew up in.  I'm now in the exactly opposite environment you know we have all black people around us.  And I'm, I'm finding E. Franklin Frazier's my sociology teacher.  They the, what's his name had just left to go to the United Nations [UN], he had worked--
Speaker 1: Ralph Bunche (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ralph Bunche--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Ralph Bunche had just gone to the United Nations, he had been working on that book that was done on 'The American Dilemma,' [sic. 'An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy,' Gunnar Myrdal] and then went to the United Nations.  He was, he was my teacher for just one course.  Let's see oh, Sterling Brown was my English teacher and Sterling Brown was a jazz enthusiast.  And we had a jazz club and we could go over to Sterling Brown's house, sit on his floor, he would play his jazz records and read his poetry to us.  Now how can you not feel that you came out way ahead of the game under those circumstances?  So I found the most incredible teachers and the most incredible supporting environment.  'Cause those teachers were so glad to have students that they could pour everything out to.
Speaker 1: Now was, Howard Thurman was there, too--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you, did you--
Speaker 2: He was at the chapel and I was in the choir, I, I sang every Sunday while, while Howard Thurman was there.  And listened to his sermons, so you know this was an unexplainable experience, you cannot tell other people how much it meant to be in that kind of environment when you knew that there were possibilities that you would have a totally different response if you had gone to some other schools in the United States.
Story_ID: 483933
Speaker 1: So it was the best decision that I had ever made.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it and it really made me an activist because the first thing we did, we were on the campus [of Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at the same time that people were working up at Howard University's law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  On the strategy for breaking through on the segregation issues in the schools.
Speaker 2: Now was Charles Ham- Hamilton Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --there, okay.
Speaker 1: He was there.
Speaker 2: And James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: James Nabrit of course was there, Thurgood Marshall was there, they had just set up the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund [NNACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].  So those people were also part of that process, and we had a chapter of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] on the campus and some, a woman by the name of Pauli Murray was there.  And Pauli Murray had already challenged two schools, one school for not letting her in because she was a woman.  And the other school for not letting her in because she was black.
Story_ID: 483934
Speaker 1: We were just talking about Alain Locke was there and just all these incredible people at, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: At Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: It was just the greatest time in the world to be there, and of course we were also, we be, we became activists.  Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Pauli Murray yeah you were just talking about her.
Speaker 2: Pauli Murray--
Speaker 1: Now she's--
Speaker 2: --was on there and she had been, she already had her history in being an activist.  'Cause she had been denied opportunities to go to the law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] for, because she (laughter) was a female at one point.  And they changed their minds later, and she had also applied to some other school where she was denied because she was black.
Speaker 1: So, so she would eventually, was she the--
Speaker 2: She was at law school at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was in law school.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she was chairing, not chairing, but she was sort of one of the head people at the chapter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's interesting-
Speaker 2: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Because I happen, one of the odd bits of information I know is that the first black woman law school graduate was Mary Ann Shadd Cary.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Back in the 1880s, and so they had closed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was law--
Speaker 1: --since to, to women from that time I guess.
Speaker 2: Well I'm not sure--
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: When they had absolutely closed and my feeling is probably not many women were applying for it.  But Paul- Pauli did apply and apparently they did not take her.  And so she really fought of, about getting in, and she got in, she wound up at Howard's law, Howard's law school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so she was the head of the NAACP chapter on campus, and we got organized and decided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she went right to the top of it I guess (laughter), she went--
Story_ID: 483935
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We decided to go right away and do something about the segregation on the campus.  By this time the, the people who, the men who had gone off to the war [World War II, WWII] 'cause my first two years at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] there were not men on campus.  Because they were all in the [U.S.] military services, but when they came back, they came back with a lot of, of antagonism.  To the system that they had left when they went down there, so by that time, we had the American Veterans Committee.  It wasn't the, the usual American Legion kinds of vets, they came back angry.  And they were instantly put into the position of saying, "Let's do something about segregation in Washington [D.C.]."  So we started to, to picket and demonstrate in the area, we would have days when Pauli [Pauli Murray] would organize us all.  And we would go down to a specific place and we would stand out there and picket.  And say that we're po- protesting discrimination, we had good luck in the, in the grill which was supposed to be open to all students and wasn't.  But we weren't, but we were able to get the, the grill opening its doors to every student on campus at Howard.
Speaker 2: And why, why I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was right in the middle on, on one side there was a very white neighborhood, and then Howard was on this side.  If you were a Howard student you could go to this place and you could order your meal, but you had to take it out.  The white kids could sit, so we picketed that and we got them to open up, because we had more people on our side (laughter) than their side, so that it weren't.  The one that was the biggest one that we got involved in was, one of the universities I think it was Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], was building a new building.  And it was going to be a theatre and they, they built the theatre, had it all ready to open.  Was opening with a play in which Ingrid Bergman was starting, starring, was 'Joan of Arc' [sic. 'Joan of Lorraine,' Maxwell Anderson] and we learned that they're gonna have a segregated seating arrangement.  You could go there if you were black, but you had to sit up in the separate section.  So Pauli organized us and we went down and we picketed the theatre, and Ingrid Bergman came out, 'cause she wanted to know why are we are we out there on the streets picketing?  And we explained to her why we were there and she said, she had no idea that this true about the capital of the United States.  And she would not play anyplace in Washington, D.C. until that was changed, and she never did.  When her contract on that one was closed, she never came back to Washington until many years later when they actually did open up the, the whole system.
Speaker 2: So that particular demonstration didn't bear any fruit?
Speaker 1: Well it didn't bear any fruit at, right away, but the theatre, the university finally had to make some changes.  Because it was just outrageous for them to do that.
Speaker 2: You talking about Georgetown?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember the name of the, the theater, it was, I'll think of it before the end of our interview so, I'll let you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, that's exactly (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that, I've always liked Ingrid Bergman ever since then.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah I can imagine it coming from, from Europe here and then seeing you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know I, that's, I guess the, that sort of an microcosm to strategy of the Civil Rights Movement in.
Speaker 1: Well again you know the fact that she was from; she was Swedish and the Scandinavian countries, although they have very few people of color, that's for sure.  Were always much more open and still are, incidentally as you look at the international arena now.  We find that the many of the programs that are for women's rights or minority rights are funded by a lot of the NGOs [non-governmental organization] that come from the Scandinavian countries.
Story_ID: 483936
Speaker 1: Students went on a campaign to desegregate Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it didn't happen through, in through my years it took a little longer than that to desegregate Washington.  We had the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.] there where all of the famous musicians and, and singers came, and then people who were white would like to come, but they weren't allowed to come.  Because of the segregation in Washington, and so you would find people say well, "Can't we go in with you?"  We can always say, 'cause there were a light-skinned black people who could say, "We're black," (laughter) and go.  'Cause they wanted to hear the musicians.
Speaker 1: But they, but it, it was sort of cut both ways, you couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you couldn't--
Speaker 1: --go if you were white you couldn't go--
Speaker 2: Well you couldn't--
Speaker 1: --if you were white--
Speaker 2: Because not--
Speaker 1: --you couldn't go to the--
Speaker 2: Were not--
Speaker 1: --Howard.
Speaker 2: It wasn't that the Howard wouldn't have let you, but if they, if somebody who was a police officer or white person out there could've said you know you can't go in there it's not allowed.
Speaker 1: So by law, an officer will feel compelled to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --enforce strict--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --segregation--
Speaker 2: 'Cause segregation--
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Was going on, at least that's what I thought they were doing.  Because they certainly had that kind of situation happen a number of times, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Gee, so you know, either by, by law or by custom, either--
Speaker 2: By custom I think it was, and the history of, of blacks in Washington is such that there are a lot of light-skinned black people in Washington, D.C.  So I'm off, I always wondered how they could tell who, who they had let in.  And who they should've not let in later on (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now I've heard it said that a, if a black student wrapped up his head or put on a turban or something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --they could go anywhere in D.C.
Speaker 2: That was one of the things that happened at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] which caused a sort of, a rift between the international students who were black.  And the American born students who were black, 'cause it was true.  Most of the, most of the diplomatic people were able to go anywhere they wanted to go, and so if you were, and they did.  You know they could go to the theatre and they just showed their passports, and they were afraid of having any kind of international incidents (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they could be black?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, if they, if they had their passports, because it was then in the diplomacy arena and people were a little nervous about you know saying no you can't come.  So it's, it's a craziness of discrimination.
Speaker 1: That's always been a real curious aspect of that.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Story_ID: 483937
Speaker 1: What else happened at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I mean let's, let's, get, get to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well again, I, I was in all kinds of things at Howard; I edited the school newspaper again at, at Howard University, The Hilltop.  We picketed and demonstrated, I was in the Howard Players [Howard University Players], so I was part of that.
Speaker 1: Oh what plays did you did in the Howard Players?
Speaker 2: Well I did the, the Dodson's what's his name, oh what's his first name, the playwright (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Owen Dodson?
Speaker 2: Owen, Owen Dodson's play which was based on 'Peer Gynt' [Henrik Ibsen] but was called 'Bayou Legend' [Owen Dodson], and I was the star in that one, I was, I was the, the witch (laughter) in, in 'Peer Gynt' but I played a number of things.  And I was also in the, the religious group's theatre, they had a separate theatre and I did 'Mary Magdalene' [Maurice Maeterlinck] in that one a couple of times, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's see Beanie Butcher [James "Beanie" Butcher] was then, Beanie and Owen Dodson and Anne [Anne Cooke] what was Anne's last name, they were the ones that really built up the Howard Players during that period that had become very popular.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this, now this takes us where, where are we?
Speaker 2: And I lived on campus all the way through the four years at Howard, incidentally, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was on the campus all the time.
Speaker 1: All right, now did you do things like join the sorority or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right. And--
Speaker 2: It was hard decision because I had friends that went AKA and others that went Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and I did not know anything about any of the sororities.  So I just decided to go the one that I had more friends in (laughter) which was the AKA's at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 483938
Speaker 1: You saw Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] change from being mostly like an all-girls schools in some ways, before the war [World War II, WWII] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the first two years--
Speaker 1: Then all the--
Speaker 2: --were pretty heavily female on the campus, but the second two years because, as I said, the returning veterans came back and they had a right to go back to universities.  Because the G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], they could get into the university, was totally different, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They, they were mostly older guy too, right?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, you know they had given four years of their lives probably to, to being in the war, so that they came back much more mature.  Much more angry about the kinds of things they had gone through, it's kind of, of interesting to watch the, the great programs that the president [President George Walker Bush] had the other day for the, the air qual- the guys (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee Airmen, yes they could tell a lot of stories too (laughter) they were being very nice as they got their medals that's for sure.
Story_ID: 483939
Speaker 1: Now did you have a special teacher or, or mentor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Not a spec- not a special mentor, but, but I spent a lot of time in the drama group so that they were friends.  So those, those were all very close friends--oh it was Anne Cooke was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --person who was there, the person at Howard in the drama group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I like political science and one of my, one of my favorite teachers (laughter) there was a man by the name of Emmett Dorsey [Emmett E. Dorsey].  I'm laughing because he was also a real con, real crazy character, and we didn't start off well.  Because when I decided to change from sociology to political science we had had these survey courses in fresh- in the freshman year.  So that you got a little bit of everything to decide what you wanted to do, and I had liked the political science ones.  So when I finished the sociology course, I started to do the political science, and I went to my first class, Emmett Dorsey was teaching it.  It was a course called international relations, and I got there early and I sat down in the class, and nobody was there.  And so I started reading a book, and I heard a lot of rough, rustling and scurrying around, and pretty soon I look up and there were a lot more students in the class.  And I go back to reading and then there's a lot of hustling and I know the professor has arrived, and I looked, I closed the book I was reading (laughter).  I looked up and I look around the room and I discovered that I'm the only girl in this class, there are forty people sitting in the room, and I'm the only girl.  He comes in and he says, "This is political science 183, which is international relations; this is a course which will require a lot of homework.  We will have a lot of term papers that you'll have to do, and anybody who is not ready to do, do the kind of work that's necessary to get a good grade in this class, you might as well leave now and sign up for home economics."
Speaker 1: So that was a targeted?
Speaker 2: So I look around again, and I said he must be talking to me (laughter) but of course I would not move.  I did not get out of that seat, I stayed where I was, and I went through that whole course, he called on me every single day of that course.  So I know more about international relations (laughter) than I know about almost any other subject.  'Cause he forced me to be prepared on every single day that I went in, we later became really good friends.  And when I graduated, he invited me to come back and be his research associate, and work on a research project which was hilarious.  Which was to interview all the black people in the federal government who were above grade level [sic. General Schedule] fourteen which turned out to be about six people.  So that was what I, that's what I started out was my great research project was interviewing six people who had reached the, the level of grades fourteen.
Speaker 1: Now that's quite a study, I mean its dra- dramatic that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very dramatic (laughter).
Speaker 1: It sounds like it might be--
Speaker 2: Very dramatic.
Speaker 1: --an animus task until you get to, get to it and find out only six.
Speaker 2: I actually didn't finish the whole project because I wound up, my other activity while I was going through the, my research associate position was being in the Howard Players [Howard University Players].  And going out on, on play assignments in other parts of the, the district.  We go in other parts of Washington [D.C.] and then into Virginia, then the other places to do the plays.  And I wound up with tuberculosis, I came back from one of the plays and the next morning I woke just absolutely flooding blood all over the place.  Turns out I had about a hole in my lung about this size, so I spent three months in Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.] getting ready, getting better.  And I was lucky because they had just come up with a new drug that was used at that point to, to control the tuberculosis.  I have never had another incident since then.
Speaker 1: That's when the sulfur drugs be, were created, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, I forgot what the name of it was but, but it was the first time they had ever used it and Freedmen's as you know was a, is a public hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I never finished my, my six person interview, I think I only got through about four.
Story_ID: 483940
Speaker 1: Yeah, you graduated magna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: --magna cum laude, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did graduate magna cum laude, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You can't get any higher can you with that?
Speaker 2: Yes, can do summa [summa cum laude] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Can, can oh summa, all right, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: I got a, I got a C in gym.
Speaker 1: I never come close (laughter).
Speaker 2: I got the C in gym because we were supposed, it was supposed to be Danish, what was it?  Some kind of dancing and it was a modern dance group, and they didn't have the teacher that year.  So they, instead of that, every morning and it was an eight o'clock in the morning class.  Every morning we went there and we sat and we filed our nails and we put nail polish on and I was bored.  And besides that I don't like getting up that early in the morning, so I didn't (laughter) go to class.  So I wound up with a C in that class, so I didn't make it into the summa graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's pretty good, now you're the only, only female in the political science?
Speaker 2: Well not anymore.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were then?
Speaker 2: It didn't stay that way for a long time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just one class, as I said, because there were other people in other classes, but for some reason he was really a curmudgeon and he didn't--and I think part of it was the, the reputation among some people about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was, this is where parents sent their daughters to find doctors and lawyers to marry.  And that they weren't really interested in school, and probably some of that was true, to some degree.  So there probably were a few professors who got annoyed if they wound up with women in their classes.  Because they figured they never go on to do anything.
Speaker 1: How much did the ratio change when the soldiers came, came back?
Speaker 2: Changed a lot.
Speaker 1: Were there more men (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, because it sort of evened out--
Speaker 1: --on, on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot more men on campus there was the very, the very clear and a lot more activity in terms of really civil rights kinds of activities went on at that stage.
Story_ID: 483941
Speaker 1: So what did you do after you recovered from tuberculosis?
Speaker 2: I went back to New York [New York] and de, decided to go ahead and get my master's [degree] at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and was about two courses away from getting my master's (laughter) at NYU when I was sitting in the library doing a term paper.  And there was a magazine on the table and I decided I needed a rest from doing my term paper so I started reading the magazine.  And I opened up a page and on the page it said not the exact words but this was the tenor of it said, "Are you an oddball?  Would you like a career that doesn't pay very much money but gives you lots of psychic rewards?"  And there was a telephone number at the bottom of it, so I called the telephone number, and the telephone number turned out to be the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union [ILGWU].  And they were just establishing what they called their training institute, David Dubinsky, who headed that union had come to the conclusion that they needed to get more leadership from outside.  Primarily from the universities and colleges because the, the employers were hiring people who were technologists in those days, to do time and motion studies on how you could do more work for less money in the garment industry, so he figured he had to get some people who could at least compete in some ways with those guys.  So, he decided to set up a training institute and he put out this information all over the place about a year's training that ILGWU would give you.  And at the end of the training, you would have an opportunity to decide where in the ILGWU family you would like to go work.  So I, I applied, I got a chance to, to get in for a couple of reasons.  One was because my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] had been a member of the union during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and secondly, I had been very active in the Americans for Democratic Action.  And at, at that, in the Americans for Democratic Action, one of the people who I'm, I met during that period was a guy by the name of Gus Tyler.  Who was a, a pretty much up in the higher echelons of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union.  And so when I needed to get a reference, he helped on giving me the reference too, so I got accepted, and I was one of four women among, out of thirty-two people selected for the program.
Speaker 1: So even, even for working for the International Ladies' Garment Workers' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Working for the union--
Speaker 1: Mostly men were--
Speaker 2: Working for--
Speaker 1: --were-
Speaker 2: A union that had like 85 percent of it's members were women, they all of the of, all of the officers except for one on the executive board were men.  All of them were also white in those days; they were mostly Italian and Jewish, because the industry was immigrant industry.  And though, and so a lot of those people had just recently come to the United States and had found a way to get work in that area.  Dubinsky was a genius in a lot of ways and a person who had a lot of ideas about what you could do to make life better for people who were in jobs that were pretty well limited jobs.  You, you could work in the garment industry, in the sportswear industries, without any kind of, of skills, 'cause you did piecework, you did section work.  You didn't do a whole garment; you just sewed one seam all day long on a dress, and then it passed on to somebody else.  Who added the cuff and it passed on to somebody else who did the hem and all the rest of it.  And so what he did was he started out by having a resort for the union members, we could go on a two-week vacation at the union's resort, which was called Unity House up in the Pocono Mountains [Pennsylvania].  They started the first of the, the medical benefits for workers; tuberculosis was pretty rampant in the industries.  So that they had set-up a lot of programs, they were very big with the City of Hope [City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, California] in those days.  Which focused a lot on new techniques for tuberculosis, which of course interested me at that point in time, too.
Story_ID: 483942
Speaker 1: Did the conditions that the ladies worked under (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very tough.
Speaker 1: --contribute to the--
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of dust--
Speaker 1: --high T, TB [tuberculosis] rate?
Speaker 2: A lot of dust, a lot of you know closed windows all kinds of things in this, in the factories.  The history of the garment industry is really terrible, and a lot of the new laws, well they're not new anymore.  But a lot of the laws on protection of workers came out of the garment industry for the most part. We lost about over one hundred and some odd young women in the, I think it was about 1911 or 1913.  They lost about one hundred and some women who jumped out of the window of a garment factory 'cause the doors were locked 'cause they didn't want union organizers in there.
Speaker 1: That's a Triangle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And couldn't get out.
Speaker 1: --Shirtwaist Factory?
Speaker 2: The Triangle Shirtwaist factory [Triangle Waist Company, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Fire.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, interesting how things connect again, Frances Perkins was, at secretary of labor at that point in New York State.  And was one of the people who got involved in, in setting up the changes that, that particular situation led to a lot of safety things that happened in the garment industry after that.
Speaker 1: I know there's a description in the old movie of 'American Tragedy' ['An American Tragedy'] by Theodore Dreiser--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where the, the ladies are working and, and the guy comes in tells them, "Stop talking."
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know.
Speaker 2: You couldn't do anything.
Speaker 1: "And don't chew gum," it was like being in grade school or something and they, they would walk around and they would just work, work, work.
Speaker 2: It was ter- it's a terrible industry, it, it's just organized terribly and it's, it's designed to essentially to be a sweatshop.  Because the whole idea is to keep cutting back and cutting back un- until people get to the lowest possible price of they can get to get a contract to make the garments.  And then they have to take it out of somebody, so they take it out of the workers, the workers have to work harder for it.  So it and most of the people didn't earn a lot of money which is why Dubinsky [David Dubinsky] was so smart.  Because even though they did not earn a lot of money, they, the union became very political and what it did was it went to change laws.  So they did a lot of the work on getting the laws changed at the nat- at the national and at the state levels.  And then they provided these other kinds of benefits, they were the only un- only union [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] at that time that had an educational department.  Which was training people, which was helping people become citizens of the United States, 'cause as I said, it was an immigrant industry.  And helping people become political to understand that this is the way you made a difference in the United States was to get involved.
Story_ID: 483943
Speaker 1: Now what was the organizing train- training like; now, I think of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was partially academic, you know to teach us the history of the labor movement with the factories were like how the changes were made, and was partly technical. How do you, how do you run a picket line, how do you do leaflets, if you gonna do leafleting, how do you, how do you get to an employer.  How do you get to workers, how do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there, there's a way to do those things.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think though, the average person, the reason why I'm pausing here is just because I think the average person has no idea that there's strategy, I mean actually you know rehearsed strategy that goes on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure.
Speaker 1: --on, on behind the scenes.
Speaker 2: And, and we worked in teams and we did all of those kinds of things that were necessary, and it really gave you a sense of how important it was to do that work.  So it, they were not kidding incidentally about that ad in the newspaper, you didn't earn (laughter) a lot of money, but you got a lot of psychic rewards, I loved working with the garment industry.  I loved the fact that we could do training and to do teaching, got to use my political science on the citizenship programs.  So I like, I that was my best job in the world was the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] job, it was just, it fit me very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 483944
Speaker 1: You said your parents [Ethel Hall Clarke and Charles Clarke, Sr.] were kind of surprised that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah they, they were not, I a little surprised but more, "What are you gonna do with all the college that you've gone through and stuff at the union [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union]?"  Turned out I could do a lot you know because it really did give me an opportunity to use my skills in ways that I probably would've never used in as a political scientist.  If I had just gone to a university and decided to teach or something, I saw politics in the practical sense at that stage.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So and they, they were fine with me afterwards, they, they've always let me do what I've wanted to do.  They have never said, "You can't do this," go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, you, you said your mother's always supportive of you doing something?
Speaker 2: Very much so, I think she sort of lived through, through me to some degree just, "This is what I would've done if I had, my father [Ernest Hall (ph.)] had let me go to school," my mother said.
Story_ID: 483945
Speaker 1: You worked for the Ladies' Garment Workers' Union [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] for nine years?
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: Eleven years that, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I worked for them for eleven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And did organizing at almost all of the time, but also in addition to being an organizer, I became the director of education and training for the ILGWU on the West Coast.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever have to organize a union from scratch?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And go into a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not, not a union, but a shop.
Speaker 1: A shop, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yes that's part of the training, in fact six months of the training was in school, and six months was in the field.  So we actually went on, on picket lines and ran picket lines during that period of time, and, and actually organized shops while we were doing it, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now do you have any interesting stories from those days, so I know those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Some of them were funny.
Speaker 1: Organizing can be exciting.
Speaker 2: Some of them are scary and some of them can be very exciting.  The very first one I did was believe it or not a pajama factory, and it was about the time 'The Pajama Game' [George Abbott and Richard Bissell] was also running so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 2: --so everybody was kidding around--
Speaker 1: --the, Broadway show, 'The Pajama Game,' right.
Speaker 2: And seven's--what is it, "Seven and a half cents, doesn't mean a hell of a lot," ["Seven and a Half Cents"] was that the song.  And this was an immigrant picket line 'cause everybody there was Spanish speaking, I had taken Spanish in school, so I knew, I knew Spanish.  And I discovered many, many, months after I had been on this picket line, but the picket line was actually being run on the other side of the picket line.  The, the employer's side was being run by gangsters, but I did not know it at the time.  And I was pretty flip with a whole lot of people who could probably have blown my head off in a minute (laughter) if they, if I had know that, I would probably shut up.  But we did okay, and that's the, we won the strike incidentally and they were able to get their work back.  And a lot of good things happened, a lot of changes occurred.  The training institute really had people who went into towns and changed the entire atmosphere of towns.  That would, did wanted, did not want union organizers and certainly didn't want union organizers who were multiracial.  But a lot of things changed on that level too, so, I, I thank the U, the ILGWU for a lot of what happened to me later on in my life.
Story_ID: 483946
Speaker 1: We're talking about ILGWU.
Speaker 2: International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union.
Speaker 1: Was there, did, did anybody ever try to call it Illg, Ilgoo or something, or?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They, use, they usually said the ILG, they never got to the WU part, but just talk about it as the ILG.  But they don't exist anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They've, the garment industry itself exist very, in a very minor way in the United States now, it's almost all overseas.  And when the jobs go overseas, the union membership drops as well, so they now merge, they first merged the ILGWU and the Amalgamated Clothing Workers [Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America].  The ILGWU was the women's garment makers, the people who made women's clothing; the Amalgamated Clothing Workers were the ones who made men's clothing.  They merged then the Textile Workers Union [Textile Workers Union of America] who the ones who make the fabric, merged into it too.  And they called themselves, U, UNITE [UNITE HERE], so IGLWU and Amalgamated Clothing Workers no longer exist.  UNITE exists, but it is more than a garment workers' union now, it has gone into also organizing people in the hotel and restaurant industries who are again low wage workers.  And it's, and it's now in San Francisco [California] we have it, and it's called UNITE HERE.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The hotel employees and restaurant employees is the HERE part, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now over a couple of years ago we heard UNITE HERE sort of articulate a strategy of organizing internationally.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: To you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well if--
Speaker 1: --once again get some power to--
Speaker 2: I think eventually that's what has to happen, as long as there is this disparity in terms of the wages that are, that are available in other places, all kinds of jobs are gonna go wherever the low wages are.  At least for those people who want to make money all their lives and that's it.  Those who have the control of the industries are gonna go for the place where you can get it done cheaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I think you have to organize, there has to be an international labor movement, and it has to be one that has the credibility for workers to want to join it.  Unfortunately some of the labor unions have lost their credibility over the years, and that makes it more difficult.
Story_ID: 483947
Speaker 1: You were with the garment workers' union from '51 [1951] to '60 [1960], is that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually I left in '61 [1961], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, now and when you left what, what position were you when you?
Speaker 2: I was the director of education and, and what, education and training of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union [ILGWU].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: On the West Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now during that per, period of time you got married too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So.
Speaker 2: During, when I was at the union.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I married a guy [Alfonso Hernandez] who was in the union and he, and it was a cutter, the cutters are the ones that when you lay out all the fabric out there, put the patterns on it, they cut it.  So they're the high end of the industry, they have to be very skilled because they save a lot of money or lose a lot of money for the employer.  Because ever inch that they can save on the fabric, makes money for the employer, so if you're a good cutter, then you're a very high-priced person.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: He was also a, a volunteer union organizer during those days too, 'cause very often they will use people who are members of the union.  To go and talk to the people that you're trying to organize, so he did a lot of that, um-hm.
Story_ID: 483948
Speaker 1: Now you're in the union during the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And such as it starts to really rail up (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts on the, on the Civil Rights Move- Movement in those days?
Speaker 2: I was just sorry I was on the West Coast at that time because so much of it was going on, on the East Coast in the cou- instead of the West.  But we did a lot of work particularly in the union, we, when Emmett Till was murdered, for example, we had all kinds of forums.  And I used all my skills that I had learned in the training institute making flyers to go out for all these meetings.  I still used them, I by no means an artist, but they taught us how to lay out a, a flyer in such a way that people would grab it.  And, and how to pick up the right message that you want to put down on it, we were in that, we supported a lot, here in California we moved on a lot of civil rights laws.  There was a coalition of labor union people and civil rights people that came together to move to get the first fair employment practice law [California Fair Employment Practices Act of 1959] passed in the State of California.  We had very few minorities in the legislature at that time, it was Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] and the man who was the pharmacist over, oh goodness what was his name?  Terrible to get old to all these, I know I know him very well.
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles [California] or?
Speaker 2: No he was here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here.
Speaker 2: In Oakland [California] he was in the Oakland--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --area, I'll think of it, Rumford, Byron Rumford [William Byron Rumford].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Byron Rumford and August- Augustus Hawkins used to sort of, each year one of them would take on one of the laws, they would introduce it.  And then the nex- next year the other person would take it on, and it took us a long time to get a fair employment practice law.  We had stuff on the ballot; we had stuff as initiatives on the ballot which knocked out what we had just gotten done.  And we finally managed to get both the fair housing law [California Fair Housing Act of 1963] and the fair employment practice law on the books.  When I left the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union], I had no thought about where I, what I was gonna do or about where I was gonna go.  I had not decided what I was gonna do (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 483949
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you decide to leave, what was the--
Speaker 2: A couple of things, some of it sexist and one of that wa- one of them was, the ma- the man I worked with for a long time, who was the actual head of the Department of Education [U.S. Office of Education], got appointed to the, to a job at, in Governor Pat Brown's administration.  In 1958 the Democrats swept the elections and for the first time in a long time in California, most of the statewide offices were being held by Democrats.  Governor Pat Brown, not Jerry [Jerry Brown] but Pat Brown.
Speaker 1: Yeah I remember Pat Brown (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was elected.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he was powerful.
Speaker 2: He was elected like three times, so (laughter) you know that he was doing pretty well.  So all of these things were, were going on and people were seeing changes occurring as a result of it.  When he went to go to this new job, the question was who was gonna become the new education director, who had, which his job at that point.  Well I discovered they gonna make a national search to do this, and while they're making the national, national search, I of course am doing the two jobs.  I'm doing my job and the guy's job before me, and finally one day I went in there and I said, "I'm leaving."  And they were shocked, that I said I was leaving, and they said, "What do you mean you're leaving?"  I said, "Well, obviously you don't think I have the capability to be the led- the head of this department.  So I see no reason why I should stay here and do two jobs for the price of one (laughter)."  Well they got panicky because when Dubinsky [David Dubinsky] put his, his program together, this became his baby, having the training institute was like his vision about what was gonna go on.  So he really liked our first class, 'cause were the first ones that were successful.  Back there in that, in the day when we came in, and to lose anybody from that first class was not something he wanted to see happen.  So the person who ran the Pacific Coast office of the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] calls (laughter) up David Dubinsky to tell him that I'm leaving.  And Dubinsky gets very angry, (laughter) "What do you mean she's leaving?"  "Well, I don't know she just came in said she's gonna leave, and she's gonna leave in a few months."  "Well what does she want, why aren't you giving her the job?" "Well, well she says that she wants--," this is my great negotiating skill--, "she said that she wants, she wants a thirty-five dollar a week increase, and she want (laughter) and she wants it retroactive to when, when she started doing the two jobs."  He says, "If that's she wants, and you, you're saying no, give it to her (laughter)."  So they gave me the job and I, and I did it for quite a while, but at the same time, a lot of the union organizers who had come up through the training class were organizing their own union.  Because they were saying, we're not getting paid very much, we're not getting very good benefits, we're doing all this work, we're working all these hours.  And we're not getting anything we're near what we should be getting, we don't even get the same benefits as the people who are in the gar, in the, in the union.  So they setup this, this group call FOUR, it was the Federation of Union Representatives.  And the ILGWU refused to negotiate with them (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So this is, this is really ironic, isn't it?
Speaker 2: They, it was very ironic and, and the, they went back and forth on this for a long time, they finally got the NLRB [National Labor Relations Board] to agree that there should be a union.  And actually the union won the people on FOUR won by one vote.  But they never were able to get the negotiations done to get the contract signed.  So after about a year of this, I decided I've had enough, I'm leaving, so I did, I just decided I would quit at that point and time, and did.
Speaker 1: Now that it just seems so strange, now, I, I know, I've been around organizers and, and you know people can come out of some strange bags.  They, they can work real hard to do one thing, then, then they can't see that they're, that they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as part of the--
Speaker 2: Well it's, it's the same kind of thing that you saw with some of the unions around the question of racial integration.  You know because we had some very strong union people who fought to the death on not getting minorities into some of the trades.  A lot of the construction unions, for example, they just would not take in, it was an apprenticeship program approach.  Which essentially said, "My, my son gets to be the apprentice when I vote."  And for that reason they, they really made a lot of enemies that last 'til today.  You know a lot of people who don't wanna join any of the construction unions because of that history.  So there's no understanding about why this happens, but it does happen, the FOUR does not exist, it went, it went out of business pretty quickly.  Because they never were able to get the negotiations going, but it turned a lot of people away from, from the whole union program.
Story_ID: 483950
Speaker 1: So I went off and went back to, to Brooklyn [New York] to visit my family, I was very active during this whole period with the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] with the Democratic Party.  Because the Republicans for the most part control the State of California in those days, and a lot of the labor laws needed to, to be changed.  And we couldn't get anything through, so I knew a lot of people in the Democratic Party, and was part of something called the California Democratic Council.  Which was established by Alan Cranston who later became the senator for the state, and we had worked together on the California Democratic Council.  I was a trustee of the council, and when I went back to Washington [D.C.], when I went back to Cali- to New York [New York], I went down to Washington to visit some friends, and I ran into Alan Cranston on the street.  He was then the controller of the State of California, and he said, "What are you doing in Washington?" So I explained that I had left the ILGU, et cetera, et cetera.  And he said, "Well come to work for me in my campaign 'cause I'm gonna be running." I said, "I don't wanna get back into the political arena, Alan.  Thanks a lot, but no thanks," so we went up the Hotel Washington [W Washington D.C., Washington, D.C.] to have a drink, and we're sitting there with a couple of other people that showed up.  And Alan goes downstairs to pick up a newspaper to see what's going on in California, he comes back up and big headline says "Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] to run for governor."  (Laughter) So he comes back and he says, "Are you sure you don't wanna be in politics, you wanna be out of politics when you have a chance to be in this campaign?"  I said, "You sold me, so I'm coming back," so I spent a year working on Alan's campaign and also working on obviously to trying not to get Nixon elected at that point.  And we won, and then Alan wanted to know if I wanted to become what, what were they called, an inheritance tax appraiser, 'cause that's what the controller does.  He handles all the people who handle the estates for people who die; I said, "No (laughter) that that's definitely not what I wanna do."  And then the next thing I hear is, "Well, we got a job coming up at the Fair Employment Practices Commission, somebody is just about to leave."  And one of the people we had worked with in getting the law passed on fair employment practices [California Fair Employment Practices Act of 1959] called me up and said, "Since you haven't decided what you wanna do, do you want to come and work with the Fair Employment Practices Commission?"  And I said, "Okay," so in 1962, I came up to San Francisco [California] from Los Angeles [California] to work for the Fair Employment Practices Commission as the assistant chief of the agen- of the agency.
Story_ID: 483951
Speaker 1: I wanna go back for a minute just be- before we, we pick up there just to ask you about that can, that gubernatorial campaign with Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon] and you know Nixon had you know really put all his chips on this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and he lost big time and so--
Speaker 2: He lost big time.
Speaker 1: And you know everybody thought he was finished but, how, what are your reflections on that, why did he lose and since he was such a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I act- I actually think he lost because of the California Democratic Council, just to, the reason the Democrats lost all the time, they had more Democrats in terms of registration than they had Republicans in the state for a long time.  But they could never turnout the vote, and one of the reasons they could not, it was they were not organized.  Alan Cranston and some of the people who put the California Democratic Council together organized the State of California's Democratic Party on a precinct by precinct basis.  So they had people in every precinct of the state.  And for the first time they were able to pull out enough votes because people worked in precincts got what they had to get done in the precincts.  Turned the vote out, so all of a sudden it was this big vote that showed up for the Democrats, and then they had of course control of the, of the state for a while.  And as a result of that, got a lot of things passed the fair employment practice laws, the fair housing laws, the changes of labor standards.  They organized the farm workers under this, so there was a real groundswell which kept the Democrats in power for quite a while, until they got lazy, and stopped doing it.  So it was really trying to get something done in the State of California that was not gonna be controlled simply by the richest people in the state.  And the people who were also controlling in terms of their backgrounds, there was big business that ran the state in those days.  And as I said, no Democrats could ever win; I think they only had one Democrat that was able to get through on the legislative approaches in those days at the statewide level.  There were of course people in the assembly [California State Assembly] and in the, and in the house and then also in the national legislature and they picked up votes as well.  They began to get more Democrats elected nationally at the assembly level and at the senate level in the state.  And, it, it swung back.
Speaker 1: Yeah because it seem like the Pat Brown  [Edmund G. "Pat" Brown, Sr.] thing was a juggernaut, and then all of a sudden (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Here, here comes Ronald Regan [President Ronald Wilson Regan], and I could--
Speaker 2: Well a lot, and it was because politicians tend to get really comfortable and figure they don't have to do some things after awhile.  And you have to do it, and the party didn't like the fact that the Dem, California Democratic Council had the ability to, to actually endorse during the primary.  'Cause if you're in a political party you don't endorse, the clubs don't enjoy, endorse during the primary.  Because that's, that's where the control takes place is there, but in the case of the California Democratic Council, they were not a party, a piece of the actual party.  They were separate, and so they could endorse and they did endorse and they endorsed candidates that were more liberal.  And more likely to, to run on some of these issues and those old people had been sitting in there for a long time, not doing anything.  And sort of just playing games with the Republicans that were there.  And I think what happened was the Democrats started to undo the California Democratic Council, because once, once they won and they continue to win the party mechanism said we don't want this anymore.  We want them to be inside the party, so they stopped the Dem, the Democratic Council (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they--
Speaker 2: --Approaches.
Speaker 1: They sort of untied their own shoes (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and nobody endorses in the primary anymore either, you can just go through that process.  Individuals endorse, but you don't get the clubs doing it to any great degree.
Story_ID: 483952
Speaker 1: Okay, so Fair Employment Practices Commission, you're assistant chief of that?
Speaker 2: Right I became the assistant chief, and then they got the fair housing bill [California Fair Housing Act of 1963] passed, so that also became a part of that agency.  Became the Fair Employment and Housing Administration [Division of Fair Employment and Housing; California Department of Fair Employment and Housing], and was statewide.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That puts us around 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I went to the Fair Employment Practice Commission in 1961, '62 [1962], I started in '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration is nationally--
Speaker 2: Oh I forgot to tell you about that, we helped elect Kennedy in the Dem- through the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union].  One of the things the ILGWU always did was they ran rallies for the candidates who were endorsed by, by the party.  Or by the union mostly 'cause the ILGWU has always been sort of in, of independent in terms of its political stance in New York [New York].  And established the American Labor Party, established the Liberal Party [Liberal Party of New York] 'cause it wasn't always in tune with some of the Democrats.  And so, and so they have played a major role in politics ever they since they began actually, but more so in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s].  And a guy by the name of Gus Tyler, whom I mentioned earlier when I told you that, I, I decided I would go to work for the ILGWU.  He was the political person, who did a lot of the work of what should be done, and one of the things that always happened was whenever the union endorsed candidates, it was a usual big rally for the candidate who was elected for president.  You know who was running for the presidency, and there was a, a real battle going on in the Democratic Party that year.  Because a lot of people did not like Kennedy in the lu- in the union movement, because he, nobody remembers this.  But he was one of the persons who had introduced a bill that came out, right about the same time that the Taft-Hartley bill [Labor Management Relations Act of 1947] came in.  Which was really very negative in terms of labor, but you have a hard time finding his name on that bill anymore.  But the, a number of the people in the unions were not happy with him, but because he was the Democratic Party's candidate, they had agreed you know to hold these rallies and to meet with him.  And the first meeting was held in the old Ambassador Hotel down in Los Angles [California], this is the California group [California Democratic Council].  And everybody was standing around there mumbling because they were, he had not, Kennedy had not yet arrived, he was late.  They were not happy about him anyway, because they had rer- heard all of these things, and they were told that they should get, come there because he was likely to be the winning candidate.  And this guy walks into the room and it was like a light turned on in the room, this, he really had the kind of charisma that people talk about at that point in time.  And he has, he had a way of pulling a crowd together, he knew people were angry, he knew that he was on really shaky ground in there.  He came in and jumped up on the table in the Ambassador Hotel so he could see everybody in the room.  And he went to town, and gave a great speech about you know the importance of bringing people together, what it was like now to make sure that we were gonna start on a new footing in this country, et cetera, et cetera.  Never mentioned the bill that he had put (laughter) in before, and by the time he was finished there, everybody was applauding him like crazy.  So the ILGWU schedules its rally, every time we had done the rally we had used the same place, we, it was like a little it's kind of a, what do you call those places with that's not an open street, you know it's like a?
Speaker 1: Plaza or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: It's on three sides, what's.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cul-de-sac?
Speaker 2: Say it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cul-de-sac?
Speaker 2: Cul-de-sac.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter) I knew it was a foreign word, thank you.  And, and we always had it there, and it holds maybe two thousand people or so, so it's a good size rally.  So I'm now the director of the educational department so it's my responsibility to put this program together.
Story_ID: 483953
Speaker 1: So I go down I go through my whole routine, I had been doing it for eleven years, along with the guy that had been my boss at that stage.  So I knew what to do and I had everything setup, the stage was there, everything was going well.  I go down, it's nine o'clock in the morning, this rally is not supposed to take place until twelve, I'm looking around and there are a couple hundred people there already so I get very nervous.  When, when it got time for the rally, there had to have been thirteen thousand people in this place.  They spread out from the cul-de-sac, down the streets, we had a hard time getting Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] up and onto the platform.  Because it was, just every street was blocked, and I said, "The guy's gonna win, there's no question about it.  He's found a way of reaching the American people and he's definitely gonna win."  Everything went wrong in the rally, the sound equipment went off, Sammy Davis, Jr. was one of our entertainers, he was supposed to sing.  Couldn't sing, so he played the drums and tap danced instead, because the, he, nobody could hear him.  And as I said, it was a, it was a madhouse but it was very clear he was gonna win, and having that change, made a big difference I think in what people were ready to do at that point in time.  So it was easier to get into administration jobs, to get into policy level jobs at that time.  And it made it quite easy you know you could get what you were going, problem of course happened that he was killed.
Story_ID: 483954
Speaker 1: And Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] came in and we were in the middle of the fight on the civil rights bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964], and here in California we were pushing very hard to get the bill passed.  Because we needed it to con- to obviously support the one that we had out here and it was touch and go.  But Johnson was able to pull the votes in, he probably knew everybody in the [U.S.] Congress and something bad about them that he could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Hold over their heads (laughter) if it was necessary.  Little twisting here and there and he got the bills through.  But they had not yet gotten it through when we were getting nervous here in California, because we wanted to see it happen right away.  So we were bugging everybody, we would saying, "You gotta get out there and do something, we gotta get this bill passed.  We gotta get Johnson on, on target," at this point, everything happens, it works out well.  I'm with the Fair Employment Practices Commission, I'm up in Sacramento [California] trying to get some money for our agency, 'cause my experience has been every civil rights bill that we have ever passed has been underfunded and understaffed.  And, and it's done that on purpose, it's not gonna just happens that way.  So I'm up in Sacramento trying to get some more money for the budget for the, for the Fair Employment Practice Commission.  And I get a call asking me to get on the phone; I've got a call from Washington [D.C.].  So I go to the phone and it's John Macy [John W. Macy, Jr.] who was the head of the Civil Service Commission under Johnson.  And was the person who was recruiting people for the jobs in the Johnson administration, and he's calling me to ask me if I would be interested in being considered for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] now that the law has been passed and it's gonna be going, would I, would I be interested, now this is '65 [1965].  The law was passed in '64 [1964] it was given a year to get itself organized so that on the 2nd of July in 1965, it could start business.  It is now February of 1965, they have not done anything, they have not appointed all the commissioners, they haven't done anything.  So when this guy calls me and he starts off with saying, "We'd like to know if you'd be interested having your names put in for consideration?"  I start arguing with him about, "Why haven't you done this a long time ago, you only got two months to on- to get the organization (laughter) going," blah, blah, blah, blah.  He said, "Well we need an answer by the weekend." I said, "Well I, I'm not inclined to do this, but I will talk it over with some of my friends and see what happens."  So I did that, and all of my friends said to me, "I know it's, it's terrible, I know that they're way behind.  But if you don't go there you gonna be mad about it for the rest of your life if things don't go right so you might as well say yes."  So I called him back and I said yes and I got appointed to the commission, we got appointed in April.  We had to go through the [U.S.] Senate hearings, so we didn't actually get on board until May.  And we had to open up the office on July the second, fully ready to go with this law that what had been passed back in '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 483955
Speaker 1: I remember this was a big deal, your, your picture was on the cover of Jet magazine.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: So, I mean all, all the blacks folks knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a big deal.
Speaker 1: --about it.
Speaker 2: And it was funny because some of the, some of the stories said, "Highest paid black woman (laughter)." My, my salary was twenty thousand dollars (laughter).  So you know what that sounds like now.
Speaker 1: So did that, did that actually make you the highest paid black woman?
Speaker 2: I don't think that was true.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's, the highest paid black woman that anybody knew about at that point in time so that was it.
Speaker 1: Well those days twenty thousand dollars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was--
Speaker 1: In those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was big money, it was big money.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I there's some, I put into perspective a guy, Vada Pinson of the Reds [Cincinnati Reds] is making about that much playing baseball.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, so.
Speaker 2: Well I wish I was making as much as they are playing baseball now that would be a whole lot better (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he wasn't the highest paid, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: He about middle level, I just remember re, seeing that what--
Speaker 2: Yeah generally speaking government was usually getting paid better than other places, especially for black people.  That was true.  The jobs that were available in government were usually better paid than others that were there.  So that's how I wound up at the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].
Story_ID: 483956
Speaker 1: And of course when they passed the law [Civil Rights Act of 1964] back in '64 [1964], they added that little phrase in the law that said sex discrimination, as well and we had no experience in the United States on sex discrimination.
Speaker 2: Now I've read that that's, was kind a fluke that that got in there and--
Speaker 1: Peop- people have different ways of looking at it, it was definitely not in the original bill.  The original bill was a traditional civil rights bill which was race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry.  A guy from Virginia on the floor raised the question of putting on in sex, he was not an advocate for civil rights, so nobody believed that he was doing that in order to get the bill passed.  But because it was done at the very last stages of the, of the pol- political activities around the bill.  And because women were organized, you know women had gotten organized back in 1961 when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] established a Commission on the Status of Women [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women].  And a study was done and came out saying very clearly that women were second class citizens in the United States.  It was, it was chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt, the commission that did that.  When they finally made their report, Margaret Meade did the public version of that, and every state had created a Commission on the Status of Women.  So women pushed a lot of power to get that law passed.
Story_ID: 483957
Speaker 1: We were discussing, as we were changing the tape, about, the, the contributions of Lady Bird Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She seemed to be somewhat in the mold of not, not in, not another Eleanor Roosevelt, but she did have the respect of people who were doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah she was much more behind the scenes than Eleanor Roosevelt was, that's, very clear, but she had a lot of influence, there's no question about it.  And a lot of people really liked her; she was very down to earth.  When I was appointed to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] and we got to get sworn in at the, in the Rose Garden, my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] and father [Charles Clarke, Sr.] were invited to come.   And they did, in fact my older brother [Charles Clarke, Jr.] came as well, and my mother was taken by Lady Bird Johnson and shown the entire White House [Washington, D.C.].  And she treated her so beautifully, my mother loved her, and she really was a very nice person.  She was a person that understood politics, stayed in the background in a lot of ways, you didn't see her out as much as you saw Eleanor Roosevelt everywhere.  But maybe that had a lot of to do with the fact that Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] couldn't get out, so Eleanor Roosevelt was out doing the things that she had to do, because he wasn't able to.  But everybody liked Lady Bird, and she was, she was very influential in a lot places, she had good friends that she could call upon.  She was a Texas lady and there's a, there are Texas ladies that have, are dynamite.  And a lot of Texas women have a lot of influence and have done some magnificent things behind the scenes; they don't always step out into the forefront.  But every once in a while they do like Ann Richards, and you can see the power.  They really had the ability to do things, they're smart and they're, they're ready to work on a lot of issues.  And they, they get things done.
Story_ID: 483958
Speaker 1: Were there any other black women in, in high positions in government in those days (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, in fact another Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] student was very much in high position, Pat Roberts [Patricia Roberts Harris]; she held office in, actually two jobs.  She was both at the department of, they keep changing the name of that Department of Health and Human Services [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].  And she was also the head of the HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] at one point, so she's had two.  And of course she was an ambassador also, so she's had those kinds of jobs.  There were several other people, on the commission with me there was, there was another black person.  Samuel Jackson [Samuel C. Jackson], who was the Republican member of the commission, the commission is al- always supposed to be nonpartisan.  But really is just bipartisan, so Sam was black and, and a Republican, I was black and a Dem- and a Democrat.  And the interesting thing was that Sam and myself and the other Republican were closer than I was to any of the two Democrats (laughter) on the commission.  Mostly because they were ready to move, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Jr. was the chair of the commission, and he really did not have his mind on the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC].  He wanted to run for governor of the State of New York, which he actually left to do, but he didn't win.  And the other member was a Texas minister [Luther Holcomb] who had been on the civil rights commission down in Texas, and he was not quite in with what we thin- thought needed to be done in terms of changes and commission policy.  On some of the issues that were really like class action issues, we had, we had so many complaints.  Because they took so long to come along with the actual hiring of the commission.  There were well, on the day that we opened our office on July the 2nd, 1965, they were well over two thousand cases that had been delivered to us by the end the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Plus all the others that were coming from other places, so we were backlogged from the very first day, 'cause we had no staff.  We had to borrow staff for almost a year, I had to call back to San Francisco [California] and see if we could steal some of the people for at least on a temporary burse- basis.  From the California commission to come and work with us to get going, so the commission started on a backlog basis.  It started with a very iffy leadership; there were people who knew nothing about some of the issues that we were talking about.  Certainly nothing on sex discrimination, and it took a lot of effort to get some things changed at that point in time.  We just did not have the cohesiveness on the commission that was necessary.
Story_ID: 483959
Speaker 1: I have here in my notes that Pauli Murray suggested that, that the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] really wasn't gonna be able to be as effective as, as peop- people had hoped on, on issues of sexism, especially (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's really interesting that you, here we connect again, I hadn't seen or heard from Pauli in years, and then Pauli was on the staff of the Commission on the Status of Women [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women] that Eleanor Roosevelt chaired.  So she had helped do the, the lot of the research that showed how much discrimination there really was against women.  She did particularly the research around black women, so that you knew that, and the ca- the commission was not jelling in any kind of way for a while.  Because it was just very haphazard, and we had a lot of decisions to make, because there was some things that were not very clear of the law.  We had to interpret them; a lot of those issues were around the question of sex discrimination, because for example, there were many areas where there were special laws that only protected women, and not men.  And the law says you had to have equality, so we had to look at those laws to see should they still be valid.  Should they be changed, should men be added to the protections that were there?  We had some places where some jobs were not even permitted for women to take, so this was a second one.  We also had the, the help wanted advertising issue, the newspapers in those days ran their columns on jobs under headings that said help wanted male, help wanted, female.  So we had to decide is this a violation of the law to have segregated columns on terms of the jobs.  So we went back and forth on a lot of these issues.  'Cause the, the law was not that clear on the relationship, for example, of the newspapers to an employer, it was clear we had jurisdiction over the employer.  That if an employer discriminated we had something that we could do, it was not clear that we could go after the newspapers for having the columns.  So we went back and forth on those issues, and that was one of the ones that Pauli (laughter) picked up.  Because we made a couple of decisions on an interim basis which were very stupid decisions.  And Pauli was quoted in The New York Times as saying, "What women needed was something like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Because until they organized, they were not gonna get the kind of response on this new law that they were hoping to get."
Story_ID: 483960
Speaker 1: Pauli Murray--and I, I had to, I'm been digging through my mind here, the name, I, I think I read years ago that she in Chicago [Illinois] at a certain point.  Was founded the precursor to CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] with James Farmer, they were doing the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ver- very interesting that you raise that because James Farmer as you may, I think Pauli has been involved in everything.  And I would not be surprised if that's true, I'm not sure myself, but I would not be surprised.  But Pauli also, I got reconnected with Pauli a couple years after this; because Pauli was involved in Shirley Chisholm's run for the pres- for her job in the [U.S.] Congress.  And she ran against (laughter) James Farmer, and that was fascinating and per- and the reason Pauli wrote me was because I think it was James Farmer that she ran against.  So maybe we better check that fact, but it was one of the leaders in the, in the Civil Rights Movement, CORE or something else.
Speaker 1: It might've been McKissick [Floyd McKissick], I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Not McKissick.
Speaker 1: It wasn't McKissick?
Speaker 2: Not, it wasn't McKissick but there might've been, I'll, I'll think of the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Person's name in a minute.  But in doing his campaign, instead of just running a campaign about his qualification, his, his motto was, "Put a good man in the Congress (laughter)."  So, (laughter) Pauli, Pauli went ballistic and sent out letters to everybody and all of us were on top on that in ten seconds.  You know we got all, all excited about it and then we all went out and supported Shirley Chisholm's campaign for the presidency later on.
Speaker 1: But clearly, she, she's at the forefront of progressive thinking on this issue and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ver- a very definitely.
Speaker 1: --she sets the stage for NOW [National Organization for Women], right, the creation of NOW.
Speaker 2: She is, she is a strong person in the, in the fight for NOW because of that background on the Commission on the Status of Women [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women], and then coming right behind that the passage of this new law, she's got data.  She's got information, she's got all kinds of things going that she can bring into the play, and she made it ver- verbal you know.  She was interviewed by The Times [The New York Times] on one of the decisions made by the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], and she's said you know, "We need something like an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for women to do this." And then Pauli never gets much credit for it, but she actually wrote sections of the statement of purpose of the National Organization for Women.  Mostly those sections that dealt with connecting the women's movement to all struggles for equality, so that it's not, it's not a struggle for white women essentially to do this.  It's a struggle for all women to get together, to do things that would change the way in which the world operates.  To look at all the issues of inequity in our society.
Story_ID: 483961
Speaker 1: This goes back to, this is a struggle that goes all the way back to the 19th century with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --when, when white women were involved in the abolitionist movement also the white, the not white but the women's movement, too.
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: And they were both win- winning (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at one time, and--
Speaker 2: The women who were the suffragists.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Who were after the vote.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They say--
Speaker 1: They were abolitionists--
Speaker 2: They were almost all white women at, at the point, southern white women; there were some southern white women who were supportive of that issue.  And supported of, of making it an issue that was all women, but for the most part, there was no connection.  You know the white women and black women have very little connection with each other in those days.  There was no way to create a movement around them.  And when they have the, the suffrage convent- well it wasn't a convention but in 1848, they decided that the needed to have a convention around the question of women's rights.   And a lot of the women's rights had to do with their inability to get property, the inability to have a vote, to have all of those things.  And it was done in this tiny little town, up in Upstate New York called Seneca Falls.  They, I'm sure there was not a black (laughter) person anywhere around there except that right up the street in Rochester [New York], a certain guy by the name of Frederick Douglass was.  And Frederick Douglass went to that convention [Women's Rights Convention], he spoke at the convention that was held in 1848 and he was an abolitionist whose newspaper [The North Star] was clearly also supportive of women's rights.  So when he spoke, he spoke up on getting the vote, it was not originally in their documents that they put together.  He said getting the vote is the important thing we know that that's important, and women have to learn that it's important too.  So there was that connection, black man and white women for the most part, very few black women actually involved in the suffragist movement.  But a lot of them were very supportive of the movement, and you see that as you go back into history, there are some really good books now on people who've trace history.  And found the black women and other women who were part of the movement--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right yeah, I know they talk a lot about Sojourner Truth but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Ma- Maria Stewart [Maria W. Stewart] before her and others.
Speaker 2: Yeah and you know here I go again, Ida Wells-Barnett [Ida B. Wells], she marched in that parade the will, you, we're talking about Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson] in one of the breaks.  She marched in that parade when they were trying to persuade Wilson to come out and support of the suffrage amendment [Nineteenth Amendment].  And she was not; they did not want her to march in the parade.  Some of the, some of the southern women did not want her in the parade, but she marched anyway.
Speaker 1: Now she, she worked closely with Jane Addams (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah Women's International League for Peace and Freedom and all of the groups that came out of that and so.  And Jane Addams of course was also a founder of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; she was on the first board, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So there's this con- connection through history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --of civil rights and women's issues there, they're really both civil rights--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, they're both human rights--
Speaker 1: --human, yes.
Speaker 2: When you get right down to it, and, and that's growing more and more, the whole fight now is in a broader context than what would normally be limited to what we think of as civil rights.  We are talking about human rights internationally, we're talking about environment, we're talking about all of these things that were not on the agenda.  Because the immed- immediate issue was stop the lynching you know, get, get people freed, get people the right to vote.  But now we are looking at a global movement that very much connects what used to be the Civil Rights Movement.  And what is also the movement around all what, all the issues that are contained in human rights.
Story_ID: 483962
Speaker 1: Now was it hard in those day to, to get black men to, to think seriously about women's rights?
Speaker 2: You know what's so nice to get to be as old as I am, is that you learn that there is no such thing as a stereotype in these areas.  Some black men were great, and other black men were not, you know I can remember a saying.  And having people write articles in which the battleground was black men are not getting things 'cause white women are getting them.  And so you, you black women is out of the picture altogether, she's not even being thought of at that stage of the game.  So the idea is again to say this is not that simple, and not all men are gonna be the enemies.  And not all women are gonna be the friends, as we go through this, and it turned out to be very true.  'Cause as we started to try to get some of the changes in the law, but we were looking at the Equal Rights Amendment which we still haven't gotten passed, as you know.  We found that there were a lot of women were totally hostile to the idea, and there were some men who were very supportive, who came out and did it so.  I've learned along the line then that little lesson that my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] taught me when she went and knocked that hat off that man's head, was that you can stereotype.  You can say that because somebody is some race that all people in that race are gonna be the same way.  And it's true about gender, so some of the really good supportive friends that we've had have been men.  And I think more and more black men are beginning to understand that this is an issue that they have to be on the right side of.  We have to do a lot of things that I think we're learning, 'cause we haven't taught history, so we have generations of new young people who have no idea about the history of, of our society.  And this whole discussion around the use of certain words has become big one in the, in the black community.  Because they're usually words very hostile to women, you getting an image of them that that really makes you feel that those people who were doing that clearly have very low images in terms of women and in particularly of black women, as we go through, and somehow they were trying to say that black women were making monu- many more strides than black men were.
Speaker 1: Right, they used to be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They would get a double you know they would get a double benefit, because they were both a woman and a minority, they got double.  So we get all those mythologies out there and you find yourself in, in arguments all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah it used to be a, there's a street saying at one point that used to, I used to hear this a million times, people would say only.  The only peop- people who are free in America are black women and white men you know, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so that was, you, I'm sure you heard that.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, it's been said lot of times, but when you really analyze on, anything that is that general, you know puts everybody in one basket, has to be wrong.  You know you, you just start out saying (laughter) that's not gonna be true.
Story_ID: 483963
Speaker 1: --Tell us about the development of NOW [National Organization for Women], 'cause this, this kind of that, you know this, this NOW is about Pauli Murray kind of sets the stage for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah Pauli was very signif- significant figure in it, not just in terms of what she said in the newspaper.  But she was doing some work with the [U.S.] Department of Labor and a lot of the help that was given to the formation of NOW came from the department, of the Women's Bureau.  Where, where Pauli had been working on these issues and so Pauli had good vibes in that, in that community.  She worked with a lot of those women, she had done a lot of the research work on the, on the commission's [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women] report.  So Pauli was very active in the entire discussion about what she had already said to The Times [The New York Times], how do you organize women to be more forceful about pushing for this law?  'Cause if there's nobody out there pushing, nobody's gonna do anything in terms of them enforcing the law, that was pretty clear.  Especially with these big, big issues of how many, how many cases have been filed with us, and how much backlog we had.  They were gonna do whatever was there first, there was no question about it, so what, part of it was to get more women to file complaints.  Where there was a problem and Pauli did a lot of that, and secondly was to make sure that whatever was put together was not gonna be in competition.  That we're not competing with each other, the women, women's rights versus minority rights, that these were two interlocked communities.  And they needed to work together on these issues, and Pauli in what she said in the statement of purpose made that very clear.  But because of the way in which NOW got formed, because it actually got formed at a meeting of the Commissions on the Status of Women.  And it was just after we had gotten Title VII [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title VII] passed, I spoke at the first meeting of the, with the Commission on the Status of Women about the change in the law.  And by the time we got to the second meeting, I was saying the same thing that Pauli was saying you know.  That you need to have somebody out there speaking on this, I worked with a lot of the women in the Women's Bureau.  The issues around sex discrimination 'cause they were the place to go for information.  And Pauli had put her two cents in there and things were moving along very well, and women got together.  And they decided at one of the Commissions of the Status of, of Women that they were gonna come back and they were going to ask the Commission on the Status of Women to take action on a particular issue.  The issue that they were gonna take action on was the fact that the way the, the Title VII was written, commissioners served a five-year term was the maximum term that you had.  And then you had to be reappointed if you were gonna be appointed.  But because we were the first commission, they had staggered the terms, so that you wouldn't lose all of the commissioners at one point in time.  So I had the shortest term, the first term, I had a one-year term, but because they hadn't done anything for one year, I actually wound up with the largest term.  Because I then was reappointed for a five-year term, and then somebody had a four-year term and somebody had a three and two and a one.  And the person who had the one-year term at that point was Richard Graham [Richard A. Graham] who was the businessman from Wisconsin.  The Republican businessman from Wisconsin who had taken on the responsibility for the sex discrimination part of the law.  We had, we had no staff, so we had to divide up who would do what, they wanted to give me sex discrimination and I said, "No.  I think we need to get somebody else to get the information on this."  Besides I have to deal with the relationship between the state commissions on, on equal employment opportunity and our federal commission.  'Cause the law also said that if there is a state that has a commission that relates to, to equal opportunity and employment or housing, that state has the right to take the complaints.  And the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] should work out some arrangement with them where they get paid for doing those kinds of things.  So I was supposed to work out that agreement, it was kind of interesting 'cause I had never been one of them before.  I had known all of these people for all these times, (laughter) I went to the first meeting as a member of the commission.  And they were up there saying, "Well you guys do this," (laughter), and I said, you, "I'm one of you, don't you remember me (laughter)?"
Story_ID: 483964
Speaker 1: But anyway Dick [Richard A. Graham] took on the sex discrimination cases, so he was very important to the women's groups in that.  And he was gonna lose his job, he had not yet been reappointed by the president [President Lyndon Baines Johnson], and the law said that you did not stay on until a new appointment was made on the day that you're, you're commission ended you were off the commission.  So on July 1st, he was a commissioner and July 2nd he was gone, (laughter) his office was cleared out.  And the women tried to say to the president appointed before that and he did not, he did not.  So they were mad about that and they wanted to put in a, a resolution at the Commission on the Status of Women [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women] telling the president to appoint Richard Graham for the next five-year term.  When they raised the question at the meeting, the chair, the person in the chair at the meeting said, "We cannot take that resolution.  We are not as a body authorized to take any actions; we are just a study body, body."  The women who were there who were very anxious to do this, said, "This is ridiculous," so they all sat around a table at lunchtime talking about this.  They said, "We gotta do something," Pauli [Pauli Murray] was in the group and they said, "We gotta do something.  Let's meet tonight about this, but in the meantime, we got to get an organization started."  They met that night; they came back and decided yes they would start an organization.  Everybody threw in five bucks [dollars] for the money so they could set out, send out a mailing, and Betty Friedan contributed the name.  Which was the National Organization for Women [NOW] and it was born at the commission meeting.  And they had the summertime to organize to actually do more than just get those few people that was sitting around that table.  But to actually get a movement going, so everybody was supposed to go back to their home state and start moving to get more members of the organization (cough).  Excuse me (pause). So by October of that year they had three hundred members and they held a convention and NOW was born on October the 31st, 1965, 19--yeah, 1966, pardon me (cough).  And that, that was NOW, Pauli was in it, Pauli helped write the statement of purpose, as I said.  She continued to be active in it; she also would eventually came and worked with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] for a while.  She was never really on staff, she came as a consultant, but she did a lot of work with the EEOC as well.
Story_ID: 483965
Speaker 1: So you were with the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] until, 'til when for how long until?
Speaker 2: I was appointed in 1965 and I left in November of 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I resigned because we were making stupid decisions, and I couldn't do anything about it, so I decided.  And I had been working also with these women who were trying to explain what was going on and what they needed to do to change.  So I told them that I was resigning, and I was resigning primarily 'cause we had had cases that was sitting on our desk for almost a year with no decisions (cough).  The cases were not only women's cases, they were cases involving the steelworkers, we had not come to decisions on whether or not we could use class actions suits on some of these issues.  Or use commission complaints on them, people had filed cases with us, we have actually had individual commissioners make a decision.  But there was nothing that happened after you made the decision.  So I said, "Enough of that, I, I think I need to be someplace more active than this, I'm not gonna sit on this commission and not do anything."  So I announced my, my resignation, and by that time, we had three members of the commission.  Roosevelt [Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Jr.] had gone off to run for governor, he was gone, the president [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] had not appointed anybody, the second person was Dick Graham [Richard A. Graham].  He got lost because his term expired; the president had not appointed anybody.  I wrote letters to people in the White House saying, "This is unconscionable.  We've only got three members left on the commission and those three members have to be unanimous in order for us to make a decision and we are not unanimous."  This man from Texas [Luther Holcomb] is not on our side (laughter) on some of these issues, so it's myself and Sam Jackson [Samuel C. Jackson] trying to hold the commission together.  And I didn't get any responses back from the, from the White House, so I said I'm gone.  And I announced my re- my resignation as of November.  But I also said I still think you have to make the appointments to the commission, the president did make another appointment.  He made it so that we had four, he ma- he named a new chair by the name of Stephen Shulman [Stephen N. Shulman], and he came on while I was still there.  And I said to him that I thought it was important that we make some decisions while I was still there.  So that we would not have to go over them all over again, and he agreed, so we held, held a commission meeting and we tried to make some decisions on the steelworker's cases, to move them forward and get them going, and secondly to make a decision on the sex discrimination cases.
Story_ID: 483966
Speaker 1: The case that we were looking at was a United Airlines [sic. Northwest Airlines] case and it was case [Evenson v. Northwest Airlines, Inc.] in which the decision was being made about whether or not the U- the airlines could continue to limit their jobs to women only on as flight attendant.  And we had made the decision that they could not because the law said that you had to treat men and women equally in this arena.  And that we found that there was nothing that was in the flight attendants' job that a man could not do.  And, therefore, they had to open the jobs to them, and we, we just simply toss out the suggestion that what they were doing in the airlines qualified as what they call a bona fide occupational qualification, a BFOQ.  Which in simple terms meant is it possible that there are some jobs that could only be done by women or only be done by men?  And we had really tried hard to find them, and actually we did not find them, there were some by custom that people would like to do.  But not certainly by, because they were not capable of doing it.  So this would be a really big decision, 'cause it would change a lot of things in the airlines.  And certainly make their life more miserable and cost them more money 'cause they didn't pay the women who were flight attendants as much as they paid the men on their jobs.  And most international lines already had men who were flight attendants, so they had very little to stand on.  They really go and lose the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it's just the--
Speaker 1: --together.
Speaker 2: It's the United States' custom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was mostly the United States and even in the United States they were doing something similar, because they had a few men, but the men got more money than the women.  United Airlines, for example, flow, flew to Hawaii, and on that Hawaii trip there was a male steward in part, in charge.  And the stewardesses paid less money for the same flight.
Story_ID: 483967
Speaker 1: Tell us about becoming president of NOW [National Organization for Women], now you; you were the second national president?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: After Betty Friedan.
Speaker 2: Right, when I left the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] because we finally did make the decision and I finally did leave.  But they did not accept the decision incidentally, I the agency got sued.  Because they sa- the, the airlines [Northwest Airlines] said that I was going to become the executive vice president of NOW, and therefore, my position on the airlines case [Evenson v. Northwest Airlines, Inc.] was illegal.  That I could not make a decision since I had this prior commitment to NOW to work for them as executive president.  Which was really hysterical 'cause they didn't, if you throw five dollars of, from each person into a pot, you don't exactly have any money (laughter) to, to hire anybody for a job.  But they sued and I was on my way back to, to California, when I got to California, I spent Christmas Eve with lawyers taking depu- depositions about whether or not my vote could count on the decision we finally made.  That we really weren't going to hold the airlines responsible.  We went to court and the judge said, "Yes, you cannot make the decision, that this, this is not right for you who is going to be the executive vice president of NOW to have made this decision relating to women."  I said, "I made the decision a long time before NOW even existed (laughter) we were just waiting to get it done."  But they threw the decision out and so they had to start all over again on, on holding hearings and getting it, and they finally made it.  But I was back in, in Cali- California, I had no thoughts about what I was gonna do, I just left.  Somebody interviewed me in the newspaper and they said, "And what you gonna to do when you get back to Washington [D.C.], to California Miss Hernandez [HistoryMaker Aileen Clarke Hernandez]?"  And they kept asking it over and over again, and I didn't wanna keep saying I haven't decided.  So I said, "I'm going fishing," well I, I do fish, I like, I (laughter) do, do fishing.  I get back to, to California and there's a story in the newspaper and it says, "When asked what she's gonna do Miss Hernandez said she's going fishing," next line, "for a husband (laughter)?"  So this is, this is the way I returned to California, having really not decided what I was gonna do, I just simply got back and took, took a little time off.  And sa- pretty soon people started calling me and inviting me to lunch, a lot of the corporations that I had been working with both at the Fair Employment Practices Commission at the EEOC.  Invited me to lunch to find out what's going on the commission and how, what are the things they can do to make sure they don't get into trouble in terms of cases?  I went in one week, I went to lunch six times, and then the next week, I got repeat invitations, and I said this is ridiculous, I'm not gonna get any money, but I'm gonna get fatter (laughter) if I keep doing this.  So I sent a bill to the person that invited me for the second one, and he paid it and I became an urban consultant (laughter).  Mostly on EEOC stuff, but I really am an urban consultant, and I work on issues relating to being in cities, housing, employment, transportation and all that sort of stuff.
Story_ID: 483968
Speaker 1: So I did come back and do a lot of that, so NOW [National Organization for Women] did say to me, "We're sorry," 'cause I had told them don't put me in anything.  Because I am not gonna be (laughter) on, on the NOW board, I'm willing to help in any way I can, but I'm not gonna be on the board.  They said well, "If you can just help on the West Coast and be the vice president, west," now nobody has any money.  Nobody is paying anybody, I said, "I'm just getting ready to start a business [Hernandez and Associates], but okay, I'll do the West Coast."  So when I'm doing my business I can go around and try to organize people, so I did.  I was organizing the West Coast, Dick Graham [Richard A. Graham] the guy that got thrown off the commission [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] without getting reappointed, was the east vice president of NOW, and Betty Friedan was the president.  I got asked by members of NOW in 19--in 1970, early in 1970 if I would run for the presidency.  Betty had been president from 1966 until 1970 and there were some people who were very upset with just her personality (laughter) and how they, they worked with her.  So they wanted somebody else to run and they didn't want the presidency of NOW to become a permanent position.  So they asked if I would run and I said yes, I would, and I got elected.  So that was in 1970, in March and I got elected in Chicago [Illinois].  And began to work on that and a lot of the newspaper articles about my becoming president were focused on what I said when I became president.  That one of my goals was to, to make sure that the movement for women's rights would include all women.  And that we would be looking at women of color and that we would be looking at women who are poor and that we would be looking at women who have disabilities.  Because this is an issue that the whole society has to address, I stayed as president until 1971, which is about all (laughter) the time I could give if I was also gonna learn, earn any money.  And went back and did my business after that, I stayed in contact with NOW but I am not active in NOW at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Anymore.
Speaker 2: Is there, is there a reason why, why?
Speaker 1: Well mostly because I really do believe that you only get out what you (laughter) that the people who start an organization should not stay there forever.  That this is about de- developing leadership, and I think the more the person stays around, the less likely you are going to begin to develop leadership.  It'll just become worse and worse as you go along, so that was the primary reason for it.  And I actually did feel that there needed to be a whole lot more work done with women of color and poor women.  This is where I had spent most of my life working, and so I thought it was important to, to do that.
Story_ID: 483969
Speaker 1: Give me some of your thoughts on the struggle between black women who are fighting for fair treatment.  And white women who are, there, there is, I know there are, there is a fashion of black women who formed something called the womanist movement.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: You have the feminist movement going on, and then you have the womanist movement which is a black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's--
Speaker 1: --woman's movement.
Speaker 2: That's primarily a, a coming from, most of the authors, the writers have done that.  A lot of what has happened in the women's movement is terminology you know and how do you call things.  What are, what are you identifying when you use certain kinds of, of words?  And Alice Walker, for example, uses womanist more than she uses feminist.  I don't think that there's any serious disagreement about what the focus is, but it's mostly on women, but for some reason Al- Alice feels that womanist pays more attention to the individual women than the general comment of feminist.  Men can obviously be feminist too, that's not a, a negative word at all, but the words change a lot.  But they've changed everywhere, I, I can remember I started out life as a little colored baby, and then it was a Negro baby (laughter) and then it was whatever (laughter).  So we changed terms all, all the time as we go along, I just hope we don't get all the way down to, to figuring out that the one word that has been used lately in, in a number of situations is the word that we wanna use permanently.  But I think that's what happened in the women's movement; you have philosophical people, people who are very often academic who are setting sort of parameters for the movement.  And they spend times digging into specific issues; we have, for example, in the first years of NOW [National Organization for Women] a lot of position papers on everything that you can think of.  Women in the family, women in work, women in the religious areas, and everybody had position paper on how that should go.  Those have all been in attitude, they have been changed in some ways, many of them have been held to be pretty sound, even at this point in time.  But I think it's less important about the words that are used and the fact that almost everybody still believes that the women's movement has not been totally successful.  That there's a lot of work still to be done, and, and part of it is that within the, within women's groups there's a lot of difference about what people think is liberation for women.
Story_ID: 483970
Speaker 1: We saw that when we were trying to do the Equal Rights Amendment because it became very clear that the fundamental issue that most of us thought was there was this issue of equality.  For women to say that men and women are equal so then all of the laws that we're talking about would come together.  Some saw that as taking away privileges that women have or things that women need to have.  A lot of people said well women and men are different, well yeah sure, but what does that mean in terms of legality, what does that mean on a legal basis?  During the whole Equal Rights Amendment, you got crazy things being said: "You know like that if you pass that amendment, women and men would have to use the same bathrooms, or that women will have to go into the [U.S.] military forces."  They said, "No, they can have the same options as men and say I, I don't wanna go you know that's not gonna happen."  But it, it diverted a lot of the discussions and it's still not passed as you know.  We got very close, we got I think through thirty-five of the thirty-eight states need it, but then it sort of died.  And it hasn't been able to be resuscitated to get to the final three, because many people now think we don't need it, we've got all these laws now that protect women.  So why do we have to have a constitutional amendment?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm try, trying to think of, I think it's when did Phyllis Schlafly, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Phyllis Schlafly--
Speaker 2: She was the, the--
Speaker 1: She became famous--
Speaker 2: --antagonist of the women's movement.
Speaker 1: Yeah she, she was the one; she was one person and because the philosophy in those days, I wish we could get them to extend it to 'til to, today.  The philosophy of the media in those days was they had to be fair.  So that if five hundred women's organizations said that we're for the Equal Rights Amendment and Phyllis Schlafly said that she was opposed, she got to be equal to five hundred organizations.
Speaker 2: I remember her on 'The Phil Donahue Show,' sitting with Betty Friedan and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --who really represents somebody, here's Phyllis Schlafly who you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She had nobody.
Speaker 2: --represented herself--
Speaker 1: She had nothing, there was nothing going, she finally put together a small organization.  But basically the media made her, because they, they did fairness, as I said I would like them to do fairness on some other issues now, which they don't seem to be able to do.
Speaker 2: You think there's a parallel between what they did with her and what they do with say [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams, or somebody on, on their talk shows.  They, they have a black person advocating for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --affirmative action, instead they have Armstrong Williams, so--
Speaker 1: I think it's very much alike.
Speaker 2: Is it?
Speaker 1: You know they look for the person who's gonna be on the wrong side of the issue or in from the sense in the sense that it's wrong from the point of the human rights issues that are involved.  They go after those people, they get Armstrong Williams, they get our, our good friend, who keeps passing laws (laughter) in our state all the time.  And they figure if they get this one black voice or this one woman's voice that makes up for all the others.  So there's no comparison whatsoever (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I agree.
Speaker 1: And the issues aren't even anywhere close to it.  So it, it, it's strange and I wish the media would get better at what it does and it won't get any better until it's more integrated that's the first part of it.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, it does sort of like its deliberate attempt to unbalance things with one, this one voice.
Speaker 1: You know you hate to look at conspiracy theories, but it does seem to me that they recognize those people who have been in power for a long time.  Recognize that there, these movements are huge now, the human rights movement, the women's rights movement, the movement for human rights all over the world are very big movements.  The environmental movement which started as a small one has now become global.  Because it's incorporated a lot of things that the original people talking about the environment were not talking about.  You know it was a very narrow focus on the original environmental groups that were out there, but now that it's incorporating everything.  And people are coming together more and more people are coming together, there are more and more coalitions being formed.  It doesn't mean people are giving up their own organizations, 'cause there's still a need to do work in your own communities in many ways.  But people are coming together and they're seeing the, the interests are similar.  That if we come together, there really is a mass movement there that you can make a lot that would could make a lot of difference.
Story_ID: 483971
Speaker 1: Did Roe versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] cause any, any serious splits in NOW [National Organization for Women]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, there were, in fact, two things caused splits in NOW.  In fact in the second convention that NOW had, the two issues that were up for debate and the only reason they were a debate was because we couldn't decide.  So we decided that we were gonna put out on the floor of the convention a debate between the people who thought one way and the people who thought another way.  The first one was on the issue of Roe v. Wade. In NOW at that time, we not only had women from a lot of religious groups, we also had an archbishop.  We had, we had lot of nuns were members of NOW as well and they had very strong feelings about what they saw as, as life.  And that it was not appropriate to do away with life, well the women who thought about this, did not think about it as doing away with life.  'Cause what we were really talking about was a choice, we were saying essentially women had the right to use their voices to determine what to do with their bodies.  And not to have all of this being done by somebody who does not know what you're talking about.  We saw it as it as the human rights issue, they saw it instead as a, as an issue of a clash with religious beliefs.  And Roe v. Wade came out and it was, nobody expected that it was gonna happen.  You know because it was argued in the, in the courts by a brand new young woman [Sarah Ragle Weddington] who had, who was probably what twenty-two or twenty-three years old at the [U.S.] Supreme Court arguing on the case and she won it.  And it meant a lot of change, what it meant in NOW was the people who were very much religious who thought of this as a religious issue, left NOW.  But what, what happened was young women who had not been in NOW came into NOW because they saw NOW then as somebody, some group that would help them on identifying their rights to make decisions in these arenas.  And nobody that I heard at that conference said it's--, "I consider abortion a method of birth control."  That was not (laughter) what they were talking about, I don't know too many women who go around saying abortion is the method of birth control.  And I do not know too many women who would not sink, think very seriously about having that decision to make.  It's not a casual decision in any woman's life that's for sure, but to have anybody else make that decision for you is intolerable.  So it did have that split, but it also brought new people into the movement.  So that was the first part.
Story_ID: 483972
Speaker 1: The other issue that came up a lot was the, the fact that we were talking about those separate laws that we have in the, in the state that protected women's rights.  Well we got people on one side who were saying they may protect some women, but they're also barring other women from getting jobs.  And it was an easy argument because we would do, we had come out of the Second World War [World War II, WWII] where women were asked to do a lot of things, they had never done before.  And who were the Rosie the Riveters and all the rest of them, and suddenly after the war, they closed that all down.  And most of those women were forced out of their jobs and sent back into their homes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my mother was one.
Speaker 1: Lot of people you know, here in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] because we had so many [U.S.] military bases here, a lot of women did that.  Now here comes this law that says that men, there should be equality, and yet men can do certain things in the job market and women cannot.  You know men, men could work overtime.  In a lot of states women were not permitted to work overtime, men could get ja- any job that they were capable of doing.  But a woman was barred from any job that required her to lift more than a certain number of pounds in some states.  There were all kinds of issues that we wound up being money issues because they always resulted in less money for women coming through.  And that was up debate, where was our problem here, we have the labor unions.  You know the labor unions were part of our, our, our NOW [National Organization for Women] founders, mostly the UAW [United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America; United Automobile Workers] people, and some of the people in, in the, the not the culinary unions, what are the other ones, the clerical unions, were in our membership.  The unions did not want the laws to change, they had put them out there, and they put them out there legitimately at the turn of the century.  They needed them at the turn of the century, because women were totally exploited in the job market.  Didn't get paid, lived under horrible working conditions, as, as we were talking about when I was mentioning the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union].  And so there was this dilemma, you know what should we as a movement say about those protective laws, should we say throw them all out?  Should we say some should stay, should we say that some should not only stay but they should be extended to men?  So we had a debate, and the debate came down and the debate said we should go for eliminating any of those laws that are, that have the result of lowering the opportunities for women, in, in, in work.  So in some cases, it meant extending them to men or at least throwing them out.  If, if you say the person can't work more than a certain number of hours, and, and you so apply it to women, when you say that, then you're not being equal.  So when you apply it to men, you don't need the law anymore.  Because, you can, you can say everybody is going to be limited to a certain number hours of work and get paid overtime after that period of time that you decided on.  Some laws you can't do anything about you can't say that you can bar everybody from lifting a certain number of pounds on a job.  'Cause then the job can't get done, what you can say is that nobody ought to lift anymore (laughter) than they're capable of lifting.  And there is machinery that you can use to make some of those lifts necessary, but you can't do it on the basis of gender.  If a woman has the ability to do this, she has a right to that job just as a man who has the ability.  And so again, we lost some of our union people for a while, the UAW people left for a period of time from the movement.  But we got a whole lot of people coming in, so you got this up and down situation, while women figured out how does the movement serve me?  And how does it not serve me under some of these conditions?  And it's still debating a lot of the issues, because some of them are not easy.  It was the young people who, who taught us that we should go for the Equal Rights Amendment.
Story_ID: 483973
Speaker 1: Because people were saying, well if you have an Equal Rights Amendment, people will go to war.  You know the women will have to go to war, so you say when are our, when are we old people talking about going to war, we're not gonna go to war.  So let's go talk to young people, 'cause they're the ones who are gonna be drafted, if there is a war. And we went to talk to them, and they said if we want equal rights, we have to have equal responsibility. Now that does not mean that everybody will volunteer to go into the [U.S.] military, and it doesn't mean that the, the women who go into the military would have no right.  Do what some men who, women who don't wanna go into the military would have the same right that some of the men have.  Which is to say I am a, I am not gonna go into the military 'cause I don't believe in war, I'm a person who believes in peace.  So I'm a conscientious objector.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it, it works, we got women in the military now and some of them are, are recognizing that they can do as well as men can.  And so are the men recognizing it.  So it's, it's not gonna end as a discussion, we're gonna always look at how, who gets impacted by any change we make in the law.  And how do we make one that is humane that applies to everybody, that gives everybody an opportunity to make some choices that their capable of making.
Story_ID: 483974
Speaker 1: When you look back on it now, as a--do you think there's a big difference between what's going on in the country today and what was going on in 1970?
Speaker 2: In the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 1: Well in the, in the, in the whole--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --equal rights.
Speaker 2: Well you see it for your, we're sitting here at the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] which has a whole lot of, of people who are lawyers in this place.  The number of women that are in the law now as compared to what they were in 1965 is astronomical.  The kinds of law that are being practiced has totally changed.  There would have always been lawyers somewhere along the line, but the women lawyers were usually confined to doing things that were, were around domestic issues.  Divorces or children or there something along that line, women are in everything now, and men are also doing the others.  Men are moving into areas that they would not have been in; there were almost no nurses who are male.  Men are now doing nursing, almost no man who were teachers in the elementary schools.  I went through all of my elementary schools, I had to get to high school before I found my first male teacher.  And it was in science that that he was there, so there is a lot of change that has taken place, and it's been.  And it's been as for my point of view, it's been generally beneficial, because you found the talent rather than the gender.  You're looking at the person who's able to do it.  I know a lot of women who are not very maternal, you know and I know a lot men who love having, have the opportunity to be with their kids.  So you can again make generalizations about this though.  So far we haven't figured out how the men are gonna have the babies, but we certainly have found ways of, of providing them opportunities (laughter) to be part of the process, even if they're not in your household.
Story_ID: 483975
Speaker 1: Tell us, I guess about some of the activities of Her- Hernandez and Associates, I guess for the--
Speaker 2: Well as I said, I, I am an urban consultant and to define that, that means I work on what I think are the issues within cities that require human rights attention.  So part of what I work on is getting more people involved in the processes in their, in their cities.  My clients, the people who generally are the ones who hire me, are either non-profit organizations, I do a lot of work with community-based groups.  Or there are projects going on in the city, let's say there's a housing discussion going on.  I will facilitate meetings of the community people who come in, I will get the men there, we will sit down and talk what needs to be done.  We try to come to consensus.  I also do a lot of facilitating just of strategic planning for groups, getting people to sort of work through the process that they need in order to get done what they need to do.  I've worked a lot on what I would call essentially bringing people together in, in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], we've had a number of groups in which we've reached out to communities, to try to get them to see the issues as being ones that that affect all of us.  So we pull together business people and labor people and people from the communities.  And women and men and disability people to work on issues rather than on something that isn't, is foreign to one of the groups.  It's a school issue, for example, we've tried to say the school issue is not an issue that is related only to the people who have kids in school.  You know because the sch- whatever happens in that school is gonna impact a society totally as we go through.  So everybody needs to be part of this process.  But we need to find ways of getting the parents and the people who are ordinarily not felt welcomed in the schools, opportunities to hear their voices in a lot of ways.  So that's another one that we've done, we've pulled together forums; we bring people together on trying to look at things on a regional basis.  Because we're not gonna solve anything by just looking at one city, we do have too many cars and too much transportation.  To have that city be able to do what it wants without moving forward to sp- to meet with other people.  So that's basically what I do, I do a lot of training on diversity.  I serve on the diversity council of the United Parcel Service, and have for about thirty-eight years; they're my longest term clients.  I met them a long time ago and we have created some interesting programs as a result of that.
Speaker 1: It's interesting their logo was, "What Can Brown Do For You?" (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We've had some funny discussions about that 'cause in my early days I said, "What's, what a--such a drab color.  Why would you wanna have brown on your--," (laughter)?  When they went to, when they opened up their first global investment, they went to Germany and brown is their big issue.  And brown shirts in Germany have an entirely different focus (laughter) than they would have other where, other places.  So it was a very interesting discussion about how they changed the shade of brown that they could use as part of that discussion.
Story_ID: 483976
Speaker 1: Now you've been involved in some international activities as well, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so I just wanna, maybe you can just, you're in '75 [1975] you're part of the, went to a conference sponsored by the Konrad-Adenauer foundation [Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung]?
Speaker 2: Yeah in Germany (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Un-huh.  It was interesting that, partly because of what I've been doing in my life.  You know the fair employment practice and the fair housing issues as part of the law were very interesting to me.  And after the Second World War [World War II, WWII], Germany, as it was coming back up again, began to have the same problem that we had in the United States.  Because they had lost so many people during the war, mostly the men, that they were importing workers from other places, like Turkey and other places.  So they suddenly had what is a diversity issue.  Prior to that time it was not a whole lot of diversity in Germany from the point of human race anyway.  So they in, they invited a group of us who had been working in that area to come to, to bond.  And we had a big conference on minorities in the metropolis and how do you, and how does one work to integrate into your society?  What Germany did in the beginning and they may still be doing it to some degree, was they saw people who came in to work in their offices.  Like we're talking about immigration now and the, and the workers, they saw that as guest workers.  So they didn't provide any opportunities for citizenship, people were ghettoized in giant communities.  Just as blacks had been in the United States for a long time, so we found again that there are international connections to some of the issues that we've been struggling with in the United States.
Story_ID: 483977
Speaker 1: The first international thing I did was, when I graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] I, I was able to go on a summer intern program in Norway.  A whole group of us went it was, there were eight of us from, from Howard University and there were about a hundred of us total.  Went over on a Marine [U.S. Marine Corps] jumper ship right after 1947, we went over to Norway and we spent the, the summer in Norway, looking at comparative governments so that we were looking at socialism versus you know capitalism and all the rest.  But also we were able to meet with the people and to do a lot of things along that line too.  So that was the first one I went to, and then the second one was to the labor, labor educator in South America in seven countries in South America in 1961.  I went for the state department [U.S. Department of State] and did some work with labor unions in, in Latin America.
Story_ID: 483978
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about the Beijing conference [Fourth World Conference on Women] in 1995 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Good. The, the Beijing conference in nine, in 1995 was the fourth and actually the last, we have not had another one since, of conferences that the United Nations [UN] put together and the first one was held in Mexico City [Mexico] in 1975.  And brought women from around the world into discussions about women's rights all over the world, what was happening in the various countries.  And it came at about the time that NOW [National Organization for Women] was growing, and began to be larger and stronger.  So there were a number of people who went to Mexico City from, from the United States.  I did not go; I in fact I have not been to any of these conferences because I'm usually working trying to work to get some money to stay alive.  But a lot of our members have gone and over the years, as I said, there have been four.  The last one in Beijing, China which was in 1995 came out with a plan of action that was supposed to be given to all of the women for all over the world as a guide as to what should be done.  It had twelve different areas in it that everybody agreed had to be addressed, if women were going to become equal partners in the world.  And everybody was supposed to go home and take it back to the grassroots.  Well the people from the California area who went came back and decided that they would try to take it to the grassroots.  So several people called me, 'cause I have stayed active in all of these other issues so that everybody knows what I'm doing.  They called me and said, "Would you come to a meeting so that we can start thinking about how we might do it in California?"  And I went to the meeting and we agreed that we should hold a conference, first of all of all the people who went.  So that we can get them back again and try to do something, but added to that women's organizations throughout the state.  So in, in 1996, we did a conference at San Francisco State University [San Francisco, California] to which about two hundred women came, who represented organizations.  And out of that we created a plan of action for California called the California Women's Agenda, and they asked me to chair that.  So I've been chairing that now since 1996, and what we are doing is we're trying to encourage women in every one of the counties of the State of California to get to know their own communities.  To become involved in their political lives to make connections with other people who have similar issues.  And try to work out more cooperative activities among women's organizations.  Not competitive but cooperative, to find the issues that people have similar issues around and can, and want to have some solutions made.  So we now have about, we have about six hundred organizations in the statewide network; we reach about 2 million women in the State of California.  Because the way this works is we send out to the people who are part of our network, and as I say we got six hundred organizations.  They in turn send out to their organizations so it, it multiplies as you go along.  So that when we are working on something that has a lot of unity to it, we can reach over a couple million women, in the state about these issues.  And then they get back to their, to their legislators and their members of [U.S.] Congress and their local community people.  They create programs that address some of those twelve issues I was talking about; big issue was violence, for example, against women.  So over the years it's been a lot of change both in how the society addresses violence against women.  In the, in the old days it was like the old rule of thumb you know if the stick is not bigger than your thumb, it's okay to beat your wife it?  Well they gone past that and they're recognizing that a lot of those things need to change.  That movement has become not just California now, there are other states that are modeling what we do in California in their states.  And there are women all over the world now who are talking to each other.  As a result of our program, we have, we have, not only hosted women from other countries who've come to California, and we take them through our networks to see what's going on here.  But we've been to Uganda three times, and Uganda women have been back here several times.  Some of our group has gone to Afghanistan; others have been in Japan working on these issues.  And we have fairly strong now international connection, where, where all kinds of women's organizations are working on issues.  From, you're a Chicago [Illinois] person so you know about the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom.  Well that's Jane Addams founded that along with other people who when, who came from that Hull House [Chicago, Illinois] experience that they had.  So women had been out there a long time and now Women's International League for Peace and Freedom has been out there since 1915, working on these issues.  And there are more and more organizations all the time.
Story_ID: 483979
Speaker 1: What has happened is as a result of women getting more vocal, changes are occurring generally in this society.  I notice in the Civil Rights Movement, because in the last ten years, more and more women are working in the traditional civil rights organizations, as the heads of the organization.  In the old days they would not have been seen, they would all, all the leaders would've been men.  But if you just take right here in San Francisco [California], we have something called the California Coalition for Civil Rights [California Civil Rights Coalition].  We have about sixty organizations statewide in it; the coalition is headed by two women.  One of them who runs the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights in San Francisco [Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights of the San Francisco Bay Area, San Francisco, California], the other one who write, who runs something called Public Advocates.  Which works on issues related to all kinds of groups but are related to improving the situation in the society for them.  We have, we have coalitions that are working on everything you can think of.  In every area there's a coalition now if it's on health, we got a massive health coalition going in the State of California.  Which involves women's movement people as well as civil rights people, as well as people in the health fields.  We were able to turn back one of the attempts to undo affirmative action in the State of California.  Because we were able to in, in, include in our coalition the health people, people from Kaiser [Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Menlo Park, California] and other organizations came together when they tried to eliminate data collection on the basis of race and gender and ethnicity.  Ward Connerly came out with this proposal that we should not be collecting any of that data anymore.  And because the health people find a real need to have the data by race and ethnicity and gender, because of the illnesses that are related specifically to those groups as they have gone through.  They got into the process with us and were able to get a whole lot more people on our side, and we were able to turn that back.  So we're finding that, when I started out I guess when I said that having grown up in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, New York, I had to learn very quickly that you can stereotype.  We've been able to, to find out that it's possible not to stereotype even big business people.  That there are some big business people that really gotten the message are beginning to more effectively to provide some of the funding that is needed in many of these areas.  And you all should go to some of those people for some funding.  'Cause I think what you are doing should be of, of interest to many of the organizations where there're individual donors.  They're not even necessarily a foundation, just very rich people who wanna see something done and willing to put some money into it.
Speaker 2: We should get some phone numbers after we (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm not gonna give you five phone numbers (laughter).  No, I'm, I'm encouraged in some ways because I see this movement going in this direction in where people are really did, coming together.  But I'm also appalled on the other side about how much really negative stuff is still out there or getting even more virulent than it used to be.  Because partially it's because of a, the economic situation, the war, the lack of attention being paid to any of the human issues in our society, because of this insane war that we're in.  And taking so many of our resources and so many of the young people, whenever you look at who has died in this war.  When they show you all these list, and you look at these nineteen, eighteen, seventeen year-old young people, it's re- it's crazy, it's just absolutely nuts.  And it's not only here, we're destroying countries all over the place, and that means we have to rebuild them.  You know if you keep dropping bombs on places the next thing is you have to rebuild them somewhere along the line.  And it's gonna take a lot of resources we're, we are making more and more enemies.  So on one level we are making and more and more friends across lines where people are really trying to work together.  And then on the other end in the official government arena, we're making enemies all over the place, so I'm both happy and unhappy at the same time.
Story_ID: 483980
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope really is that we will learn how to come together, we don't very often, I think we have lost a lot of the, the positiveness that we could've had.  Because we somehow have been competitive with each other in the arena, and I think sometimes we have had our leaders stay too long in, in situations.  So that we don't make room for the new, new voices and the new issues coming up, we need to keep going all the time on bringing new voices into the process, 'cause things change.  The world that kids are living in now is very different from the world that I lived in back in 1926 when I was born.  You know there's just very many things that they have to deal with that I never had to deal with in my life.  But I also dealt with a lot of things that they don't have to deal with right now, so there are, there's a reason for some conversation across those lines.  And I think also African Americans have to also move more affectively to work with other groups as well.  I think there are coalitions possible because there are really good indications that we have common issues that we can work on.  Maybe no other group can do it as much as African Americans can because there's also a lot of diversity within the African American community.  Just racially, there's a lot of difference, you know that we have every shade of color in our community that you can possibly think of.  So that you know that there're elements of other backgrounds.  We live in a city that has a beautiful museum, called the Museum of the African Diaspora [San Francisco, California].  And that tells us that we all came from one source, and we all ought to recognize that we're one source.  And all of the things that have, we've been working on for a long time should have brought us to the point of saying we got to find the people who believe in making the society different.  Making it more humane, making it more equitable, rather than to only look at the color or the race or the ethnicity or the gender.  We need to collect the people who are on the, the track that is humane, rather than the track that is, it's for me you know, it's just for me and nobody else.  And I think we have to do it in a different way than we done it before, it doesn't always work in the old styles.  We have to come back and think of new tr- new strategies and new people to work with to make this change happen everywhere.
Story_ID: 483981
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd make money (laughter) no, no, I, I don't think I would do anything really differently, because I like what I'm doing.  Or I wouldn't be doing it, that's for sure, and, and it's I, I give very good advice to other people and I probably should take some of it myself.  And one of the good (laughter) advice is give, is also, do something for yourself, you know because we do, we don't necessarily take care of ourselves as we go along.  We're so busy and involved in everything else that we don't take care of ourselves very often.  And I think we have to learn how to do that, we have to learn how to have fun as well as doing all of the other things that are going on in our society right now.
Story_ID: 483982
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: I never an- never think of that (laughter).  Everybody ask me that question, I haven't got the vaguest idea.  I would like to believe; I would like to leave a legacy that says I did something that left the world a little bit better than when I started out with it.  But I'm never sure that happens because too many things occur along the way that take back what you start with and change it in so many ways.  So I'm not sure what happens and, but I would like to believe that I lived a life that has made me happy.  And also has some productive results in the society.
Story_ID: 483983
Speaker 1: Now do you have any children or we haven't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --talked about, okay.
Speaker 2: No. I have nieces and nephews, but not children.
Speaker 1: And--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so who would you say constitutes your family at this point?
Speaker 2: My family is, are, well my family is very extended now because it's not just the people that I'm related to.  But in my immediate related family it's nieces and nephews and bra- and a brother [Charles Clarke, Jr.], and cousins that are, that are now in the United States, so there is that.  But also so many people that I consider part of my family because we've, we've lived so much together so many years, and done so many things together that I think it's part of the family.
Story_ID: 483984
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Depends on what your last question is (laughter). I think we've gone through my life, I can't think of anything that we left out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well.
Speaker 2: Unless you wanna mar- have some, some no, forget that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay well I, all right.  Well the last qu- question is similar to legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As not as, not having gone through life just taking up space, I think that, that will be what, what I would like to be remembered as (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Somebody once said to me that, "If, if you're living your life on the edge--."  Now how did it go, wait a minute.  I gotta get it straight, I'll, I'll have to think of it and send it to you, but it's really a smart, it's a good answer.  Because it says, you, we should not just be taking up space, but it says it much more eloquently than I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you so much, you've been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh you're very welcome.
Speaker 1: --very eloquent.
Speaker 2: You're very welcome, it's a pleasure.
Story_ID: 483985
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Aileen Hernandez, and it's A-I-L-E-E-N, last name is H-E-R-N-A-N-D-E-Z [HistoryMaker Aileen Clarke Hernandez].
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My, my place of birth is Brooklyn, New York and let's see my yes, that I, I guess I better co- say Brooklyn, although I was actually in, in New York City [New York, New York].  But we did go down to Brooklyn very quickly after that, so I consider Brooklyn my place of birth at this stage of the game.  And May 23rd, 1926.
Speaker 1: Okay and let's see, oh, now and what is today, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: My title and occupation right now is I'm retiring at this stage of the game, but basically I have been, I been on all kinds of things (laughter) over the many past years that I'm talking about.  I started out thinking I was gonna be a teacher, and something happened that that didn't quite come up.  I wound up being an organizer, a person who was part of the union situation, and I did that after I graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And I was trying to decide what I wanted to do and I was sitting in the library of NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  And there was a magazine at the other end and I got tired of what I was doing.  Went down and picked up the magazine and started reading and there was an article in there.  And it said that Dubinsky, David Dubinsky who was the person who headed that union [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union] at that time.  Was looking for young people to come to work for the union, and to get involved in union activities, and it was a year's program.  And so I called up, there was a telephone number at the bottom and I called up and they said yes we are doing this.  You can come down and put in all of your information if you want, so I started as a union organizer.  And worked for the union for twelve years, and then I got a little upset with the union because the union was not permitting the people who were in our group.  The new young people that they were bringing in to join the union (laughter) they didn't want us in the union.  So I said, I didn't think that was very good, so I decided to leave.  And wo- and wound up going off on a trip for the, for the federal government actually to six or seven countries in South America.  'Cause I did speak Spanish in those days (laughter) it was not my lie- my regular language, but I did speak it fre- 'cause I learned it at Howard University.  And then, I just kept going to new things from there, so after that, I was sitting again in a library doing something.  And we were, we were trying to get some changes in the law at that stage, and we put together a whole group of people who were working on the law generally for equal opportunity for all people.  But what happened was this turned into a whole different approach, because we wound up getting very involved in new ideas for women.  And what they could be doing at that point.  There was a change; we had some people coming in the federal government, the new presidents that came in at that period of time.  And they were, it started very quickly on the issues on what needed to be changed in our society.
Story_ID: 483986
Speaker 1: And as part of that, the women's issue came out of the law [Civil Rights Act of 1964] that they passed, President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] came out with this information on this.  And everybody was saying okay, what do we do now, and we said well let's go find out what we do now.  At the same time, Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt], Fra- Franklin D. Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had been in, had been sa- actually asked if she would come and work on this whole issue of new opportunities for women in this society.  And she was sort of my person that I liked very much in Brooklyn [New York].  And I used to go down and wave at her in, in the car as she and her husband drove (laughter) by, so I, I felt that she was the person that I knew best.  And it turned out that I kept connecting to her, because even at that union, she was very involved with the ILGWU [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union].  And when I got there, she was the person who spoke to us about what we should be doing.  And everybody began to look at this new idea about getting more opportunities for women in the society.  'Cause we were way, way down in terms of what kinds of jobs we were in, most women did not work in the kinds of jobs they are presently working in then for, for sure.  The one that I thought was so interesting at that point in time was just thinking about what does the law say women ought to be able to do?  What are the issues that we are gonna be addressing, and people thought it was a joke in the beginning.  That they just didn't think anything was gonna happen, but as we got involved in it, we suddenly got this huge group of women from all over the country.  And reason we got that was because there was a committee [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women] that got together periodically.  And when they found out that this was moving forward on this law, we all began to come together and talk to each other.  And one of the things that caused us a little bit of a tr- problem at that stage was, most people didn't understand what we were talking about.  Especially on the women's issue, they just didn't think that women could do anything beyond what they were already doing.  But suddenly it just opened up, and women began to take a look at what was going on, and we began to see a lot of changes, very quickly.
Story_ID: 483987
Speaker 1: Could you just maybe list your occupa- your occupations and your titles going you know up until.  'Cause we know you're retired today.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: One of the things that I'd been all for a long time has been my own businessperson.  I worked here in San Francisco [California], working on getting involved in the changes that were coming through by all the laws that were being passed at that point in time.  Opening up new opportunities for women, racial and ethnic backgrounds of people who had not gotten opportunities before.  Suddenly got into the mix of changing the society and I was particularly interested in that, because I had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And been there and could not have understood very well how the capital of the United States was actually segregated.  So that started me off and as a result of that I got involved in a number of things as I went along.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you, you were the president of NOW [National Organization for Women] at one time, right?
Speaker 2: I was the president of NOW and it hap- happened unexpected, the reason was I was at a meeting, I had been appointed by the president--
Speaker 1: I, I just wanted to establish that you were and then we're, we're gonna talk later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous Okay.
Speaker 1: --about it, but, but you were, and you were also commissioner--
Speaker 2: Maybe we should just talk for a few minutes about what you, specifically what you would like me, not to talk about but go from one to one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All, all I was trying to get you to do is to list your occupations; I mean your, your titles that's all.  Just, "I did this, I did this, I did this, I did this," and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we're gonna talk about what today's date is, where we are right now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then we're gonna start the interview.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we weren't really getting into the--
Speaker 2: So what all you wanted at that point was that I started out oh, with my own business [Hernandez and Associates]?
Speaker 1: Well yeah that in addition to you know just your titles what you know your occupations.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's all I was asking.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Your occ- your occupations over the years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My occupations over the years were kind of mixed up because I kept going from one to another.  I started out thinking that I was gonna be staying with the union forever.  And did not stay I moved on as a result of that, got involved in federal government issues.  Because they were just passing a new law [Civil Rights Act of 1964] and they were looking for the people to come through, and John, President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] selected five people to be on that commission.  And I was one of them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in--
Speaker 2: --from that.
Speaker 1: Equal Opportunity Employment [sic. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Commission, right.
Speaker 2: I'm not doing very well (laughter) on this, am I?
Speaker 1: Okay well, well maybe I just say well can I, you were the president of NOW that's correct, right, and, and you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well.
Speaker 1: --also the--
Speaker 2: Well not, not but that was after do you want, you don't want it in order I gather?
Speaker 1: Well I well we could, but, but if, let's see all right we can do it to your own (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, because the first one I--thing I did was the union stuff.
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Yeah you worked with the International (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) International Ladies' Garment Union, I lay or worked with the--let's start again, right there, okay?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've had a lot of different jobs over the years; my first one was with the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union [ILGWU].  When Dubinsky [David Dubinsky] decided to bring young people in to work in his, his union, and as a result of that I moved on and went off to the federal government for a while.  And tr- and went through seven countries in the world, checking out what was happening to women and other people in other countries.  Not just the United States.  Stayed with that for a while and then moved on from that because I wanted to do things to change what they were doing at the federal level.  They weren't doing enough as far as I could see to make sure that the discrimination that I remember from Howard University in Washington, D.C. was gonna be all over the country.  And that was an important part of it, and the more this got involved, the more I felt that I needed to be a little bit more independent in these areas.  And not be under the requirements of some company or all the rest of it, so I set up my own business and began to really move forward.  On how to handle the new laws and what you needed to do to really make them different from what they had been before.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now this is before or after you, you were at EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] this is?
Speaker 2: The EEOC came first.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes that came first and then after that, because it wasn't going anywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay then you founded Her- Hernandez and Associates, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now that's the business we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yes, the businesses.
Story_ID: 483988
Speaker 1: Of course you taught during this period of time, but you also became the president of the National Organization for Women [NOW] in 1970, right?
Speaker 2: Yes well I was the vice president for, for a couple of years, because ba- basically what we were talking about was the new women's concerns.  And I was invited to come to a meeting that was being held with Mrs. Roosevelt [Eleanor Roosevelt] and all the others.  And when I went to that meeting, I spoke a little bit about the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] and what we were trying to do.  And, and what we were not able to do because the law was not strong enough, and at the meeting the women who came were actually on, were on the committee that Mrs. Roosevelt ran at that stage.  And when they came in and they heard this, they were very upset, the women who had come from every es- every part of the United States.  They were all coming from ever, different state at that point and time, and they came and they were very disappointed because nothing was happening.  They had been trying to get anything out of the EEOC and it wasn't really moving.  We had five members of the EEOC; one of them was Mrs. Roosevelt's son [Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Jr.], who was the president of the EEOC at that point in time.  He became very interested in going back into politics and left very soon after that, and we were standing there with a, a, a law [Civil Rights Act of 1964] that could've been very strong, but wasn't very strong.  Because people just did not know where it was going, and because this committee that Mrs. Roosevelt ran, was from all over the United States.  We had women from all over the United States, and they had invited me from EEOC to come down and talk to the group [Presidential Commission on the Status of Women].  I gave a small, very short talk and talked about how weak we were at the EEOC at the, at that time.  And if women didn't get up there and start talking about what they needed to do to really change the law, nothing was gonna happen.
Speaker 1: So, so this is the beginnings of NOW, you said but now, I, I just want to establish what you did at NOW it's almost like a menu for.  This is the introduction to our discussion.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Not, not the discussion itself so, so you're president of NOW in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Sev- in '71 [sic. 1970].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971] okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Betty Friedan was the first president.
Speaker 1: Okay I'm just getting, I'm just dealing with you right now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then, after that you, you've taught, you been with, you, you were on a fact finding trip to South Africa, I mean it's a lot of thing, but--.  So I'm just trying to establish you, you done a lot of different things and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And, wha- what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The 25th [sic.].
Speaker 1: I know that sounds crazy now, but, but all I was trying to do is establish who you were, what today's date is and where we are right now.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: So we can get started with the interview, that's all.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what I've been doing now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So today's date is?
Speaker 2: The 25th.
Speaker 1: No, it's, it's November the 8th [November 8, 2013].
Speaker 2: November the 8th, pardon me (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Twenty thirteen [2013].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and we are in your home?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In San Francisco [California], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and we're finishing up an interview that we started in 2007 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We did do some--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I thought we all were, already did some.
Speaker 1: Yeah and we did talk about all those things.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, all, all we're doing today we're trying to just get some reflections on some of those occupations of yours.  And then we're gonna do photos.
Story_ID: 483989
Speaker 1: The first thing I wanna talk about I guess is EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], what are your reflections on what the country's doing now in terms of equal opportunity employment?
Speaker 2: I think there, the country is doing a little bit better than it was doing at that beginning, it was a very weak law that we had.  And it took a lot of act- action to move it forward, people left quickly the president [Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Jr.] of the committee left.  And that was not very well done, and we got new people, but there was a lot of concern at the federal government level about how this should actually be run.  So this kind of thing really led to women getting angry, and as they got angry about this, they decided that something had to be done.  So at one of these meetings, in fact the very first meeting that we had for the public in Washington, D.C., women got up from all of the states in the United States.  And said things like, "I can't get a job in this place and I can't get a job in this place, and when I do get a job, I don't get the same salary as other people."  And all of a sudden it began to build.  And Betty Friedan who had written a book ['The Feminine Mystique'] came down for, to that meeting and she got up and, and asked a couple of questions.  And she was not happy about it, so during the lunch period, women came together sat down at tables and began to talk about, where are we going?  This doesn't seem to be an EEOC that's gonna be very effect- good for what we really are concerned about, women having a bit of live, life in this country.  They decided not to talk about it at lunch because they didn't want everybody to listen in, but Betty had invited people up to her room.  And a group went up there and a group of very interesting women who were very powerful.  And as a result of that, they decided that something had to be done to change this, so they decided to have a new organization.  Didn't have a name yet, but it later became of course NOW, the National Organization for Women.  And in that room they sat down and raised all the hands that they could get to find more women to come in because this was, had to go across the United States.  It had to go from Washington to every state in the United States if it was gonna make a difference.  So that's what they left at that stage, they didn't do much more than that.  But they agreed that they would come together in the, about a couple of months after that to have a major meeting.  In which people would come from all over the United States to decide what should be done, they called it NOW, the National Organization for Women.  And they had a lot of very, very powerful women who were very anxious to get into this, and get it done.  It didn't appear to very much of women of color in the beginning, but little by little the women come, color did come in.  And were very powerful also they, they decided what needed to be done.
Speaker 1: So you were, you became the second president of NOW.
Speaker 2: I was the second president of NOW.
Speaker 1: This is 1971 [sic. 1970].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you left NOW I guess it was in '78 [1978] or so?
Speaker 2: It was, it was actually '73 [sic. 1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973].
Story_ID: 483990
Speaker 1: You felt that NOW [National Organization for Women] was not really addressing the needs of minority (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well I knew it wasn't addressing it because again, because of the way in which that whole organization was put together.  With all these women who could come from all over the United States to this meeting, we were not addressing the people who were who were concerned about women and where they were.  Because they were indeed poor, now it's not all the women of color who were poor, they were, were already working in the communities.  Oh I could remember all of the groups that I was in at the stage of the game, but to get inside and have women from all over the United States come together and decide that there was a power there that can be changed was a different issue altogether.  Betty Friedan started writing the statement of NOW and of course had additional people who came in and did that as well.  And African American women were at that meeting, and they began to get involved.  Because they knew that if this move forward without touching any of the women of color or the women who were not, were really poor, I have to say they were poor, there was nothing else.  When you looked at the data and saw where women were, women were way down the line in terms of what they earned in these places.  There were lots of jobs they couldn't get into at all; the telephone company was the largest company that had women at that point in time.  But they only had jobs talking on the phone (laughter) that was, that's what they did, they didn't do much of anything else.  And there were almost no black women or any other women of color who were in the telephone company in those days.  So you knew that you had to breakthrough what had been not only a, a woman's issue but also a racial issue.  And that's began to bring women together again, and it was very interesting because there were a lot of things that you would not believe were really not possible for women to do.  It amazed me to find out that they were no women of, of color who are actually in the airlines.  And the airlines actually let women go at thirty-two if they got to the age thirty-two; they could not look, work any longer on the airlines.  And they could not be married if they were going to be on this, so these were the kinds of things that we were facing at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Yeah in looking back on this, this is there, there were clearly pandering to business people that hoped to meet young women on, on airline.
Speaker 2: Well I think they really saw the airlines and the women as a way of getting them in on the, on the a- on the airline (laughter) and being getting a drink and talking and all the rest of the things that went along.  But it really cut off that whole opportunity for women even though there were a lot of women working at that stage.
Story_ID: 483991
Speaker 1: You left NOW [National Organization for Women] and when you left you're quoted as saying you would not rejoin until NOW takes meaningful action to eliminate racism.
Speaker 2: Well my point of view was I like that law [Civil Rights Act of 1964] but I thought the law was supposed to go out to everybody in the country.  Not just a few people who were able to come across the country to be at a meeting and be part of a new forum.  So it seem to me that we had to reach out way beyond where we were, and so I said that it was important for me anyway.  That we sit down and think through what did we knew; need to change in this country in order to eliminate the discrimination that was all over.  Now there were certainly areas that as I pointed out that were, that women were working at.  Like the airlines, but in such a way that didn't make any sense at all and there were not women of color in the airlines in those days.  So that you had to start thinking you can't just think about women.  You have to start thinking about women who happen to have a lot of other problems that are going on at this stage.  They had very little things that they could do about their own health.  You know you could not make your own decisions about whether you wanted to have children or not, all of these things were very much a part of it.  They told you how you had to dress you know, there were, I, I remember going to a meeting to meet with some of the employers who were coming under the new law as well.  And I was the only woman on the commission [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], so I had to you know I had to be the one that would talk to those men about what they needed to do.  And I found them that they didn't want women to wear certain kinds of clothing, and then they did women to wear (laughter) other kinds of clothing.  They were, you had laws in; well they weren't laws 'cause they were already vi- violating the law in that point in time.  But women actually could not go to restaurants in many cities, San Francisco [California], the great San Francisco.  There were restaurants that women could not go to unless a man came with them.  And if it was lunchtime, they didn't want them at all.  Because quote, businesses can't have women who are coming for lunch and talking to each other all the time.  This is business that we have to deal with, so there were restaurants that did not let women come to lunch.  And then we couldn't wear certain clothing, we were all wearing slacks by that time, you know.  Because we recognize as we go around the country and get on the airlines it's a lot easier to tor- to be in, in slacks than it is to be in a dress that's gone be flying all over.  And you found that actually they didn't want you to wear certain things, not at all, so there, it was just ridiculous once you start.  As you look at it from this stage, this day you find out how did we get through with all of this?  How did you get through the airlines, how did you get through anything where women could get a job that was not the traditional job?  Working in some store and, and doing that kind of background.
Story_ID: 483992
Speaker 1: Do you think NOW [National Organization for Women] has made some progress since 1978 in terms of reaching out to other, other women other than white women?
Speaker 2: I, I, I actually think a lot of organizations are in existence right now, so it isn't so much NOW that's out there now.  It's a lot of groups that have come together and a lot beyond any racial or ethnic group.  We have Latinas, we have Asians, we have everybody now seeing the importance of women having the opportunity to work at whatever they have the skills to do.  So this is been the big problem over the years and it's changing, we also had a little bit of problem because when we talked about getting all of these other jobs opening up, we usually got back from the people in the political reign.  Well women shouldn't be, if they, women wanna do all of these things then they should go into the [U.S.] military.  And we said sure (laughter) you know if that's what we wanna do we, we should have the same kind of access to any job that's out there, that we have the ability to do at that point in time, and that was it.  And we were very lucky because some of the young women that were coming in through this, actually made a very stunning statement to the, to the [U.S.] Congress, about their willingness to go into the military.  If it meant, if that's what meant equal opportunity, they were willing to take equal opportunity too, which surprised a lot of people.  They thought the women just wanted all these other jobs, but would not doing anything else.  But it was the young women themselves that came down and talked about that.  We didn't want to talk for them, the older ones, that wasn't fair, but they were ready to talk on this.
Story_ID: 483993
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about South Africa that's another topic that you were keenly interested in and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --participated, we, in '81 [1981], you took a tour to South Africa and, and well, well I think you went before '81 [1981] but you wrote a book in '81 [1981] called 'South Africa: Time Running Out'?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, and so, so how have you, I mean how do you view the changes now and you, you, are you, are you satisfied with what's going on there now?
Speaker 2: Well I think it's a lot better than it was before, but I think there is so many places in the world where things are not better at all.  So the assumption that just because we opened up these things, we gonna make a difference for the whole world at that time, was not true.  'Cause keep, people are still pushing to change what was done by that law, they're still talking about it.  They're still making a, all kinds of recommendations about how to make this work cor- correctly and all the rest of that.  So I think women are gonna have to be out there for a long time changing what's going on.  But I think it's also important to pull together the women and the men on this one.  The first thing that I was asked was, was I op- opposed to men (laughter) I said no, some of my best friends are men.  So this is not it at all, but there are things that men have problems with that, under this law, as well.  They're not able to get, do certain things that they, they would like to do in terms of jobs.  So I think it's a matter of bringing this together.  It's not as if you're pulling this whole consideration about are women not getting what they should be getting in this society to one that is a little broader.  What we should be talking about is how do we make all people have opportunities to get into this society that they are living in.  And earn whatever they can earn by the skills that they have, and not by their race or their ethnicity or anything else.  So we broaden it by a whole lot of things.
Story_ID: 483994
Speaker 1: We're talking about NOW [National Organization for Women] and what, what were some of the racial issues in NOW that you wanted to talk about.
Speaker 2: The racial issues from, in NOW that I was concerned about was the fact that because of the way in which this organization was founded by this conference that they came to.  There were a whole lot of white women at that, but very few women of color.  And, therefore, unless you reached out and really made it clear that this was not a white organization, it was an organization for all kinds of women, that nothing would've happened for the groups that I, I've got con, concerned about as well.  And so we began to work on that, and when I left the presidency of NOW one of the things I said I wanted to do was setup some work, working opportunities to talk to each other about the importance of reaching out to all women.  That we could not do this by just the women who wound up coming to that conference, otherwise, we would not be make, making much change at all.   And so we did, we setup some work, working--well kinds of I would call them discussions, we would call people together and sit down and talk about what do we need to do to bring more women from all kinds of backgrounds into the organization.  Or if they don't come into NOW, then they open up their own organizations, and they begin to work with each other, if that's the way it's gonna be.  So that's what has happened since then, if you reach out now, we have, we have women's organizations in every racial background.  Every ethnic group, every kind of money group, so that's not, it's not just rich women who are coming in.  It's all kinds of women and it's all kinds of women for all kinds of backgrounds.  And this is where it is now; there are many, many more organizations than we had when we started NOW.  And that has brought a lot of changes on a lot of levels, and it did bring men in.  Because we also thought because if you have discrimination for one group, the other group is gonna have discrimination (laughter) as well.  If women are gonna be doing things new, men are gonna be doing things new too.  Everything begins to open up, and, and as a result of that, as a result of have a, opening all of these up, you're getting to know more people than you ever knew before.  And that you possibly never even had a chance to meet before.  I grew up in Brooklyn, New York as you mentioned earlier and that's true.  Because one of the things that I had the benefit of is I lived on a street in Brooklyn that what, which was an international street.  Because the federal government was building new housing all over the country and in those moving from wherever you were before to this new one, meant that people from all individual organizations or individual ethnicities got into the same streets that other racial groups came together.  And so all of a sudden you began to know people from all races, all backgrounds and you began to think about laws not just about the rich people or the poor people.  But all the people how do you do this, and how do you get a real change in the United States about its society?  We have not done very well for many, many years and we certainly don't do as much as we should be doing about people who have lower incomes than some people in the United States.
Story_ID: 483995
Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself a feminist?
Speaker 2: I, I, I guess I am and more, because I can't I can't imagine a society that should be there with only women that you're talking about.  So I, I think I'm an, I'm individualist on this one.  But I really feel that the United States because it has all of this brought--broad discussion about how marvelous we are as a country.  And how all the things that we do are perfect, we need to stop saying that; and we need to start saying that we have a responsibility.  Not only to do what we are doing now, but we really do need to find a way to get the, the world connected.  When we're talking right now about all the problems that we got in the society, one of them is that we are still going through this nonsense of having the rich people getting more rich and the poor people getting poorer.  It doesn't make any sense, and we are not doing as well as we were doing thirty years ago in some places.  Because of the way we've decided to move forward.
Story_ID: 483996
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes for them, the whole community I'm talking about now.  Is that we stop having this separate, separation, I think the only way we gonna change in the United States is to have people come together.  And there are poor people in every one of these ethnic groups that we're talking about as well.  We also have to take on the responsibility in our community, in the African American community to make those changes happen.  That means we got to work with each other there too, and we have not done that in a lot of places.  We've, we've decided that we're gonna be very rich and that's what we're gonna do and we act like we're very rich.  And don't give much opportunity for people who are really having a bad time in this society right now.  We forget about that, I think the whole United States has to think in a different way about money.  You know that's all we talk about all the time and we also talk about violence as a result of that.  Because if you are going to do this over and over again and leave people out of opportunities and take away their houses and do all the rest of it, we're not gonna have a very nice country.  And we got a lot of other people who are coming into the country in large numbers at this point and time who are coming because we have told everybody.  Come to the United States where we have all of these opportunities for, we don't, we don't have those opportunities.  So African Americans are not moving very, very well in this society, at this stage.  Young people are not doing very well; education is not going very well in most of these places, so the narrowness of what the opportunities are for a whole lot of people will indeed give us a big problem for a long time to come, if we don't find a way of changing it.
Story_ID: 483997
Speaker 1: Since we interviewed you last, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected president of the United States in 2008.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Also on the heels of the biggest economic collapse in the country and widest dis- disparity between rich and poor we've ever seen in this country (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the election of Barack Obama, the times we live in today?
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting to me.  First of all, all of us who were working on the women's issues immediately decided that we wanted to get Obama and his wife [Michelle Obama] in.  So that was one of the issues that we, we did not even have one or two people in our neighborhoods who were black who didn't say that they were gonna vote for Obama.  And it was because they thought we have an opportunity to do that now, we ought to work together on this, we ought to support the people coming in.  He was very much liked by the black community, but it sort of gave the rest of the country a headache (laughter) if you can talk that way.  You knew from the beginning that they were gonna make this man have as much problem as they could possibly give him.  They were not happy that he was coming into the country, and they considered him a radical, which I don't know how anyone would get to that.  But they really thought he was gonna be a radical changing everything in the society.  So I think Obama from the beginning was going to have a lot of pushing by other people, and that's exactly what, they didn't even give him very much time before they started.  All of the foolishness about whether he was, he was (laughter) whether he was white or whether he was black, or where he came from or all the rest of it.  And whether he was somebody that you could trust, it just, it just turned the whole country upside down, and they're still doing it.  This man was not gonna get any time at all to do what he had the ta- the ability to do, there was no question in my mind that he was bright enough.  And had enough education and knew what he wanted to do to make a change in the society he started out that way.  But he also had not really had too much connection with the African American community in some com- in some states.  So they had to learn about him, and then all of this, all of the foolishness of the Republicans and some of the more, worse than Republicans' groups about where he came from.  Was he really this kind of a person, did he really do these things, it was foolish, it was absolutely foolish.  So he never got a chance to make anything that he thought he was gonna be able to make once he became the president.  He, they were very surprised that he was elected, number one; that was the first surprise.  And it was very much a surprise to find that he had some ideas about what he wanted to do.  So I think we have to come to the, to the fact that until we decide that when you're president of the United States, you're a president of the United States.  And what you have to do is what you think is the right thing to do, and not believe that you have to sort of back off.  What are the things that you should be doing?
Story_ID: 483998
Speaker 1: Are there certain aspects of the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration that you, I mean are certain policies that you think he should've pushed hard, harder or, or?
Speaker 2: I do think he should've pushed harder on these things, but it was very clear that they were gonna be push- pushing back very quickly (laughter).  So but I thought he had a chance because he is coming in and everybody is looking at him as who is this man, we didn't know who he was.  What, what did he like, what did he think the United States ought to be doing, and I think perhaps a little more moving right away to get some of those change.  He tried I think too hard to be trying to get the ones who didn't him want him in there in the first place.  To, to let him stay in there, so I think, I think he should've moved a little faster.  But I understand why he didn't because they instantly went after him, all the foolishness about where he was born.  And whether his father [Barack Obama, Sr.] was so and so, and all the rest of it was insane, and it made it impossible for him to behave as a president in the beginning.  But I think a lot of things we as a committee could've done, we, we could've done more to support him on a lot of issues.  We even had several people in the black community as I remember, who were the ones who were out there asking all kinds of stupid questions.  About what he was going to do and why he wasn't doing certain other things that should be done.  So I think he should have gone right ahead and done what he thought ought to be done, and then we should have been ready to support him.  The thing that scared me for a while were the num- the number of people who suddenly thought that he wasn't gonna be able to do any of these things.  That he was not radical quote enough to do these, and I think that was unfor- unfair, it just was not the right kind of thing to happen.  But I have to put the blame on the other party, because they just went crazy.  And I was very in- intensely angry about some of the women in that, in that point.  Particularly in the Republican Party who started out immediately going crazy about how they wanted to get in there and do some work.  When we get somebody who is running for the presidency and talks to you about why she's qualified is because she [Sarah Palin] lives in Alaska and she can see Russia from here.  That's enough to say, how can you push for women's rights (laughter) if you gonna get this kind of woman out there?  Walking about it, talking about it, speaking out in such a stupid way, in order to get elected, and thank god, she didn't get elected (laughter).  So I think we're, we are different now, we're not quite as bad as that with the women, the women have learned that, that being a woman is not the issue about coming into public life.  You have to have a policy, you have to have policies, you have to understand the country.  You have to know what will change what is going on at that point in time.  And we just had this whole large group of women that just drove you crazy, because they simply did not have any idea about what to do.  And of course the country didn't go anywhere--
Story_ID: 483999
Speaker 1: Now, were you surprised by the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], did you think that you would see that in your lifetime, an African American president?
Speaker 2: I, I didn't think I would see that in my time, I thought that we would not get there for a long time.  I had gone through Howard University, Washington, D.C. discrimination, all of that sort of stuff.   And I just didn't think the country was gonna turn around that fast.  But what, what I was surprised by was that there were a lot of people who did not understand that our government is what needs to be changed.  You know you go back and read the [U.S.] Constitution now and you look at the things that we're supposed to be doing, and you cannot believe some of them.  The par- the policies that we have now are certainly not designed for the lower income person to move up the ladder.  We haven't done that, we have done something absolutely the acc- the opposite; we have not decided anything about what we need to change in our constitution.  The, there are lots of things in our constitution that needs to be changed because there is all of those old southern issues that came up before that was still in the constitution.  And we were trying to run around the constitution to do that; no way, we really had to say we got a new person.  We never thought it was gonna happen in our time, and here we have an opportunity to do this.  And this is the person who has an ob- obligation to do all of those things at the same time, change those things.  Be the person who steps up and says this is a policy that I, I want us to change.  But I think in a way, I think he wanted to be liked by too many people right away.
Story_ID: 484000
Speaker 1: Well, you got two more years but in, in two more years there's a lot of political pundits are saying that Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] is going to run.  And she'll be our first female president, do, do you, what do you think about that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I would like everybody to have access to being a president (laughter) you know.  I didn't do this just to make sure that a black person had it.  I was delighted when I saw that happen 'cause I never thought it was gonna happen, I just didn't see it, I didn't think we were anywhere close to having this country ready to say we're gonna hire somebody or we're gonna vote for somebody who is black or, or any other minority.  And I feel same way about women, I'm--I am not out there saying I want a woman in there.  I wanna know what the woman is gonna do, I wanna know what the black man is gonna do.  So I think we've gotta get out of that bag and recognize that we have a lot of different people in this country who have different needs.  Who have different problems that are going, and we have to deal with all of them, I would hope that somewhere before I totally die, there will indeed be people from all kinds of backgrounds.  I want them to be smart, I want them to be fast on these issues because if you don't move fast, it's not gonna go very far.  So I am delighted he's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in, I like his wife [Michelle Obama] very much, I think she does a lot of good things to keep some people shutting up (laughter) in a number of places.  But I think we have not come even close to saying that this is a man who had a full opportunity to be a president who could come up and actually do what his talent should be possible for him to do.  But you can't do that if everybody is gonna say nope, he's not really a president, he's not really an American, he's not this, he's not that.  And it's our fault; I think it's our country's fault as individuals that he hasn't had an opportunity to really move in this country.
Story_ID: 484001
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, now when you look back on your career and all, all the positions you held and things that you've done is there any major thing that you would change or do differently if you'd go back and change something?
Speaker 2: Yes, there a number of people I would (laughter) very quickly change if I could. What I would like to do is not have a situation where we had only fo- focused on women, in the beginning.  I think we needed to immediately connect all of the people who are not getting in this country what they were entitled to get, and bring them together.  I think we're getting closer to that now; we are getting much closer than we were when we started out in ab- on Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  And we all recognize now that they were, the Republicans were just simply not ready to have him there.  And they got more and more racist as they went along (laughter) because he was there.  Just as they decided not to do certain things on, with women they got very racist and they lost many places in the beginning, where they could've made a change.  I remember when it was possible that there were Republicans that actually would vote with a Democrat on something, and vice versa.  They got together but it was no way, we're not gonna connect in anyway.  And I think we, we lost a lot of opportunity because of the stupidity of some of the people who simply would not give the man a chance.  Because he was a man of color.
Speaker 1: Okay, but ma'am I, I was ask- asking if there was anything that, that you've done that, that you would personally change or do differently if you could it differently.
Speaker 2: Well I would immediately start bringing the two together, I thought, I thought I was saying it, but--what I, what I was trying to say is, that basically you got to get both men and women together on this issue to do it.  So when somebody ask me if I'm gonna support a woman for the office is the answer is no, unless I know what that women is gonna do when she gets in there.  You know so that's not it, people ask me; people assume this is very interesting to me.  People assume that I was originally for guess, guess who they thought I was for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] but--
Speaker 2: Yeah everybody thought because I was a feminist and I was out there that I was for Hillary.  I thought that anybody who would stay with that husband [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was not gonna be very good as a president (laughter).  You know so no, I don't go that way, I don't go that it has to be a black person.  I wanna know what you stand for, I know, I wanna know what you want to see change in our country before I give anybody my votes anymore.  Because it doesn't make any sense at all to do it on the basis of what race you are, what ethnicity you are.  Whether you're a man or a woman, it's what's in your head and what's in your heart.  And if you don't have both of those things connected in the right way, we're not going anywhere.
Story_ID: 484002
Speaker 1: So you would've spent more time on, on more broadly or- organizing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would've--
Speaker 1: --people who were discriminated against?
Speaker 2: I would go into the community, that's, in fact that's what I did, mostly I went into the communities to try to get them moving.  And wha- what our problem was in the, in the African American community was we had gotten to used not, not voting.  We were not going to, to vote for anybody, the numbers were very low, but little by little that begun to change.  And there are now some people who are really--have philosophies about what they wanna do and what needs to be changed.  And we recognize it with, within every group that we're, we can talk about, we're gonna have the rich, the poor, and all the rest.  So we gotta deal with that, we have to deal with the issues that are there, not just the races.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So and we got to recognize that there are a lot of people who are poor in all kinds of backgrounds.  And there are idiots who are, who are women (laughter) just as there're idiots who are men, so we act, we can't go around  thinking that just because you're in this group, you are, you have something really great growing for you.  And making it bigger and bigger and bigger and so everybody's gonna keep going up the ladder.  And I'm gonna say something really stupid now, I'm sure for those people who love the technic, technic areas--I think that's a major problem that has caused us problems.  All of the technology that we now have I think is a really bad scene.  Because it, it uses what was supposed to be used to improve things to make it possible for people to get training and all of the rest of it that went around.  It is changed that into sort of everybody has to buy lots of technology all over the place and it doesn't do them any good.  It, because you're not, we're not talking to each other anymore; we're getting on a machine.  And we're pushing something into the machine, we don't know any more about each other than we knew in the past.  I think technology should be doing something very different from what it's doing.  It should really be starting with young people because they need to open up to all of these issues that we're talking about.  But it, it has to connect with people and, this is not connecting with people, we're connecting with machines.  And until we connect with people, I don't see that we're gonna make a lot of changes that are gonna be really positive.
Story_ID: 484003
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, too.  When, when you look back at everything you've done again throughout your career what today would you consider to be your major accomplishments or your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think I would go back to teaching number one because I think one of the problems that we have is that we've forgotten that all of this is about education, all of us.  And what I would, what I would do is start out by believing that we got to connect people together, across all of these lines.  I think all of our groups should be together on these issues.  And when I'm, when I say all our groups, we don't always as African Americans come together with each other.  I've seen that happen, in fact I'm still seeing it every once in a while.  I'm turning on TV and there are African Americans who are taking an opportunity to take a swipe at, at our president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], because it's easy to do now because he's in trouble.  So what I would wanna do is to figure out a way of changing that, I, I'm not against technology.  But I think its way overboard in terms of its prices number one, it is not, it's not designed to improve the society.  It's just to make rich people richer, it's ridiculous to see what, how much money people are coming through on technology.  So I would, I would find a way of using technology differently, if I had a chance to go back and start where that technology started in the beginning.  I would do it differently, and I would try to get people to do it differently.  'Cause I think the more we go into technology the more apart we will be, 'cause you don't have to talk to anybody.
Story_ID: 484004
Speaker 1: Once again we always ask this question, what do you consider to be your professional legacy the things that you've accomplished?
Speaker 2: The things I have it, I think I have accomplished has to bring people together, I spent a lot of time doing work in all of the communities that I can think of.  And bringing people together, having meetings and things like that giving people the opportunity to believe that they have power.  That there is power there instead of sort of sitting down and saying that oh I can't do this because they have this and they have that, and all of the rest of it.  I think that's been the best thing that I've been able to do, because I have, I do have an opportunity and it works.  To bring people across lines together, part of it has been because I'm across lines all the time.  Because I think we're not gonna get anything done until we get that kind of strong group of people to make the changes that need to be made.  And I think it's not easy, this is not an easy thing to do because we've been es- apart for such a long time.  People don't trust other people, people don't speak the same languages of other people speak.  So it's hard to get that connection made, so that the people will teach each other.  And I mean that seriously that you, if you're living in a neighborhood which has a lot of div- diversity in it, you gonna learn to speak another language somewhere along the line.  You're gonna learn to eat another kind of food before another lot.  So I think we have got to get people closer together, we have to really have programs that change what we are under presently doing.  We're separating people like crazy in this country, at this stage of the game.  And we are using foolish things that we don't have the money to use when we should be using them on building human beings.  In, in a way that makes them open to dealing with each other, 'cause if we could do that if we can actually open up the beliefs.  No let me make that different, close the beliefs that people have and start all over again on some of these issues so that we can actually see each other as human being, friend, neighbor all of these things I think we can make a difference I really do.  And that's what I would like to be reminded that I did try to do this and it worked in many cases.  'Cause I, that's what I spent most of my time doing was bringing people together around issues.  But at the same time, getting people to know that they have the power to make this change, if they do that.  And if they learn more, if they open up, if they talk to everybody, if they try to see themselves as being affected by whatever comes into your neighborhood, it's gonna affect you.  So if you don't open up, and you don't get to know who your neighbors are and what they stand for and all the rest, it's gonna cost of us a lot of money and a lot of people's lives.  I think, for example, in San Francisco [California] right now, it's very, very scary, houses are incredibly expensive, going to school is incredible, incredibly expensive.  And you're, and you can't do that change unless you open up, you got to see that everybody is affected by whatever you do.  That was one of the things I learned in the, in the garment industry very quickly, that you are affected if you got people who are very poor, you gonna have problems.  And if they get poorer or and poorer, you're also gonna get a lot of sickness in your neighborhood as well.  So we got to get to the point of thinking of each other as friend or at least let's find out if we can be friends.  Let's see what we share, what is it that we can share and, and decide this is the way to go.  And I think most people if they were to ask me at this point in time what I think I've, I brought in I think I did learn this.  And I think I actually learned it in that street in Brooklyn [New York] that I lived on which was an international street.  Because accidentally they were moving people of out Harlem [New York, New York] and out all these other neighborhoods.  Into where they could put a, better house up for people at that time, we happened to have some people who were, who had vision about what might be done in those cases.  So I think that's all I can say is I tried to bring people together and to some degree I think I've been successful at that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that we all have to do that; it's not just me.
Story_ID: 484005
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family, do you have children, you, you got a son, right and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, I, I was married [to Alfonso Hernandez], didn't have children, but I have a lot of nieces and nephews 'cause I have brothers I have two brothers.  One of them is, has now died, but I have an older brother [Charles Clarke, Jr.] and a younger brother [Norris Clarke] with and myself.  And my brothers have married and have had children so I've got nieces and nephews all over the place.  Who've come and lived with me quite fe- quite, several times as they go through.  They're interesting to me now because they're beginning to decide what they want to do themselves.  And my niece Annie [Annie Clarke (ph.)] is decided to be a nurse, but a nurse in the broadened way, so that she's not just dealing with people who are ill.  She's thinking about these kinds of issues, and her sister who is a den- a dental background, she's working on that.  And a brother who's been in the government in this, in the cities and states of Cali- California.  So they're out there and they're working and they have a good education which is useful.  So that part of it is very good, sometimes they, they wanna come and really take over into San Francisco [California] (laughter).  I said, "There are other places in the world besides San Francisco, you know."  There are things that they wanna do and I'm glad to hear that they, they really are doing them, which is from my point, it's good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they are useful, they are not going around saying you know I can't, I can't they've tried a lot of education and the education seems to be working well.  And I think I'm happy, even though I don't have children, I have a lot other kids around me all the time.
Story_ID: 484006
Speaker 1: Are you ready for the last question?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Why not?
Speaker 1: All right, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different.  Ma'am, how, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be membered- remembered as somebody who tried to make a difference.  I would like people to believe that I tried as much as I could in many of these places to, to bring this together.  That would be enough for me, I'm certainly not gonna be rich, so it's too late (laughter) for that.  So I, I, I think that's, that's enough for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To have brought a lot of people together.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 484007
Speaker 1: Well this is a picture from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] I was the editor of the newspaper [The Hilltop], and these are all the people who worked with me on the newspaper.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay and approximate date?
Speaker 1: Oh let's see 19--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I think it might say under that, '46 [1946] and '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: So this is her right.
Speaker 2: Okay. Right there, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah Franklin Thomas [Franklin A. Thomas], Franklin Thomas of the Ford Foundation [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: There he is, Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You wanna tell us the name of the group; I mean just read the names.
Speaker 1: Oh um-hm, yeah, this, this group a, a commission that went south to South Africa while, oh what, what was it, 1981, right um-hm.  Oh, here's, here's the picture up here.  We of course were there for that fantastic man in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Was Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 1: Who was still in the, who was still in jail at that point in time.
Speaker 2: Right, he, he had ten more years to go.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is my dog, Ipco.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: I-P-C-O.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She was named after that company that gave me the dog (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: This sh- should be 1962 or something.  This is, this should be, I'm trying to read my, my badge over there.  But I think that's a, that's NOW [National Organization for Women], that's a meeting of, at NOW.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I was elected to the presidency.  And this is me.
Speaker 2: This is in the '50s [1950s]? It kind of looks like it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSON)
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 2: In South America when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh when I was, okay, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, South, South America '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: This is, this is me graduating from elementary school [P.S. 176, The Ovington School, Brooklyn, New York] and I made that dress that I'm in.  We had to make that before (laughter) we could graduate.
Speaker 2: So that's about 1939?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.  That must be something I'm dri- that must be liquor that I'm drinking in there 'cause my eyes are closed.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Nineteen sixty-five [1965] Plans for Progress [Plans for Progress Conference].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yacht Sequoia [USS Sequoia], Norman Nicholson [Norman E. Nicholson].
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The Kaiser [Kaiser Industries, Inc.]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And yourself.
Speaker 1: That's, that's Governor Pat Brown and some others.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: This is the International Garment Work, Workers Union [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yeah International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union [ILGWU] and that's, that is the governor on this side, and this one is, this is one of the people who was in the labor union.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   So the governor's on the left.
Speaker 1: Yeah he's on the left.
Speaker 2: Her dress has the pattern of the logo there that the garment workers union.
Speaker 1: Yes they made the dress for me because they, I, they, they had never done this before.  They had never put labels in their clothing before, and they decided to do that.  So they made that dress.
Speaker 2: Look for the union label.
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly and then they stop doing it.  Okay these are the people who, well this is the gentleman who ran the program for, for the young people who came into the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union.  He ran the whole years of training of us, and this of course is Mrs. Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: Eleanor Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Eleanor, Eleanor Roosevelt who came to speak to us, she was very tied in with the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union.  She was very supportive of the labor unions, um-hm.  And that's me, and this is the two of us were selected to be the heads of the group, so I was the one woman and he was the (laughter) one man.  We were the group leaders.  And, and this is he and I again picketing in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: We're on, and we're on a strike, a little bit after that, somebody came out and we were talking about, "Don't go in, don't go in," and they punched me in the eye.  So (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really?
Speaker 1: When I got, when I got home, when I got home, my mother [Ethel Hall Clarke] said. "This is what you gonna go do (laughter)." 'Cause I had a black eye (laughter).
Speaker 2: Really they punched you in the eye?
Speaker 1: They punched me in the eye.  Well that's me, I guess I'm about five, maybe four, so this would be 1930.
Speaker 2: This is, this is me speaking at the housing department [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] in the federal government
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  She's got the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pat Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay, Patricia Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that's me in the ocean right over here in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  In August, 1968.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Can you read that?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Winson, Sadonia?
Speaker 2: Sadonia, Sadonia Wilson [ph.], um-hm, and myself, and that would've been about fifteen years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Does that ring a bell?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's a birthday of this young man and we're in, I know his mother, but I don't know him (laughter) who he, I think her son, yeah.  Larry's [ph.] son.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who, who his mother?
Speaker 2: Has mother, his, is it back on the back?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 2: No, no give me a couple of seconds and I'll get it to you.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: These are members of the Black Women Stirring the Waters, that's me up here in the front, and this is at one, one of our meetings.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was an organization that I don't remember (unclear), book publish.
Speaker 2: Yes, let me put the book that I gave you; I'll give you one if you want it.  Oh, okay this is how they--this guy Herman Diagos [ph.] I thought that was him.  This is a friend of mine a Latino friend of mine and this is a Christmas that's actually in my house 'cause I used to give Christmas parties for everybody that we did anything with for the year.
Speaker 1: Now let's see.
Speaker 2: This is family, okay this is my nephew who is a Catholic priest, and these are my two nieces.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you go from left to right and name everybody?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, um-hm (cough).  The first one is Susan [Susan Clarke (ph.)]; the next one is Annie and my brother Charles [Charles Clarke, Jr.], no par, my brother Norris [Norris Clarke].  And that's Mark [Mark Clarke (ph.)], and this is his, my hus- my brother's wife.
Speaker 1: And that's, on the end is someone associated with the church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I think I, think it's somebody with the church 'cause I don't recognize him.
Story_ID: 484008
Speaker 1: And that's my mother and father, do you want their names?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes please.
Speaker 1: Okay. Charles Clarke [Charles Clarke, Sr.] and Ethel Clarke [Ethel Hall Clarke], and that's gotta be, it's gotta be when they were about fifty or sixty.  Okay, that's the same brother that was with the, Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S, [Norris Clarke] this is Annie [Annie Clarke (ph.)] and that's her mother.
Speaker 2: So that's your niece, in the all-white?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  You managed to get a good bunch of pictures.  (Laughter) What's her name again?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I don't even know (laughter)
Speaker 1: (Pronunciation) Aileen [HistoryMaker Aileen Clarke Hernandez].
Speaker 2: Yeah a lot of people do call me (pronunciation) Aileen (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and what, about what year is that you think?
Speaker 2: I think it's probably about forty years ago.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Ah you see people, you know people on this list.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, [HistoryMaker] Julianne Malveaux.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is right there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is here.
Speaker 2: Yeah and this is.
Speaker 1: And the others, I'm not sure, oh or [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: That's that other one that's still got, well this is me over here and that I think was at school 'cause she was, she was the head of the school down in.  And I think that's where we are.
Speaker 1: Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or?
Speaker 2: No not Spelman the one that she became the president of, Julianne.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I'm not sure, okay.
Speaker 2: It's, it's in North Carolina [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] or something.
Speaker 1: Oh Shaw [Shaw University, Raleigh, North Carolina] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think it is Shaw [sic.].  Yes this is my, the person who worked with me for years and years until she passed away.  And I don't think about how long ago this was.
Speaker 1: She was an aide when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Commissioner--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Of EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well she was oh here too, she was, she came to work with me here when.  Oh my head is going crazy.
Speaker 1: She, she's in there so.
Speaker 2: Yeah she is.
Speaker 1: Her picture's in there though.
Speaker 2: I'll give it to you before you go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  (Laughter) I didn't realize that you were handing me when you put this down.  Now does it have a date on here, yeah I think there is a date up there.  March something, yeah?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah 30th, Thursday, March 30th.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-two [1972], um-hm.  Yeah this, this is me again, and this was at the, the Commonwealth [Commonwealth Club of California, San Francisco, California] is a, is a, a club where they have people come and speak, I was speaking.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's my brother Chuck--Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S, Norris Clarke.  I should've given you the one with him and his, his is it still is it up there?  Can, can you wanna take in him in his, in his uniform?
Speaker 2: No, not necessarily we've already got it.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, Norris, and it's Norris.
Speaker 2: In fact there's one up here.
Speaker 1: Oh there is one up there, okay, good, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh did we talk about this, this one is Patsy Fulcher.
Speaker 1: This is Patsy Fulcher.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sarah Weddington [Sarah Ragle Weddington] and me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is there a date on it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, it's not.
Speaker 2: That's Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt and me and that's at the union and she came to speak the union, and that would be, does it have a date on it, it should have one.  Well you know it was when she started at the, at the ILG [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union (ILGWU)], I think that's 1951.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's me, and taking a look at that, I think that is at the ILGWU down in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh you did find the book (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, let me see.
Speaker 2: Yeah 1970 this is the year I became the president [of National Organization for Women] and these are all members trying to get ourselves together. Want to get Betty Friedan in? That's not a very good picture, though.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Do you want any of the names of those people there? 'Cause I think I saw (unclear). Well you could just say who they, who they are--they're members. Oh good, that's great.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is, that is the statue [Statue of Liberty, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Here's a nice (unclear) photo of, of something.
Speaker 2: Do you know, do you know who he is? I think he's a Chicago [Illinois], a Chicago newspaper man. No, a radio guy.
Speaker 1: A radio guy? I don't recognize him. I don't. I know [HistoryMaker] Wesley South, but that's not Wesley South.
Speaker 2: Yeah this is, this is pretty old. Yeah, it's back in--I think it was in, one of the first interviews (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh. How did all of those men get in there?
Speaker 1: Now, now, what is this, here?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to look to see.
Speaker 1: Is that EEOC?
Speaker 2: It would be around, it would be me speaking at some meeting at the E--
Speaker 1: EEOC.
Speaker 2: --for the EEOC.
Speaker 1: And same thing there?
Speaker 2: There's my union dress again.
Speaker 1: That's A. Philip Randolph, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Huh? No.
Speaker 1: No, it's not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It looks like him.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: I think that's another meeting. But I wish I could, I wish I could read the badge, 'cause then I would know that woman's face, but I can't remember her name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Let's turn.
Speaker 2: That's me. And, taking a look at them, I think that was at the ILGWU, down in Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 484009
Speaker 1: That's got to be in 1926, no probably 1927, that's my brother Charles [Charles Clarke, Jr.] and me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the last one. Okay, this is [HistoryMaker] Yvonne Brathwaite Burke.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  From left to right.
Speaker 1: Yes, she's here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So from left to right we have?
Speaker 1: Aileen [HistoryMaker Aileen Clarke Hernandez] this is me, and this is Shirley.
Speaker 2: Shirley Chisholm?
Speaker 1: Shirl- Shirley Chisholm, yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And Yvonne.
Speaker 1: Yvonne Burke.
Speaker 2: Brathwaite Burke.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, that's in the back too so, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
