Story_ID: 8482
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Friday, December 17, 2004. And this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you would, please, for the record, tell us your full name, including your middle name and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, Eric Himpton Holder, Jr., H-I-M-P-T-O-N, H-O-L-D-E-R.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born January 21, 1951 in the Bronx in New York City.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.  I work here at the law firm of Covington and Burling in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 8483
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite I think is probably salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Barbados in the West Indies.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: Nah, not, not really.
Story_ID: 8484
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she spent her childhood and grew up as a girl?
Speaker 2: Her name is Miriam Yearwood Holder.  She was born January 25, 1924 in Atlantic, New Jersey; grew up in Atlantic City, didn't move out of Atlantic City until she married my father in 1949.  But--born and raised in Atlantic City.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up in Atlantic City?
Speaker 2: She had an interesting and not easy childhood.  Her father died when she was about five or six years old.  She was raised by a single mom.  She had a sister whose name was Gloria.  They lived in a different Atlantic City than the one that we have now.  It was, it was segregated.  It was, although part of the Northeast, Atlantic City had a lot of Southern things about it, and they weren't allowed to go certain places.  My grandmother was pretty active, and actually was involved in demonstrations to desegregate lunch counters at Woolworth's and other places like that.  She describes, I think, of a pretty good childhood that, although she always talks about the absence of her, her father, I think her childhood was one that she liked a lot.  She went to Atlantic City High School [Atlantic City, New Jersey], graduated from there and then became an operator at the, I guess at the time, it was a Bell telephone company, and worked there for, for a while, was married to somebody other than my dad.  That marriage was annulled and then she met my father who was a good friend of my aunt's husband, if that makes sense.  They introduced my mother and father [Eric Himpton Holder Sr.], and they were married shortly thereafter.
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about going--did she spend a lot of time at the beach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of time at the beach.  In fact, when we were kids we used to spend the week--I grew up in New York City, but we used to spend our summers down in Atlantic City at Missouri Avenue, which was called chicken bone beach.  And it was a place where the blacks used to go.  Whites had their own part of the beach, but blacks folks congregated at Missouri Avenue, and she spent a lot of time at the beach as a, as a child and wanted us to have that experience as, as kids ourselves.
Speaker 1: And how would describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She is the rock of our family.  She is the ultimate supporter of her children.  She's like a lioness with her cubs, and even though I'm almost fifty-four years old, she still thinks of me as the eight year old who needs to be protected from all that's out there in the world.  My dad was a guy who always pushed you and questioned whether or not you had done enough.  My mother gives unquestioning loyalty and support, whatever I do, whatever my brother, Billy does, she thinks it's the greatest in the world.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your mother do growing up, when you were a child?
Speaker 2: She actually stayed in the home and helped raise us until I guess I got to junior high school.  And then she went back to work as a secretary for a man whose name was Harold Louis Wright, who was the first black bishop in the Episcopal church in New York City, and she was his secretary until he died [1978] when I was probably in college.  And she used to work at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in Manhattan [New York, New York] right down the street from where I was in, in college at Columbia [University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And did you ever visit her at work, growing up and, and what was that like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, we, we spent a lot of time down there cause as I said, it was right down the block from where I was at school in college.  So during that period of time, I used to go down there and have lunch with her pretty frequently, have lunch with her pretty frequently, have lunch with Bishop White, who was her, her boss and who was our minister in Queens [New York] before he moved into Manhattan [New York, New York] to become the bishop.  I'm really close to her, and so when we had the opportunity we used to, as I said, hang out quite a bit.  And we actually shared a car that I bought in 1971, Plymouth Duster that cost $3200 dollars.  I guess I was a junior in college when I got it, and she used to drive it during the week.  I used to drive it on weekends.  And so I'd take her home on Fridays, take the car on weekends, and then give it back to her on Sunday night.
Story_ID: 8485
Speaker 1: Let's talk now about your father.  Same thing, his name and where he was born and spent his childhood as a boy?
Speaker 2: Right, Eric Holder, Sr.  I'm obviously named after him.  He was born October 29, 1903.  He's twenty-one years older than my mother, born in Barbados in the West Indies; left there at the year, at the age of twelve or so, came to United States.  His mother who was separated from his father left Barbados, came to New York, got herself situated and then sent for my father and his, his sister, whose name was Marjorie.  And the two of them came up to live with his mother in New York City [New York] in Manhattan, in Harlem.
Speaker 1: And what did he tell you about his childhood in Barbados?
Speaker 2: He paints this idyllic picture of what it was like to be a kid in Barbados.  And basically, it's the dawn of the, the twentieth century.  He talks about, you know, walking to school without shoes, swimming on beaches, eating raw sugar cane, cane that would be cut in the fields and just chewing on it, something that I did when we went to Barbados later on when I was a child.  He describes an education system that was very good.  Education was stressed; talks about the fact that he, like my mother, kind of interestingly, he had a father, who although alive, was kind of absent, and always said that he was gonna have with his boys, the experience that he had with his father.  So he was a guy who always--although he worked hard and did a lot of different things, always had time for, for me and for my, my brother.  But he describes a childhood that I think he liked a great deal.  He had a fondness for Barbados, for that island that stayed with him until he died.
Speaker 1: Did he remember and did he talk about at all the move from Barbados to the U.S. and what the transition was like?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he talks about that actually--talked about it a lot.  He came in with his sister, to Ellis Island, and for some reason, he had some kind of medical problems.  And, although--so Aunt Margie got through right away and was able to join my grandmother, he had to stay looked up in medical quarantine for about a week or so.  And as a kid of twelve, thirteen years old, which is not the easiest thing to do.  He talks about coming in on the boat and seeing the Statute of Liberty and realizing that he was in New York.  And then they moved to, not initially, not originally to Harlem [New York], but a part of Manhattan [New York, New York], I think it was called San Juan Hill.  It was an immigrant community.  His best friend was a boy from Finland.  He discovered ice skating, something that he really loved and became apparently quite good at, fundamentally different, obviously, from what he had Barbados, where there was no ice skating.  But he came from, had an immigrant community where a lot of kids were from Northern and Eastern Europe.  And at some point they moved from, I guess it was midtown or the sixties, in sixtieth streets and in Manhattan up to, to Harlem up to, up to Harlem where he lived, I guess most of his life until he met my mother when we moved to Queens.
Speaker 1: And did he enjoy growing up in Harlem--well, spending those teen years in Harlem?  Did he ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, got into a lot of trouble, did a lot of different things.  He was a real character, and so the growing up, he talks about all kinds of things that he did--he told us this later on, not when we were kids, of all the trouble he used to--he got into doing things in stores that he shouldn't have done, staying out too late, you know, going past curfews and all that.  And, but describes a childhood that I think he a great deal, and liked being in New York.  He thought that New York was the, the center of the universe and that if you made it in New York, that was an example that you had really, really made it in the world.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your father do when you were a boy?
Speaker 2: He did a variety of things.  And I think this is in some ways maybe among the most interesting parts of my background.  I am a person who's been involved in law enforcement for a good portion of my life.  My brother is a retired Port Authority lieutenant, police officer.  My father, by contrast, did a lot of things that were not quite legal.  Now, he was involved the numbers game in Manhattan.  And he dropped out of high school, was, my dad was very smart, a lot of good instincts.  And he had connections to, affiliations with gangsters.  He'll talk about he knew Dutch Schultz in Manhattan, you know, a big gangster who was ultimately killed by the Italian mob who took over the numbers game.  And my father was involved in that until about, oh, I guess when I was a little guy.  And my mother [Miriam Yearwood Holder] told him, you know, we got to get out of this.  And so he went legit and used some of the money that he had saved from his, his numbers days to buy some houses in Brooklyn and other real estate, which is how he ultimately made his living.  But for a good portion of life, he was, as I said, involved in, in the numbers.  And in a way that--it's hard for people to understand now, it was not something that was disrespected.  People were involved in, that was illegal, were involved in that.  Joe Louis' managers were guys who were in the numbers and who my father knew.  And as a result of that, my father knew Joe Louis, got to know Jackie Robinson, a whole variety of people who were on the scene in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] in, in New York.
Speaker 1: Was it dangerous at all?
Speaker 2: Nah, not really.  You know, a different kind of life and certainly not the life he wanted for us, but also different from the life that he, the way it is now.  It was kind of a, a known secret that that's what he did, in our neighborhood in Queens.  I mean I can remember as a little boy the fact that we had silk suits, shiny suits--I don't know if they were silk.  They were shiny suits that I didn't like the way they felt.  We had new Cadillacs, and I couldn't under--you know, you just kind of accept it.  And then growing up and looking back, I understand that for a black family in the '50s [1950s], we actually did pretty well.  And now I understand, you know, what the source of that wealth was.
Story_ID: 8486
Speaker 1: I'm curious about the age difference in your parents.  First, what did your grandmother, your maternal grandmother, what did she think about the age difference?  Did your, did your mother ever discuss that with you at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I actually asked my mother [Miriam Yearwood Holder] that cause I wondered about that.  My mother was only, I don't know, four, five, six years younger I think than my maternal grandmother.  But my grandmother and my father got along quite well, and apparently, this was not an issue for my grandmother.  I'm not so sure that would, I'd be as accepting if this were one of my little girls who's gonna marry somebody who's twenty years older than her.  In my own little way, I think I've kind of figured this out, at least in part.  I mean she's a, a woman who's lost a dad at an early age.  And so this guy comes into her life who's twenty years older.  And he's kind of cool.  He's from New York.  He's well dressed.  He's got the Cadillac, and so I think that had at least something to do with it.  But apparently, my grandmother, and sort of my observations, and my mother indicates the same thing, my grandmother and father got along quite well.
Speaker 1: And did your mother--does your mother or has she ever shared with you just--how was it in your house growing up?  You know, were there like times where it was very, like distinguishable that there was like this age difference, just in terms of how they did things and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, not really.  And that's the thing, my father died at the age of ninety four, I guess.  And he was a guy who was in great shape.  I actually didn't realize how old he was until I actually filled out applications for colleges.  I remember looking and seeing, you were born in 1903?  You know, and thinking, wait a minute that makes you--however old he was at the time.  I always thought of him as a guy who was the contemporary of, of people who I now know were much younger than him, and who were the parents of my friends.  But, no, it was never an issue for me and apparently, never an issue for my mother as well.  And it became an issue towards the end of his life when the age finally did, you know, catch up with him.  And my mother, you know, substantially younger, had to kind of care for him in last couple years of life.
Story_ID: 8487
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your grandparents.  You said you would spend summers in Atlantic City, New Jersey.  Let's begin talking about your maternal grandmother, starting with her name and just your experiences with her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name was Rosalee Hardy, that was her maiden name; married name was Rosalee Davis.  She was born and raised in Barbados.  All of my--anything for me is, is Barbados on, on both sides of the family.  She came to Atlantic City.  It was, initially, sort of her, as part of the migration of West Indians to the United States.  It was all part of the great migration, I guess, in the early part of the twentieth century.  She came to Atlantic City, New Jersey, through New York.  She, her sister, was supposed to be the one in the family who was gonna come to America and live with relatives, but the sister at the last minute got cold feet.  And my grandmother said, well, I'll go.  And so they put her on the boat, and sent her to New York where she stayed for just a couple of minutes, and then moved her down to Atlantic City where she met my grandfather, who was also from Barbados and was also in Atlantic City.  And, figure that one out.
Speaker 1: Did your grandmother's family know your father's family?
Speaker 2: (nods head no)
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no connections until my mother met my father [Eric H. Holder Sr.], you know, in the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: And how would describe your grandmother?
Speaker 2: A woman before her time; a real sense of civil rights; a real sense of frustration with the plight of black people in this country, a real fighter.  She was a person who, had she been born in my generation, would have gone to great schools and would have had a lot of opportunities that unfortunately, she didn't have.  She was very, very bright; didn't have huge amounts of, of education, but had an intestinal fortitude that allowed her to deal with the fact that she lost a husband, had two young kids, you know, did a good job in raising them; always had a roof over their heads.  They had, if not a middle-class existence, they weren't poor.  And she was tough, she was tough.  She was very bright.  I can remember heated conversations I had with her about the Vietnam War, where she was--you know, she was an ardent Democrat, and passionately against the war.  I was not sure I was or against the war, at least at the beginning when I was in high school.  And she was a formidable lady.
Speaker 1: What about your paternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: I only--she died in about 1958, '57 [1957] when I was, I think about seven or eight years old.  And my memories of her are not great.  I remember as being a good cook and kind of a, a stern woman.  But I don't really have great memories of her.  It's interesting, both of my grandmothers--one thing I do remember about them is they were both very light and both had blue eyes.  Both of them had white fathers from, from Barbados.  And I remember that always kind of struck me that [I have?] grandmothers with, you know, kind of light hair and light skin and, and, and blue eyes.  I always wondered like why is that, and, and found out later on what that was all about.
Speaker 1: And what was your paternal grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Eva Gay Holder.
Story_ID: 8488
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I can, probably just being in East Elmhurst, in Queens [New York], where I grew up and I remember going to kindergarten and not really wanting to be there, and on the verge of crying--I remember this like it was almost yesterday.  And my mother [Miriam Yearwood Holder] staying there with me and then assuring that it was gonna be okay, and then seeing my friend who lived down the block, Richie Burnett.  And once I saw him, I was fine, and I was in Ms. Farrow's class, I remember that.  And this might be my earliest memory, kindergarten in East Elmhurst.
Story_ID: 8489
Speaker 1: One thing I didn't ask you about that I'd like to now is how far back can you trace your origin?  Do you know a lot about your ancestry?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  It's something I've always wanted to do, and I keep telling myself I'm going to do, but I think I'm probably have to wait till I retire to be able to spend some time.  Some say the records are not bad in Barbados from what I've heard.  So I don't know much about my family tree beyond my grandparents, and some small stuff about people before that, but not much.
Story_ID: 8490
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about what life was like in your house growing up?  Like what were holidays like?  Were they very festive occasions?  Were they a big deal, what, what were holidays like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: Christmas was a huge deal, lots of presents, lot of people coming over for, for visits.  July fourth, Labor Day, huge parties at our house in the backyard, barbeques, lived in a, I guess kind of a lower middle-class neighborhood in Queens, and a lot of folks who were there from the South.  And I can remember barbeques, but I grew up really--my father's best friends and the people who were, I guess closest to him and to my mother were other couples who had West Indian connections from other islands.  My father's best friend was a guy from Jamaica.  There were people from St. Lucia, Antigua, Barbados, Trinidad, British Guyana.  These are all people who I remember, and we used to go to their houses for Saturday nights, other holidays.  I can remember roast, they used to roast a pig on, on Christmas at my father's best friend, who was a guy named Clifford Stevenson who was a proofreader for the 'New York Times', and he was from, he was from Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And could you please give us your siblings names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  My brother is William Yearwood. Holder.  He's named after my maternal grandfather whose name was William Yearwood, William Yearwood Holder, and he was born September 22, 1952, about fifteen, sixteen months younger than me.
Speaker 1: And talk a little bit about the neighborhood you grew up in.  Do you remember the name of the street you lived on?
Speaker 2: Sure, my mother's still in the house where I grew up.  The address is 2366 101st Street in Queens [New York], in a place called East Elmhurst, right near LaGuardia Airport.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe your block for us?
Speaker 2: Sure, it's a block that, the houses that we lived in--my mother still lives in, were built, I guess in 1950, 1949.  They are attached houses.  Growing up with four people, we had one bathroom and I remember thinking to myself, you know, normal house.  And now I live in a big house with three kids, each of whom have their own room, each room has its own bathroom, and I wonder looking back now, how four people who had different schedules more or less, how we ended up managing to use just one bathroom.  But so lots of, these row houses that were built in 1950.  On the other side of the street are houses that were built probably in like the '30s [1930s], maybe the '40s [1940s] that were older.  It was a neighborhood that was Italian and that became more and more black.  As black folks moved in, the Italians moved out, until by the time I was, oh, I don't know, eight or nine, there were all, nothing but black folks in our, on our block and in our neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And was there like a, a corner store or that kind or was it mainly residential?
Speaker 2: It was residential, but five or six blocks away, there was a corner store, a candy store where we used to ride our bikes and, and hang out.  It was run by a Jewish couple who were--Mo--I don't remember what his wife's name was, but Shelly, I remember who was his daughter who was one of my babysitters and went to the same school as we did.  So it was really kind of a really nice, 1950s in America life.  We used to ride our bike, put your baseball glove on your bike, ride up to the store, take a quarter, if you had a quarter and could get, you know, a ton of candy, something to drink, and it was nice, a nice time.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of give us an idea of what a typical day was like for you?  You'd wake up in the morning and then, what?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends, if I was in school.  You know, go to school, nine to three, come home.  My mother would be there, get a snack.  I remember doing homework, could watch TV for a little bit, black and white at the time.  You know, color TV came out when I was probably eight or nine years old, and I remember going over to a neighbor's house and seeing color TV for the first time.  I'm thinking, wow, you know, this is--but we didn't have a color TV for, you know, a great number of years.
Speaker 1: What did you like to watch on TV?
Speaker 2: You remember the "Mickey Mouse Club", "Howdy Doody" , and then, you know, these things I'm sure sound corny to kids nowadays, but--and you only had cartoons on Saturday mornings, you know, not like my kids get to see cartoons any time they want.  For us, it was getting up in the morning on Saturday and watching, you know, 'Sky King', 'Roy Rogers', all those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 8491
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: In New York everything has a number, so I went Public School 127 until the end of the fourth grade at which time they'd given us all tests, and they decided that me, along with I guess six other people in my class were gonna go into a program that, what was called the IGC program, for intellectually gifted children.  And so they transferred us from one-twenty seven [Public School 127] to P.S.148.  One twenty-seven was a school--my neighborhood school, predominantly black; went to P.S.148, which was in a Jewish neighborhood in Queens, had to take a bus to get there.  And so I went from being one of, you know, a percentage of 94, 95 percent black to being the only black kid in my class in, in fourth grade and surrounded by kids who were predominantly Jewish.
Speaker 1: And do you remember some of your teachers from elementary school?  You remembered your kindergarten teacher.  What about some of the others?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I remember most of them.  Yeah, I remember Ms. Gant and Ms. Foley, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was that transition like for you?  Did you adjust well when you moved to the other school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was real apprehensive, and I remember the night before my first day at P.S.148, I didn't, at least remember, remember sleeping at an awful lot and being real nervous.  My mother drove me up there.  I didn't take the bus that day.  I remember waiting in line--you had to wait on the schoolyard, waiting in line to go in with my class.  And I was just kind of standing.  I didn't know anybody.  And this kid walked up to me, and his name was Frank Sardellas (ph.), I remember that.  And he stuck his hand out and said, "I'm Frank Sardellas, you're a new guy in the, you know, in the, in the class.  I'll show you around so you stick with me."  And he actually became my best friend for my two years at P.S.148.  He's was a good--oh, he's a good guy.
Speaker 1: And did you know that you would get--did your mother, did you guys know that?  Were you, you know, always like at the top of the class, that kind of thing?  Did you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I was always kind of like, yeah.  I always won the spelling bee and always got, you know, good grades and stuff while I was one-twenty seven [P.S.127].  I didn't know about this test, that I didn't quite understand.  And I didn't quite know what IGC or intellectually gifted, I didn't quite understand.  But it was interesting cause I went from the school where I was probably, considered the brightest kid in the class, to this other school and found out that, you know, I had a lot of educational deficits.  And a lot of the things that these other kids knew at P.S.148, I didn't know.  And so I went from a person who was the top of the class to a person who became maybe kind of the middle of the class.  And that took some adjustment.  And then I had a whole new set of friends.  These were white kids, Jewish kids, and I'd grown up with black, you know, protestant kids.  And so I ended up with kind of dual identity, two sets of friends, who I got together every now and then to play ball and do things like that.  But--and the sleepovers at the white kids houses, and they would come over to our house, but it was a, it was an interesting--I think, I think it helped in a lot of ways prepare me for later life. Because I think I was rooted in my early years in my blackness, which is important.  You got to, you know--that's still the prime determinant in this country, but at the same time, at an early age, I was exposed to kind of the reality of America.
Speaker 1: And did, did the kids back in the neighborhood have, what were their feelings toward you?  Were they still the same, were you still Eric, you know, the guy from the neighborhood, or were they starting to you see a little differently?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so cause these were still my buddies.  I still hung out with them, you know, more than--rode my bike with them, played ball with them, had, you know, on the baseball team back in East Elmhurst.  So I still Ricky to them, and I just went to, you know, a different school.  But those guys were my friends and are still my friends.  I'm still in touch with, with all of them, see them when I got back to Queens.  Some of them are still in the neighborhood.  Others are in different parts of the, of the country.
Speaker 1: Was your nickname Ricky?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was Ricky, and my brother, who's William, was Billy--Ricky and Billy, that was us.
Speaker 1: Where did Ricky come from?
Speaker 2: Er-rick?
Speaker 1: Oh, (laughter).
Speaker 2: So that's the best I can come up with.  I don't, I don't know where you get that other than that.
Speaker 1: And when you went to the new school, were you finding it at first to be a little frustrating or was it challenging for you?
Speaker 2: It was a shock.  I remember that cause, you know, school for me was always relatively easy.  And I always got great grades.  And now I was not--I was putting in the same effort, but the grades weren't as good.  I actually had, for the first time, really had to kind of apply myself and, and work.  And so that took some getting used to, it took some adjustment, but, you know, I got over it and ultimately did, you know, well there.  And then in junior high school, but that was, that was something that was unique.  And then dealing with the whole, being the only black kid in, in the class.  That was, that was different.  The kids in our class had Jewish holidays where they wouldn't come to school, and so I'd be like there with maybe two or three other kids in the school.  And then learning about the Jewish faith, the holidays and all those things, that was a, that was new and interesting.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your favorite subjects in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Always social studies.  I always liked history.  I've always like current events, science, math to a lesser degree, but social studies and history.  That was really always what I liked and ultimately, I majored in, in college.
Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, did you have dreams and--I'm, I'm sorry, elementary school.  Did you have dreams and aspirations, like what did you want to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Wasn't really sure.  May have had an idea about what I wanted to do, but I always had a sense from my father, especially, that you had to get ready, you know.  School is important.  Whatever you're gonna be, you have to have a good education, and you got to take school seriously.  You got work at it, and I remember at one point thinking I wanted to be elect--an electrical engineer.  I sued to say that.  I think I said that cause it sounded good.  It wasn't anything I ever really, I don't think seriously considered.  But, so I didn't really have any sense I wanted to be--you know, like a lot of kids, I wanted to be a baseball player, you know.  I wanted to be a, a basketball player, but no strong sense of what I wanted to be, at least in elementary school.
Story_ID: 8492
Speaker 1: What was the name of the junior high school you attended?
Speaker 2: Joseph Pulitzer Junior High School.  When you get to junior high school in New York, they start to give them names, although it was also Junior High School 145.
Speaker 1: And was that a talented and gifted school as well?  I was part of a program.  It was called the 'SP program'.  It stood for special progress, special program, something like that.  It was, I remember it was SP.  And from seven, grades seven through nine, it was--I was in a class, there were two SP classes per grade, and I was in one of those classes.
Speaker 2: And what were some of the subjects you enjoyed most in junior high school?
Speaker 1: Again, history, social studies, I remember discovering reading.  I mean I liked reading before, but when I got to junior high school, the books I started to read, I started to like old English novels, historical things, and biographies.  I remember just for some reason, books really came into my life in junior high school.
Speaker 2: Were, did you have like a favorite author or a favorite book at that particular time?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't until I got to high school that I read the book that in many ways, I think, I don't know, changed my life, had a real impact on my life. That was the "Autobiography of Malcolm X".  So a lot of books I enjoyed, biographies, especially of African Americans, George Washington Carver, [W.E.B.] DuBois, [Paul Laurence] Dunbar, I mean people like that, reading about them.  The first connection with or first interaction with books that dealt with the Harlem Renaissance, again, all, just the beginnings, it became more intense when I got to high school and in, and in college, but started to be exposed to that in, in junior high school.
Speaker 2: In junior high school, who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 1: I remember Mr. Bart was a science teacher.  I remember he was a good teacher, a funny guy.  I also remember he was the guy who broke the news to us on November the twenty-second, 1963 that President [John F.] Kennedy had assassinated.  And we were taking an exam, and his eyes were red.  And I remember taking the test, and at the end of the exam, he came and was crying and told us that the President had died.  We'd heard some rumors as we were changing classes that he'd been shot, but that had not really been confirmed until he--Mr. Bart told us that he had died.  I remember Ms. Hayes who was an English teacher, Miss Sonnenberg, I remember was also an English teacher.  Ms. Reuben was a math teacher, all people who stuck out in my mind.  I--it was interesting, as I thought about this later, I never had--I think until I got to college, any teachers who were African Americans.  They were all, all white, predominantly women, predominantly Jewish.
Speaker 2: And what were some of the things that you liked doing in our spare time in junior high school?
Speaker 1: Basketball was kind of the--I was really getting into sports at that point.  Baseball to start, really started playing basketball at that point.  I was an avid reader, real--always wanted to stay up on current events.  I had my own subscription to "Time Magazine", "Sports Illustrated"--
Speaker 2: In junior high school you did?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: And I was kind of a voracious reader of the newspaper.  I, I used to--I saved newspapers that I thought were of significant events so I have a collection now at home of, you know, newspapers from, I don't know, thirty, forty years ago that I just saved cause, you know, it had something spectacular or important that happened that day.
Speaker 2: What did your friends think, you know, you're reading "Time Magazine". They're reading comic books.  What did they think?
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting.  They always, you know, I was thought of  just kind one of the guys.  And now I talk to these guys, and they say, "Yeah, well, you were, you were a bit of an egghead.  You know, we used to--you were actually okay.  You were pretty cool.  You weren't a nerd, but we always kind of thought of you as kind of, you know, a different kind of guy."  You know, they always, it's interesting cause they said they felt protective of me in a way, that they--somehow, that they thought maybe something special was gonna happen with me and they needed to kind of keep me out of, out of trouble and all that.  But at the time, I just felt like I was of the, one of the guys, just kind of fitting in, and so that was kind of a revelation is when I got--not the best thing in the world to hear that I was considered an egghead by my, my buddies.
Story_ID: 8493
Speaker 1: What kind of young man were you starting to develop in?  Like how would you describe yourself at that particular time?  You know, like, like, that's kind of like between teen years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was pretty shy.  I guess, guess in junior high school, I had a girlfriend.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Lynn Bligon (ph.).  And, you know, I, I was still, I think I was pretty quiet.  I wasn't, I was trying to find myself.  I was, I think I was pretty awkward socially and, and, and shy.  I mean I was, I didn't mix well in, in new settings.  It was something that only came, that only came to me, you know, much later on.  I was a kind of an awkward teen, early teenager.
Speaker 1: And who do you think was influencing you the most at this particular time in your life?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think probably my father [Eric H. Holder Sr.], my brother [William Holder], who, although younger than me was a lot more socially adept.  He was hipper than I was.  And so, I, I couldn't have my younger brother be cooler than me.  So I had to kind of keep up with whatever, you know, he was wearing, music he was listening to.  So in that way, he was influencing me.  But my father always had kind of a handle on the important stuff, and was always kind of stressing the need to, you know, stay serious about school, you doing your homework--and my mother, as well, making sure, you know, we spent the appropriate amount of time with homework, making sure that all the TVs were off, all the radios were off so we had time to, you know, do our homework in silence.
Speaker 1: And at this particular time in your life, were you starting to think a little bit about what you wanted to be when you grew up or did that come later?
Speaker 2: No, again, still not--nothing really strong in junior high school.  I ran for G.O. president, which is school president in my ninth grade, ninth, my last year of junior high school and won.  And so I remember thinking, well, you know, I kind of like this and the notion of politics or doing something in public life.  At that point, it really started to interest me.  President Kennedy had come into office and talked about public service as being something that was good for people.  And I remember really being struck by his youth, struck by his rhetoric.  I have hanging up in my office today what I think is the best, the greatest--the two greatest speeches of my lifetime, which is his inaugural address and [Dr.] Martin Luther King's civil rights rally address [ref. to March on Washington] here in Washington, D.C. in 1963.  And I was really influenced by, by, by Kennedy.  He's, he's one of my heroes.
Story_ID: 8494
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: I went to [Peter] Stuyvesant High School in lower Manhattan in New York.  You had to take a test to get into.  It's one of the three specialized school in New York, and unlike Junior High School 148 or Junior High School 145, or P.S.148, the whole school is for just kids who, you know, pass this, this test.
Speaker 1: So, did you feel mo--feel more in your element there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Stuyvesant, you were surrounded by kids who were eggheads, nerds, whatever.  I mean, I actually got to Stuyvesant , I was cool compared to these other guys.  I was a captain of the basketball team through my last year.  It's, it was an all boys school, which I think for a socially awkward, kind of shy guy, wasn't the best thing in the world for me.  I think that didn't help my progress with regard to interaction with people of the opposite sex.  But it was a good, good experience.  It was three years, and it's the hardest intellectual, academic experience I ever had, meaning law school wasn't as hard as Stuyvesant. College wasn't as hard as Stuyvesant .  Stuyvesant  was a hard, hard school to get through, and a lot of the work habits I developed there, I think have actually helped me in later life.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from Stuyvesant ?
Speaker 2: Sure, Mr. Cowadlow (ph.) the geometry teacher, I remember him quite well.  Ms. Burns was my English teacher.  Mr. Iffert (ph.) was my homeroom teacher.  He was a shop teacher.  And Mr. Crosby was my Spanish teacher, I remember.  I remember a lot of them, all good teachers, really good teachers.
Speaker 1: And were you still, was social studies still your--and government, was that still your, your favorite subject or what were some of your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: No, still social studies, current events, history.  By that time, I realized that when I got to college I wanted to major in something like political science, American history.  Math was okay, but clearly not something--you know, I was okay at it, but not something I really wanted to do.  Science, again, was okay.  I can, I can do it, but not something I really wanted to be involved--I mean it was really political things, historical things that were of interest to me.
Speaker 1: And you played basketball, and what were some of the other social activities you were involved in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't much social that happened at Stuyvesant , as I said, cause it was all boys.  So my social activities, kind of like it was in junior school and elementary, I'd go to school in one place, but my social life really was in my neighborhood.  And my social life really was more where my brother went to school.  He went to Forest Hills High School in Queens.  And so I'd go to dances at Forest Hills.  My girlfriend to, to Forest Hills.  And we had parties, you know, in the neighborhood in East Elmhurst.  So Manhattan was about Stuyvesant, and that was just about school.  But in terms of dances--and we didn't have a prom, you know, at Stuyvesant.  So I--I didn't have that experience.
Speaker 1: And would you, and what kinds of activities were you involved in at school?  Like, were you in student government, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't run for school president.  I was, I think, senator or something in the, the school senate.  But, yeah, political stuff was of interest to me.  I was in clubs that had to do with political things.  There was an Afro-American Society at the school.  I was active in that, but primarily, athletic stuff and primarily basketball was what I did at Stuyvesant other than just school.  But school was tough.  I mean I--I spent a lot of time at school and working on things and then a lot of time at home doing really intense homework.  It was, it was a rigorous three years.
Speaker 1: And what was the African American population?  What was the percentage of the African American population in high school?
Speaker 2: Pretty small.  I would bet probably less than five percent, and so we actually became pretty close.  One of the guys who, kind of a nice little story, who was close to me at the school, this named Bill Irish, who went to college with me ultimately.  We both went to Columbia [University, New York, New York] together.  Bill died a few years ago, and his daughter, Corrine Irish, is now here at, at Covington and Burling. She's now first-year associate here.  And so Corrine and I are now working on projects together.  She's only been at the firm for about--I think it's two or three months, but, so I'm working with Bill's daughter.
Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Knew I was gonna go to school; the question was, where.  I was a big fan of--another one of my idols and influential people, Kareem Abdul Jabbar, who at the time was Lew Alcindor.  And he had gone from New York to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] , and I decided that's where I was gonna go.  And I remember applying to UCLA, getting in, but I didn't get a lot of money in terms of scholarship, and that was what I needed, needed cash.  And so I ended up going to Columbia, considered a bunch of other schools, but went to Columbia because I got a good package from them.  I also had the ability to use a, a Regents scholarship that I'd won from the state, but you could only use that within, within New York State.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe what a Regents scholarship is?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you take an exam--I don't know how it is now, but in the, then you--.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, back then.
Speaker 2: --took the exam that had three hundred questions on it.  And the people who scored the best in the state, got these Regent scholarships.  I remember, again, 300 questions, I had 267 right, I remember, I remember that score, which was pretty high.  And so I got a, a scholarship.
Speaker 1: And what was our social life like?  Did you, did you date?  You said you had a girlfriend, but did you date or what was, what was your social life like?
Speaker 2: My social life really didn't begin until I got to college.  I mean I--which is not, I had a social life.  But I mean it was, it was pretty tame.  I had 'a' girlfriend who was my girlfriend, I guess, all high school.  And it was mainly again about doing things in Queens as opposed to Manhattan [New York] , hanging out with my boys from Queens and not really doing much in terms of hanging out with the guys I went to school with in Manhattan.
Speaker 1: And so what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty nine [1969].
Story_ID: 8495
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in college?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that's where the person you see before was actually formed. I mean, you know, everything up to Columbia College [Columbia University, New York, New York] was really kind of preparing me for those four years, which I think were very--perhaps the best four years of my life.  Columbia was a place--it was an interesting time to be at Columbia.  The riots had happened in 1968 at Columbia.  The campus was in turmoil, the war, Vietnam War, was at its height.  That was a very activist place.  We were always demonstrating against things.  I never took, I never took final exams until I was junior cause we were always on strike about something, protesting about something.  People's consciousness as black men, as young African American men, was, was on the increase.  We took the Naval ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps] office and converted it into a student lounge for African American students.  Columbia put up with a lot of stuff from the class of 1973.  We thought of ourselves as little revolutionaries when we got there in nineteen, I mean September of 1969.  It was also the first time I had an opportunity to interact with black guys from other than New York. My best friend, and still my best friend, is a black guy from Omaha, Nebraska; other friends from New Orleans [Louisiana]--.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Steve Sims.  Other friends from New Orleans, Louis Keyes; another good buddy, John Moore, from Jackson, Mississippi; another good friend, still, all still--these are still my best friends, James Whitlow from Cleveland, Ohio.  And it was very interesting to get together with guys who were my same age who'd had really, fundamentally different experiences because they were from different places, different schools, and getting to know them was, was pretty cool.
Speaker 1: And what did your parents of like, the, the new activist, you know, in you?
Speaker 2: They had mixed emotions about that.  I had the largest Afro, I think you probably could have imaged.  It was, my father, I remember him telling me, you're gonna look back at these pictures of yourself and think, you know, I look really stupid.  And I'm thinking (unclear) (you're?) an old man, you don't know what's going on.  And he's right.  I look back now, and it's those--these, I look like a light bulb.  It's, built like this, and this huge, huge Afro, with these big sideburns and everything.  It was, you know, Walt Frazier kind of stuff.  But we thought we were cool.  It was, but it was a good time.  It was a great time to be at that school.  My parents are conservative, West Indians.  And they didn't quite understand what had happened to their little Ricky who had gone through school, asking no questions, doing, you know, good work in school and suddenly, you know, demonstrating about stuff.  You know, the kinds of things that young men just do, but it was a really intense time to be doing those things in the late '60's [1960s], early '70's [1970s] in New York.
Story_ID: 8496
Speaker 1: And you majored in history [Columbia College, Columbia University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, American history.  And by that time, I decided that's, you know, what I wanted.  I was, I'd always been fascinated by it.  And what I tried to do was craft a major, [they] didn't have an African American Studies major at, at Columbia.  So what I tried to do was, said I was majoring in American history and just took all the Afro-Am courses that I could so that, every course they offered I took.  And I had my own little black studies major.
Speaker 1: And so when you were in college, what were you thinking that you wanted to do professionally?  You knew you wanted to major in history.  What were you thinking you wanted to do professionally?
Speaker 2: Still didn't have--I stumbled into law school.  By the end of college or towards the end of college, I was thinking, all right, you got to make some decisions about what you want to do with your life.  And law school was attractive to me because people told me you can always do a lot of things with a law degree.  You didn't have to be a lawyer.  And so I figured, all right, I can defer this decision for another--yet another three years.  I don't have to make up my mind.  I'll just go to law school and then figure out what I'm gonna do.  But I thought actually, you know, something legal, something political, perhaps teaching, but again, not really focusing on much of any--one, anything specific, at least when I was in college.
Speaker 1: And so you graduated from Columbia College in 1973?
Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973].
Speaker 1: And went straight to Columbia Law School from there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 8497
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Columbia Law School [Caloumbia University School of Law, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't a person who liked law school an awful lot.  It was something that I knew I had to do if I wanted to be a lawyer.  So it wasn't the most pleasant three years.  Law school's a real competitive, intense place.  I, I didn't mind competition.  I was used to that, but, you know, people--I, I liked the law as a means to accomplish ends.  And people in law school, you know, really liked the--the law--kind of in a vacuum.  I never saw it that way.  It was just a tool to try to do other things.  So I'm not a great student of the law.  I think I'm a pretty good lawyer, but I'm not a person who's necessarily in love with the study of law, and so, you know, so, I had to, I had to put up with it for three years.  But it was an okay experience, but I was glad to be out of law school and, then, you know, actually practice.
Speaker 1: And what were, what were some of the courses that you enjoyed in law school?
Speaker 2: Constitutional law, which was really kind of a study of the Constitution of the United States and the history of the United States.  And so that was consistent with what I had done in college and had always been interested.  I liked Criminal law, which was a surprise.  I didn't expect to like that, but that was actually what--I had a teacher whose name was Telford Taylor, who was one of the Nuremberg prosecutors after World War II.  He prosecuted the Nazi regime.  And I liked Crim law a lot.  And it was at that point that I decided, well, you know, maybe what I want to do is be a prosecutor.  And that was the thing that finally gave some form to my vocational desires.  And it was after my first year, I said, all right, I think I might want to be a prosecutor.  It was as, as a result of being, that experience with Professor Taylor.
Speaker 1: What about Evidence?  Did you like Evidence at all or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Evidence, I liked because I could see that that was a practical course, something that I'd be able to use when I was gonna be a trial lawyer or something like.  Other courses were too ethereal, and again, the study of the law, Administrative law, Property to a certain extent, but Evidence was clearly something that you could, you had to know cause you have to be able--you're gonna have people that, gonna have to use course.  So I liked Evidence a lot.
Speaker 1: And were you still an activist in law school or what had happened, like your activist activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, still--the country changed, Columbia had changed, and there wasn't as active a, a period.
Speaker 1: How had Columbia changed?
Speaker 2: Oh, it--Columbia just got, Columbia just got worn out after a while.  I think the, the campus, even us.  We, we kind of got just a little tired of always demonstrating.  And it became a more quiet place, which was okay.  We'd had, you know, a pretty wild, four-year ride, and so my last three years at Columbia were actually fundamentally different from the first four, not only because I was in law school, as opposed to college, but because the country had changed.  [Richard M.] Nixon, you know, was President for a good portion of that time.  The mood was different.  So I mean, we were still activists, but not on the same scale that I was in, in college.  Many of the issues that drove us in college had, had changed.  The war had ended, and so that wasn't the, the galvanizing thing that it was in college.
Story_ID: 8498
Speaker 1: While you were in [Columbia University School of Law, New York, New York] law school, you clerked at the NAACP [NAtional Asscoiation for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund.  What was that experience like then, and what year was that?
Speaker 2: It was after my first year in law school, so that would have been the summer of 1976--no, the summer of 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, I got out--no, that's right.  I got there in 1973 so it--.
Speaker 2: So it's '74 [1974].  Summer of '74 [1974], right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Summer of '74 [1974].  That was interesting.  I was lucky to get that job, and it was a fascinating summer working on employment discrimination cases, prisoner rights cases.  I actually had to file a writ, a brief for the Legal Defense Fund down here in Washington, D.C.  It was my first trip to D.C. to go to the Supreme Court to file something for the, for the 'Ink' Fund [nickname for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund] at the Supreme Court clerk's office.
Speaker 2: What was your impression of the Supreme Court?
Speaker 1: Well, this was really, for a kid who had studied history, who had really never been outside of New York other than for vacations and stuff, but never been to [Washington] D.C.  And I remember flying down on the shuttle.  I remember they needed somebody--it was an emergency, and they needed somebody to get down there right away.  And I volunteered, 'let me go', and walking up the steps of the Supreme Court was, was kind of a humbling thing.  This is something I'd seen pictures of, you know, [Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall was there.  And I went to clerk's office, and I guess you maybe see it on my face but the--cause the clerk, I remember it was a black woman who I gave the, the brief, says, "Is this your first time in the court?  And I said, "Yeah," said, "You want to look at the, the chambers?"  And I said, "Yeah, okay."  So she took me--and I don't know if she was supposed to do this, took me into the courtroom.  And I just saw the, where the justices sat, you know, where the arguments were, and she let me stand there for about a couple of minutes.  It was a great, it was good, it was a very good trip.
Speaker 2: And, now, who were some of the attorneys that you worked with at the NAACP?
Speaker 1: I remember my supervisor was a guy named Barry Goldstein.  I worked with my buddy, James Whitlow, my--one of my friends from Columbia Law School, Claude Moore was another, was a staff attorney there at the time.  Elaine Jones was a staff attorney.  She ultimately became the head of the 'Ink' Fund [NAACP Legal Defense Fund], but Elaine Jones was a staff attorney at the time.
Story_ID: 8499
Speaker 1: And were you thinking that perhaps--you, you knew you were interested in criminal law and, and perhaps being a prosecutor, but were starting to think about civil rights law then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I actually got to the [NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund and thought, well, you know, maybe this is something I'm gonna do.  Maybe I'll do something with the 'Ink' Fund [nickname for the Legal Defense Fund] or a similar organization that's related to criminal law.  And that was actually a thought that I held until I came to Washington [D.C.], after my second year of law school [Columbia University School of Law, New York, New York], and I clerked at the Justice Department.
Speaker 1: So that was in 1975?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five.  And then I decided, all right, well, you know, I'm gonna try D.C. for a couple of years.  I'm gonna try the Justice Department for a couple of years and then decide what it is I want to do.  I took the New York bar with the understanding, the expectation that I was always gonna back to New York because New York, you know, New York's the center of the universe.  How can you live any place other than New York?  So I was always planning to get back to New York, and I just never made it; got down here in 1976 and just stayed.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at the Justice Department that summer when you clerked?
Speaker 2: It was fascinating.  I worked in a, a thing called the General Crime section of the Criminal division.  So I saw a whole range of act--activities the Justice Department, a whole range of things the Justice Department did on the criminal side and decided, this is really interesting.  This is what I want to do.
Story_ID: 8500
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Columbia [University School of Law, New York,New York] in 1976, what happens next?  I applied to be a, a part of what's called the Attorney General's Honors Program, and I was accepted into that.
Speaker 2: What is that?
Speaker 1: It's a program where you typically can't get into the Justice Department unless you have experience, but they have a thing called the honors program that allows people to come in straight from law school.  And you're supposed to be at the top tenth of your graduating class.  And so I applied from Columbia, and got accepted, and then was assigned to this newly-formed section called the Public Integrity Section that looked at official corruption matters.  It was formed by a person who was then the Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal division, [Richard] Dick Thornburg, who set this up after the whole Watergate experience.  And so I became the first honors graduate member of the Public Integrity section.
Speaker 2: And what were some of the first cases you worked on in, like the late '70s [1970s]?  What were some of the cases you were working on?  Corruption cases involving public officials in different parts of the country.  My first trial was of a public official that took, extorted some money from somebody in Indiana.  I lost that case.
Speaker 1: What was your first trial like?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  It was in Indiana in 1977, '78 [1978], I believe in Hammond, Indiana.  The defendant's name, was a guy named Frank Martin, and he had extorted money from a Greek restaurant owner who wanted a zoning change so that he could do something with is restaurant.  And after, I guess, about five, six-day trial, the jury acquitted him.  Our main witness, who was this Greek guy--and didn't speak English every well, really became unhinged on cross examination by the defense attorney.  And although I thought we'd prepared him pretty well, it was a humbling experience for this hot shot from Columbia Law School [Columbia University School of Law, New York, New York] to get out to Hammond, Indiana and lose his, his first trial.
Speaker 1: What did you learn about yourself at that first trial?
Speaker 2: It was, as I said, a humbling thing.  I thought, you know, hey, I got--I'm this guy with great credentials.  I'm in Hammond, Indiana, come on, you know, I'm a New Yorker.  I'm from Washington, I'm from the Justice Department, and when that jury stood up, when the foreman for the jury stood up and said, "We find the defendant not guilty," I realized, okay.  You know, just like my father always told me, you never, you never assume.  You know, you don't bring your credentials any place with you.  You got to always prove yourself every day, in every way.  And I was a much better lawyer, having lost that first case.
Story_ID: 8501
Speaker 1: And what was the climate of the Justice Department in the late '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  I came in, and the Republicans were running the Justice Department.  Then [President] Jimmy Carter was elected in 1976, and so my first four years there, I was there with a Democratic administration, Democratic president, and it was, you know, a great place to be.  I was proud of the work that we did.  Nineteen eighty [1980] that all changed when Ronald Reagan was elected President and the priorities of the Justice Department changed.  I had friends in the Civil Rights division who said that they weren't doing the same kind of work that they were doing before.  They weren't getting the same kind of funding that they had, priorities changed.  And so that became a little more difficult.  It didn't affect me an awful lot on the criminal side where there was an emphasis on getting out, getting at public corruption matters, but the Justice Department really changed in 1980 when, when the Reagan administration came in.
Speaker 1: And did you notice a change in the, the types of cases you were prosecuting or in the Public Integrity section, had--did that kind of remain consistent?
Speaker 2: Well, it pretty much remained the same.  Being in the Public Integrity section was kind of a nice place to be.  There was always an emphasis, if it was a Democratic or Republican president, on getting at official corruption.  You had to say that you were in favor of those kinds of cases, and so we always had adequate funding.  And they pretty much left us alone.  It was folks in Civil Rights division, you know, who really had their lives changed depending on who was president.
Speaker 1: And when the, when the change in the Presidential administration occurred, were you thinking--what were you thinking about your future in the Justice Department?
Speaker 2: I was surprised that I liked it as much I did.  I stayed longer than I anticipated.  I liked Washington [D.C.] a lot more than I anticipated.  And I loved my job.  I traveled a lot.  I tried cases in different parts of the country, actually different parts of the world.  I tried a case in Guam that involved going to Japan, the Philippines and Hong Kong to try to convince witnesses to come back to Guam for the trial.  I was a single guy, and it was the '80s [1980s].  I was having just a great time, meeting people, hanging out.  It was, it was fun.
Story_ID: 8502
Speaker 1: During your time at the Justice Department, can you just kind of talk a little bit about some of the other cases you were prosecuting that really stand out and come to mind?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the cases that I tried was of the treasurer of the state of Florida, a guy who had extorted a lot of money from people, vendors who were trying to do business with the state.  It was really my first big trial, that lasted six weeks.  It was in Miami [Florida].  The guy's name was Tom O'Malley, and it was a, it was a hard-fought, intensely watched case, especially in Florida, a lot of publicity about that trial.  And we won the case.  As I say, it was my first really big trial; got me back to, to Washington [D.C.] as the winner of a big case and really helped my career.  I got better and more important assignments after that.
Speaker 1: Any others come to mind, particularly--that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the more interesting ones, I remember, was a guy named James David Ostego (ph.), I tried in the middle district of Pennsylvania, in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania in probably the early '80s [1980s], maybe mid-'80s [1980s].  And he was a mafia guy who had fixed a jury in a public corruption case.  The jury hung for conviction eleven to one, and he had bought off that juror.  And so we were tasked with the responsibility of coming up to Scranton, Pennsylvania, and finding out what was behind this juror holding out. Determined that her husband had received a payoff.  We got a guy who was in the mob to turn, wired up his car and got Ostego on tape, laying out what the scheme was. And ultimately convicted him after a, again another long trial, a lot of publicity.  And the person who worked with us had to be put in the Witness Protection program, and to this day, he's still in the Witness Protection program.
Speaker 1: And is it kind of like--I don't know if our opinion is influenced way too much by television, but is it, you know, what we see, like a, just like this whole series of wiretaps and, you know, long nights and listening to hours and hours and hours of tape or--?
Speaker 2: And so that, that was what the interesting thing about that trial was because it was really like television.  We had this guy wired up.  He had to wear body recording material or had his car wired up.  And the first tape we got from Ostego, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agents were bringing it down here to D.C. to tell me.  And they said, "Oh, look, it's gonna be some stuff on this.  It's gonna be kind of rough.  So I was expecting some rough language."  And it was that.  But I had been assigned to the case.  The newspapers had covered the fact that these Washington attorneys had come up, and my picture had been on the front page of the Scranton news or whatever.  And Ostego had seen that.  And he said, "You see who's coming," and he--on tape, he says, "you see who's coming to investigate us.  And the guy who's from (unclear).  He said, he's a nigger."  He said, "A nigger from Washington is gonna be doing this case."  And I said, "Whoa, wait, play that again."  And so they played it back.  And, so at that point it became not only an investigation.  It became a little personal, and I think I took a little more satisfaction of that, in that conviction than I did with other ones.
Story_ID: 8503
Speaker 1: After the Justice Department, you were, you got a judgeship in 1988?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty eight, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were nominated by President [Ronald W.] Reagan.
Speaker 2: Reported by President Reagan and confirmed by the Senate to be a judge here on the D.C. Superior court, and I spent five years as a judge handling criminal matters, civil matters, domestic relations, family matters.  It was a--it was an interesting five years, not ultimately a job that I liked because I thought judges, you, you, you can't be an activist as a judge.  You're really kind of, just kind of dealing with the cases that are brought to you.  You can only say certain things if you're a judge.  You can only go certain places if you're a judge.  You can only do certain things if you're a judge.  And, though I liked the experience, it was also a time--it was a difficult time to be a judge in Washington, D.C. at that time.  The crack cocaine epidemic was at its highest.  And the future of this city, young black men, who should have been the future of this city were coming to that court in just waves.  And my job was to listen, you know, listen to juries, find guilt or innocence and then send these young black guys to, to prison.  And it was something that, given my background as an activist, was kind of a hard thing to do.  And so I liked the job well enough--I think I did a fairly good job of it.  It was a difficult time for me to constantly have these drug cases in, with these guys being found guilty and then sending them to jail.  And then also to see, kind of the harm that cocaine was doing to the black communities in Washington, D.C.  It was one of the reasons why I ultimately decided I needed to leave the bench and try to become more involved in figuring out what the solutions to these problems were instead of dealing with the problem as a judge.
Speaker 1: And were you finding that the cases were also becoming a little bit more violent or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was the, would--can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the part that was really distressing about what was going on in D.C. in the late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s].  We were the homicide capital of the country.  We had the highest per capita murder rate of any city in the nation and along with drugs, you saw an increased use of firearms.  It was just an epidemic of violence in Washington, D.C., you know, huge numbers of young, black guys were being killed; murder rate, oh, I guess we got close to five hundred in a city that only had 600,000 people.  We were really way off the charts.  And again, I thought it was another indication that I needed to be more of activist as opposed to a person who was simply dealing with things at the end of, end of the system.  It was a very, very difficult time for, for our city.
Story_ID: 8504
Speaker 1: What about mandatory minimums?  Were you--what, what was your, your whole take on that?
Speaker 2: Didn't like them.  It cut out the discretion of a judge.  You'd have a guy who might be, might have committed his first offense, a non-violent offense.  And because of the mandatory minimums--they weren't as harsh in Washington, D.C. as they were in the federal system, but it was still harsh.  Guy's convicted--judge, as a judge, I had no discretion.  All I could do was send somebody away for five years with no chance of parole.  And I might have looked at this person's background in the pre-sentence report and decided this is a person I think probably could be rehabilitated.  It wasn't gonna happen if he went to jail, and my hands were, were tied.  So I hated mandatory minimums then.  I hate them now, and we ought to have more faith in, in our, our judges to do the right thing.
Speaker 1: And what about the discrepancy in terms of crimes like, and, and the one that's often used is the discrepancy between crack cocaine and cocaine, and powder cocaine?
Speaker 2: Yeah, also something that was very disturbing as a judge to have to send somebody to a greater amount of, get a greater amount of time because he happened to sell crack cocaine as opposed to powder, which was, you know, the root of, of crack cocaine.  It was something that I tried to deal with when I was Deputy Attorney General in the [President Bill] Clinton administration.  But politicians don't have the guts to do what they need to do with regard to that disparity because they're afraid that they'll be charged with being soft on crime if they lower the penalties for crack.  And the answer they always say is all right, we'll just raise the penalties for powder and make them as draconian as they are for crack, which doesn't make any sense.  You're just gonna put, you know, just more people in jail for too long a period of time.  But that was another reason why I didn't like ultimately being a judge, you know, no discretion.  And then with these disparate penalties that were gonna be visited upon the people who were most likely to be in front of me, young black men.
Story_ID: 8505
Speaker 1: One thing I'm curious about that I'd like to have you talk a little bit about is the whole Senate confirmation process.  What was that like for you?  And what does it involve?  Can you just kind of give us an idea?
Speaker 2: Sure, I've been confirmed by the Senate, I guess three times.  All of them relatively uneventful, hearings, you know, on all three.  The last one as Deputy Attorney General was the one that I had to prepare for the most, spent a huge amount of time in the Justice Department anticipating the questions that were gonna be asked of me; people in the Justice Department trying to get intelligence from different senators as to what questions were gonna be important to them; had a good relationship with the person who was the chairman of the judiciary committee at that time, Orrin Hatch, who treated me, you know, quite well, and very fairly.  I was confirmed by the Senate the last time a hundred to zero.  So that was, that was good.  And I guess on voice votes, the first two times, both as U.S. attorney and as a judge, but (they actually?) (unclear) took a vote when I was Deputy Attorney General.  Senate confirmation is an interesting process.  It is one that takes too much time now.  It's too political.  I was held up in my confirmation as Deputy Attorney General, not because they had any problem with me, but because they had a problem with the person who was nominated to be the assistant attorney general in the antitrust division, a guy named Joel Klein.  A senator from South Carolina, Fritz Hollings had problems with him and held up his confirmation and tied my confirmation to his.  So I had to wait an extra two, three months before I could be confirmed, even though I had, you know, overwhelming support.
Story_ID: 8506
Speaker 1: You remained a judge until 1993 when you were nominated by then President [Bill] Clinton for U.S. States Attorney for D.C., Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Right, United States Attorney for the District of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Right, and what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: I, that's the best job I ever had.  I was the first black person to hold, to be U.S. Attorney in D.C., a city that is, you know, sixty, seventy percent black, at least at the time was, a job that Thurgood Marshall said he thought in many ways was the most powerful one in government because as U.S. Attorney in D.C., you had the responsibility to oversee any crimes that happened in D.C., in Washington, D.C., federal as well as local.  It's the only office in the country that prosecutes both local crimes and federal crimes, which is why it's the biggest U.S. attorney's office in the country.  And I had a chance in that office to deal with those problems that I saw as a judge, to come up with ways in which you prevented young black men from becoming a part of the criminal justice system, instead of just sentencing them to jail.  And so we came up with a lot of programs that I think, you know, had some impact on reducing the crime rate, dealing with the underlying problems that, that caused crime.  And it's not a coincidence that you see the greatest amount of crime, violent crime especially, where you see the greatest amount of social dysfunction--where schools don't educate, where men are not meaningfully engaged in the lives of their kids, where you see the highest rates of unemployment.  So I was able, as U.S. attorney, to get the federal government involved in D.C. in those kinds of issues.  And it was fortunate they had a, an Attorney General, Janet Reno, who was interested in D.C., who was willing to try some different kinds of things on the prevention side.  You know, we, we were tough on enforcement.  If people need to go to jail, we said that's fine.  But we also said that the long-term solution to these problems is to come with ways in we--which we prevent people from becoming a part of the system at all.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about the domestic violence unit that you all created?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the things I saw as a judge was kind of this, what I would call plague of domestic violence, women battered by partners, husbands in a system that really wasn't responding to their unique needs.  Too many of the cases would come to court, and the women either out of fear or other reasons wouldn't continue with the cases, wouldn't prosecute the cases.  And so the crime wasn't addressed.  The kids who were a part of the system who were a part of that incident were not--their needs, their special needs weren't dealt with.  And so we came up with a program where prosecutors were specially trained, where there were counselors to deal with the unique problems that women had in that, that arena.  And it's actually one of the things I'm most proud of.  We formed that unit over a lot of opposition, found money to, to, to fund it.  And that program still exists in the U.S. Attorney's office.
Story_ID: 8507
Speaker 1: One thing I forgot to ask you about, 'cause we skip--we're now at 1993, and I want to talk about 1990, the case, the drug case against Marion Barry, a former mayor of Washington, D.C.  And what was your role in that case?
Speaker 2: I was really just a spectator at that point.  I was on the bench.  I was a judge.  Actually, one of my best friends, Richard Roberts, who's now a federal district court judge was one of the prosecutors in the case.  And so I knew a little more about that than I should have known because Ricky was involved in the undercover effort.  There was rumors going around that Barry had been using drugs, and then we became aware of the fact that, you know, there was this sting operation that snared him.  And that was a tough time for the city and a tough time obviously for, for Barry.  I think a lot of us had mixed emotions about that.  It was clearly not a good influence in the city, and yet, to go out and kind of snatch him the way that they did, I had mixed emotions about that.  I actually ended up working with him, after he got out of jail, when I was U.S. Attorney, and then he was elected mayor again, and actually, formed a pretty good relationship with him.  He's a very bright guy.  Obviously, he's battling--I don't know if he continues to battle, a lot of personal demons, but a very engaging, intelligent, and politically savvy person, who I had a, as I said, a good relationship with.
Speaker 1: And has had two political comebacks since his arrest.  What are just some of your thoughts on that?
Speaker 2: He's a survivor.  You know, I think people underestimated him.  He's a person who was an inspiration to a lot of people in the black community, especially, the poorest parts of our city where people have their own problems.  And he's an example that, you know, however low you go, you can always bounce back.  That doesn't happen very often to black men in this country.  You generally get one chance, and Barry is an indication that, you know, if you stick to it, you work hard, perhaps you'll be one of the lucky ones and get more than one chance.
Story_ID: 8508
Speaker 1: I want to continue talking a little bit about your tenure as U.S. Attorney and here in the District of Columbia.  Can you just kind of talk a little bit about some of the other cases and activities you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got there I was confronted with a case involving a guy named [U.S. COngressman Daniel] Dan Rostenkowski, who at the time was the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, a key [President Bill] Clinton supporter, a very powerful guy.  And so that was an interesting case, being a Democratic U.S. Attorney who had to take on a very powerful, probably "the" most powerful Democratic congressman at the time.  And as I said, a key Clinton guy who was a supporter of the President's attempt to deal with the health care problems that we had.  And so it didn't make me real popular at the White House, that I was the person who had to announce the indictment and then ultimately take the plea of guilty from, from Rostenkowski.  That was a case that got a lot of publicity.  We spent a lot of time on television, in the newspapers with that case.  It was, I guess one of the more significant cases of my--as my time as U.S. Attorney.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you feel about the, the politics of it all?  You know, I think everyone, no matter what you do, you deal with a certain level of office politics, but, I mean this is like really political.  How, how do you feel about the politics of it all?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was Politics 101.  I mean, you know, you have a sense of how the system works.  You don't really get a sense of what it's all about until you're involved in a case like that.  And you hear things from different people about how the White House is reacting to what you're doing, concerns that the Democratic leadership has in the, in the House about what's gonna--what that's gonna mean cause if he's convicted, he has to removed from chairmanship.  And then there was a little question about, you know, this universal health insurance thing that the First Lady [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was leading, that was, Rostenkowski was a chief supporter, and, you know, I was gonna perhaps mess that up.  So it was, it was an interesting time.  But my experience, I'd been trained as a public corruption prosecutor, and so I knew what we had to do.  I knew this guy had broken the law.  And if I was gonna be true to my oath, I had to simply prosecute the case.  So, it was a difficult time.  We got through it, and I think to the credit of the people in the administration, it was nothing that was ever held against me.  In fact, you know, the President asked me to be his Deputy Attorney General.
Story_ID: 8509
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time with the President?  Did you work closely with him, and what were some of your impressions?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't work with him an awful until I became Deputy Attorney General.  As U.S. Attorney, I'd go to the White House every now and again, but as Deputy Attorney General, I actually got to know him pretty well.  And we formed, I think, a pretty good relationship.  President Clinton's probably the brightest man I've ever met.  He's got great verbal skills, great analytical skills.  He is a person who empathizes with people in a way that I've not seen anybody else in public life.  He had, I think, the potential to be one of our great presidents and in some ways, it's, it's sad that for problems that he had led to his impeachment.  That's gonna be, always be something that people are gonna say about him.  But he also didn't have, I mean it would have been interesting to see what have happened--would have happened if he would have been president on September the 11th and how he would have reacted to that and how he would have conducted the follow and after, after that incident.  I suspect it would have been different from what this President, George [W.] Bush, has done, and I think, ultimately, better for the nation.
Speaker 1: How do you think he--what do you think he would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he would have invaded Afghanistan.  I think anybody would have done that, but I think after that, I think the roots would have been different.  I think he would have put pressure on Iraq, but I don't think we would have seen an invasion of Iraq.  The intelligence that I saw as Deputy Attorney General never indicated that there was a connection between Iraq and Al Qaeda.  I think the Clinton administration, we, we knew that.  And I don't--he wouldn't have invaded.  I think this war is gonna prove to be a ruinous one.  It's gonna be one that's gonna be difficult for our nation to recover from because of the way it's positioned ourselves in the Islamic world.  It is something that I think was ill conceived.  It hasn't been fought real smart, and it's gonna be a problem for us.
Story_ID: 8510
Speaker 1: In 1997, that's when you were appointed by President Clinton to serve as Deputy Attorney General.  And once again, first African American in this position.  Can you just talk a little bit about your experiences?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was probably the most interesting job that I had.  It was, I liked being U.S. Attorney, that's the most interest--that was the best job I had.  This might have been the most interesting as Deputy.  It was a heady experience for a black kid from Queens to spend time in the Oval Office with the President of the United States, go to White House state dinners, to fly on Air Force One, to be in meetings representing the United States in different parts of the world.  It was a very, very interesting job, and to be able to set policy for the Justice Department or for this administration, you know.  In the Clinton administration, you go to meetings at the White House, and say, well, I think we ought to do this with regard to kids who are exposed to violence; we ought to do this with regard to the disparity between the sentences for drugs, for not--for cocaine powder and, and in crack.  It was a, an interesting, I guess, three, four years that I spent as deputy.
Speaker 1: And what accomplishments are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: The, the children exposed to violence initiative that we had.  All the statistics show that kids who are just exposed to violence, not even, who were victims of crime, are much more likely to become involved in the criminal justice system later on; much more likely to be victims, even as adults; kind of an interesting quirk.  And so we really tried to deal with, again, this whole notion of prevention.  How do we prevent people from becoming involved in the system?  And we started a program that continues to this day in different parts of the, of the country, state programs that are--get federal assistance, to identify ways in which you find kids who are exposed to violence, deal with their needs as fast as you can, and then provide follow-on so that, hopefully, they don't have really negative, continuing experiences as a result of that exposure to violence.
Speaker 1: How did you enjoy working with Janet Reno and what were some of your impressions of Janet Reno?
Speaker 2: We had a lot of, lot of fun with her.  She's, became one of my friends.  She was my, my boss, but not really.  I mean, you know, Janet let me kind of do what I wanted to do.  We divided things up at the, at the department.  She's a tough woman.  She took a lot of stuff while she was here at the, at the department.  She had to battle Parkinson's disease at the same time.  She was, I think, a very underrated Attorney General, a formidable figure here in Washington while she was here in the '90's [1990s].
Story_ID: 8511
Speaker 1: How do you think Washington was changing.  And what was the climate of Washington, D.C. in the late '90's [1990s]?
Speaker 2: See, I think that's a very interesting question.  I mean I, I saw the transition in, in D.C.  It became a much more partisan place with the election of President Clinton in '92 [1992].  There was always, even though there were disagreements between the parties, I saw it, when I was going through my confirmation hearings and as, as a judgment, and even as, initially U.S. Attorney, in '93 [1993], although there were differences between the parties, you didn't see the partisanship that you saw towards the middle and in the latter part of the '90's [1990s] where Republicans were at the throats of Democrats.  Republicans, for whatever reason, had a thing for Clinton and always were out to get him.  And you saw real battles over nominees to be judges that you never saw before.  Everything really became partisan.  Everything became about party, everything became conservative and liberal in a way that I had not seen before.  And we are still suffering through that.  I don't think that President Bush has done all that he could have done to heal, certainly, this city and the nation.  He said, he was gonna come in as a uniter and not a divider, and I think a lot of those partisan problems we had that developed in the '90's [1990s] are still with us.
Story_ID: 8512
Speaker 1: And under the [President George W.] Bush administration, you served as Acting Attorney General?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just for a little while, while Ashcroft was, John Ashcroft was being considered for the Attorney General spot.  I actually went to President Bush's first cabinet meeting.  I got a call from the White House and said, you know, the President wants you to attend the meeting.  And I said, well, "Does he know who will be coming?"  And they said, "Yeah, he knows.  He wants you to come."  So I showed up there.  The Attorney General sits to the right of the Vice President in the cabinet room.  And I, you know, sat there many times as, when [former U.S. Atorney General] Janet [Reno] couldn't go.  And President Bush walks in, and the first thing he said was, "Eric, I understand you didn't want to come to my cabinet meeting."  I said, "Whoa, whoa, whoa, that's not the case, Mr. President.  I--he says, "Nah, I was [just kidding?], " got a good laugh out of that.  But I was actually impressed with him in the, the way in which he conducted that first Cabinet meeting.  He--the person I saw in that room was assured, had a command of the facts, of the issues that we were talking about, was a person I'd not seen during the campaign.  He was, he was impressive.
Speaker 1: Were you hoping to get the Attorney General slot--I mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, remember I said, as a history major, as a student of, of politics, it would have been to see [former Vice President Albert]  Al Gore win that election in 2000, and I think the possibility existed that I could have been, you know, the first Attorney General, and that would have been, that would have been really great.  It's something that I wanted to have happen, but, you know, the election didn't work out.  So didn't get that chance.
Story_ID: 8513
Speaker 1: Many people talk about, under the Clinton administration how President [Bill] Clinton just did a very good job of putting African Americans in key positions and what are some of your thoughts on that, and would you agree with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would agree with that.  I think he was a President who understood that one of the real strengths of this nation is its diversity, and decided that one of the ways in which he had to show that commitment was to put people in very high profile--black people in high profile jobs.  [Ronald] Ron Brown, as the first black Commerce Secretary, a person who was, you know, a mentor to me.  A lot of people in U.S. Attorney positions and myself included, who were the first blacks to hold those positions in different parts of, of the country.  A lot of black judges who he appointed.  He really, you know, he talked the talk, but he, you know, walked the walk as well.  And it's one of the things I'm most proud of, my association with him, just the way in which he decided that, with regard to women, African Americans, Hispanics, people of color.  He was really gonna push them into places where they had never been before, and given simply the chance to show that they could do the job.  And that's all that, we as a people, have ever asked for, just give us a chance.  And he, he did that.
Speaker 1: And what are some of your thoughts on African Americans in law enforcement?  Do you think that we need to see more prominent African Americans in law enforcement because many of the images that we have are, of African Americans, are on the other side of the law.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I think we absolutely do.  You've got to have people who are of color in the policymaking part of, of our system.  You know, not only police officers, but people who are running the police departments; not only prosecutors, but people who are running the prosecution offices.  They are the people who are gonna decide who gets prosecuted and for what--what the plea bargains are going to look like.  And people, hopefully, will come up with programs that are gonna keep people out of jail.  You know, too often, we are seen as people who simply are the defendants in the criminal justice system.  People tend to forget that black folks are disproportionately the victims of crime, and we only make up about 12, 13 percent of the nation's population, and yet we're 50 percent of the nation's homicide victims.  And so there is a need to think about that component of our community as well, and protect those folks who simply want to, you know, get on with their lives, so--they're looking like all Americans.  They want to send their kids to good schools, have good jobs.  And so we need people to be in the system on the policymaking side.
Story_ID: 8514
Speaker 1: After you left the [President Bill] Clinton administration and have that short time in the [President George W.] Bush administration you then came to Covington and Burling [law firm, Washington D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about what kind of law firm this is and what you're doing here?
Speaker 2: I'd like to think that Covington's one of the more pre-eminent law firms in the country.  It's a firm that goes way, way back.  I've been here now for about three, three and a half years--.
Speaker 1: So 2001?
Speaker 2: Two thousand one , I came here.  I have a general practice.  When I came here, I told them I didn't want to get pigeonholed doing one thing or the other.  I didn't want to simply do public corruption cases as a defense attorney.  So I do a variety of things, employment-related work.  I advise corporations with regard to diversity efforts that they have; have tried a couple of cases since I've been here.  So I'm back in the courtroom for the first time in a, in a long time.  And I've been surprised.  I don't like it as much as I did when, when I was younger.  Now, I'm, I'm not single, and so when I'm out of town, I'm missing my kids.  I want to be with my wife.  When I was single, it didn't matter if I was Guam or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or Miami [Florida] for an extended period of time.  It was just kind of fun.  So, and as a, as an older person now, also it's, it drains me a little more than, than it did when I was, when I was younger.  So I'm not gonna try as many cases as I think, I thought I was.
Speaker 1: And you said you're in general practice.  And what, what kind of law do you think you like most?  Or have you decided yet?
Speaker 2: Actually, I think I like the advisory role where I talk to the heads of corporations or business organizations.  And they're looking for help with regard to an internal investigation that they need to be done, where they've identified a problem, where they've got a problem with discrimination, and they're trying to figure out how they can work their way around that, you know, do the right thing.  And so I've liked the advisory roles the most.  The litigation stuff is not liked as much as, as I think I, I expected I was going to.
Story_ID: 8515
Speaker 1: You know, as a, a former prosecutor, I want to get your thoughts on some things, and especially, like, you know, corruption and public officials, that kind of thing.  Let's begin first talking a little bit about Osama Bin Laden.  What do you think--first of all do you, do you think that he will be captured?
Speaker 2: I think he'll ultimately be ident--his location will be found.  I suspect he will not be captured.  I can't imagine that Bin Laden will ever be taken alive.  I got to think that he will fight to the death.  He is a fanatic, and he will, you know, use whatever guns that he has to fight off the, the Americans as we, as we approach, if he doesn't work something so that somebody in his inner circle, you know, actually kills him before he's taken prisoner.
Speaker 1: And if, if he captured, what do you think his trial will look like?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would expect you'd have military tribunal that would be impaneled to, to try him.  That would truly be the trial of this, and many other centuries.  It'd be an interesting, interesting thing, thing to see; to figure out who would be, who would be on the panel to be the judges.  Who would the defense attorney be?  Who would, who would be the actual, who would be the prosecutor?  I mean I'd, I'd sign up for that one in a heartbeat.  Let me, let me be the, the ultimate prosecution.  Could he get a fair trial?  I mean how could you get a fair, unbiased jury to consider the guilt or innocence of Osama Bin Laden.  And yet, you know, we did, I think after World War II, where [Adolf]Hitler's cronies were, were put on trial by the allies, and they got ultimately a fair trial.
Speaker 1: You think they did get fair trials?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I mean I don't think there's any question.  Bin Laden is on tape admitting that he, you know, was involved in 9/11.  So I think what you have to do is lay out, as you did in Nuremberg [trials of Nazi war criminals], what history--the crimes that he has committed so that there is a historical record, and people can understand exactly what happened.  And it's important that history look back and say that, well, he was given a fair trial.  And he did do that which he was charged; they laid it out in, in graphic detail.
Speaker 1: And a trial that we probably will see, Saddam Hussein's trial.  What do you think that trial will look like?
Speaker 2: That'll be interesting, given the fact that there is an attempt by his supporters to intimidate anybody who might testify, intimidate even people who would sit as even judges or as prosecutors.  That is gonna be a difficult trial I think to put on.  He will ultimately, I suspect, be convicted as he should.  I mean given all the things that he did to his nation, the gassing of the Kurds, the assassinations, the way in which he murdered people, the way in which his sons murdered people.  He ought to be held accountable for all that.  But that will not be an easy trial, and it must be seen as one that the Iraqi's do, as opposed to something that the Americans impose on the nation, if that is to have any kind of credibility, both in Iraq and in the, in the Arab world.
Story_ID: 8516
Speaker 1: And what are some of your thoughts--you shared with us briefly about the war in Iraq?
Speaker 2: Something that I think was unnecessary and it was unwise.  Even if we thought that Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction, and we know that he did not have, there was never any indication that he had any kind of alliance with al-Qaeda, that there was any serious danger that those weapons were gonna be passed to al-Qaeda.  He clearly didn't have a delivery system that would allow him to threaten the United States with any weapons of mass destruction that he had.  I think the sanctions regime that was in place would have effective, leaving inspectors there to try to get through Iraq to find out if, in fact, there were weapons of mass destruction would have made sense.  But this is an administration who was hell bent on invading Iraq for a whole variety of reasons.  And they used 9/11 as that excuse.  It's ultimately something that I think is not gonna be good for this nation.  It's a war that we have to win now.  We cannot lose this war.  And so whatever your feelings are about it, we have to win it.  But it's not something that I think was really necessary.
Speaker 1: And when you served in the Clinton administration, did you have access to classified documents that because--did you see a link between al-Qaeda and Saddam Hussein?
Speaker 2: In fact, there was no link between al-Qaeda and Saddam Hussein.  I had access to 'code word' material, the highest level classification that you could have.  And, and quite the contrary, al-Qaeda saw Saddam Hussein as a person who was too secular in the way in which he ran his country.  These are religious fanatics, and they saw him as being a secular person.  And there was all kinds of negative thing that went on between--there was no connection between them.  In fact, they didn't like him.  And so the notion that he was somehow, some way gonna be a big supporter of al-Qaeda, was just not, was not the truth.  It was belied by the intelligence reports that I saw.
Story_ID: 8517
Speaker 1: What haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?  What do you think you'd, you'd like to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I think about political office.  I remember back to the ninth grade when I ran for school president and was elected, and I liked that.  I see a lot of problems here in this city that I think I'd like, maybe at some point, to try to deal with.  I am, however, the father of three young kids and a husband of a wonderful wife who was almost as a single parent in the '90s [1990s] when the kids were young, and I was having all these government jobs.  And so it would be a lot for me to ask her to sacrifice--for them to sacrifice for me to be, get back into the political side or even back into government.  But maybe as they get older and we get a little more financially stable, I can, I can consider that.
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: I, just, just the tremendous number of opportunities that I've been given by a whole variety of people, from parents who cared about me a great deal and who instilled in me a lot of values that I think have been real helpful to me, to people all along the way, both black and white, who for whatever reason, took a liking to me and decided, you know, we'll give a, a chance.  In a lot of ways, my life is what I think every American citizen, every black American should experience, just chances, opportunities.  And if you give us a chance, and you give us an opportunity, black folks will respond, in, hopefully, the way that, that I have.  You know, without the chances that I got, without the opportunities that I was given, I wouldn't have had a chance to be first black U.S. Attorney, first black Deputy Attorney General.  You know, it's not a function strictly of Eric Holder's abilities.  It's because other people decided we're gonna give him a chance.  So, you know, Bill Clinton, my parents, people who, at the Public Integrity section, Lee Raddick (ph.), Marshall Jarrett, guys who were my supervisors who gave me the opportunity to try big cases, which allowed me to become, you know, a judge.  So that's what I think sticks out in my mind, just that I was given chances in a way that too many African Americans are not.
Story_ID: 8518
Speaker 1: And what advice do you have for those who are interested in a career in law?
Speaker 2: Well, you've got to, first and foremost, take your studies seriously.  The foundation of any great legal career is found in elementary, junior high and high school where you've got to get good grades so that you get into a good college and ultimately, get into a good law school.  And a lot of the things that might not seem to be connected to the law, are, in fact, very connected to it; history, a good sense of history, I think is important; a good sense of current events and knowing how things work in the world in which we live.  That's also important in the law.  The law is more than simply trying cases and looking at the facts of a particular matter.  People who are the most successful trial lawyers, for instance, are the ones who can somehow connect with members of a jury in whatever part of the country you are.  And so you got to know something about those people and about where they live.  And you only do that by having a sense of where they come from, their history and what they're dealing with now, current events.  So I would encourage people who want to be lawyers to really be as well rounded as you possibly can and to understand that great lawyers have at their fingertips a command of things more than simply the law.
Speaker 1: And what do you think about the reputation of lawyers today?  And, unfortunately, it's been highly influenced by what we see on television, in dramas, but, you know, as unscrupulous and that kind of thing?  What are some of your thoughts there?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the profession's taken some unfair hits, but I think the profession has taken a lot of fair hits.  I'm married to doctor, and so my perspective is a little different.  You know, law, lawsuits that are brought against doctors for little or no reason are a real problem for, for this country.  My wife who is a very successful obstetrician, gynecologist is gonna stop delivering babies in March because the malpractice insurance rates are going up too high.  She's gonna have to spend next year, if she wants to practice OB, a hundred and forty thousands for her malpractice insurance.  And that's simply, you know, too high.  It's something that enjoys doing.  She likes delivering babies.  I mean that's like the best part of her job.  And yet it's not economically feasible for her, and she's just tired of having to practice in the way in which she does, which is to be always worried about making a mistake and ending up in court.  And so she's gonna stop doing that.  And you see that happening with too many, too many doctors.  So I think, yeah, in that regard our profession has got some problems, and yet, lawyers are the people who are behind most of the beneficial social change that's happened in this country.  And lawyers continue to be behind that.  So I think in some ways, we've been maligned in a way that's not fair or at least doesn't take into account the good things that lawyers, this profession has done for this country.
Story_ID: 8519
Speaker 1: And why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: You can't know who you are, unless you know where you came from.  Nobody comes through a point in their life without being influenced by people who you know or, or being influenced by people who you didn't know.  You know, I'm the product of Miriam Holder and Eric Holder, Sr., but more than that, I'm the product of the experience of black people in this country, people who I'll, you know, who I'll never know.  The achievements that I have been fortunate enough to accomplish only happened as a result of the sacrifices that my parents, but other people as well.  You know, my sister-in-law, is Vivian Malone.  She is the young black woman, or was the young black woman who integrated the University of Alabama, with George Wallace standing in the door.  You know, what she did there had a positive impact on my life.  Malcolm X, Marcus Garvey, you know, all the things that those people did influenced, benefited me.  And so if--you have to have a sense of that history.  If you want to understand who you are, you have to understand that which got you to, to this point.  And I, that's one of the things that really distressing me about this generation that I see now.  We are consumed with the present, with the material, now, as opposed to respecting and trying to understand our rich history.  And without that connection, without associating ourselves with those roots, (our waste?) will, will be negatively impacted.  It doesn't mean that, you know, young kids get a bad rap.  I mean there are a lot of good ones out there who are doing a lot of positive things.  But the, the study of history in the way that we tried to do when I was in college especially, I mean it's not something that I see now, and I think we will suffer as a result of that.
Story_ID: 8520
Speaker 1: I didn't realize Vivian Malone was your sister-in-law.  Did she ever talk to you about that experience and what kinds of things did she share with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting.  I mean the person who was Deputy Attorney General then, Nick, Nicholas Katzenbach and who was the one who confronted [then Alabama Governor, George] Wallace, now sits with me on the board of MCI.  And so I know Vivian, I know Nick, and it's interesting to talk to him and to talk to her.  Yeah, she talks about how difficult that was, how, you know, she'd walk into a classroom and all the white kids would get up and walk out, and how for her whole time at the University of Alabama she had federal marshals who had to walk around with her.  Her brothers, talked about how they slept with--well, not slept, but had--they would take turns sleeping after she first entered the University of Alabama and somebody would, would sit outside the house with a shotgun because they received lots of threats against them because they were Vivian's relatives.  She went into the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] with James Hood, another black student who really couldn't take the pressure.  As bad as Vivian says it was for her, said, it was even worse for Hood.  And he ultimately dropped out.  So she became not only one of two who integrated the University of Alabama, but she was first black graduate of the University of Alabama.  And I went back to the university with her, I guess in 2003 which would have been the 40th anniversary of her integrating the university.  And we went to the very spot where George Wallace stood in the door and the university had a very nice ceremony commemorating that day and giving her an award.  So it is for me a special treat to be associated in a family where, with somebody who was such an important part of black history.
Story_ID: 8521
Speaker 1: You know, one thing I didn't ask you about.  And it just dawned on me that you said, after you read the "Autobiography of Malcolm X", it really changed your life when you were in high school.  What did you mean by that?
Speaker 2: I saw Malcolm X, a person who had suffered and done some of the worse things, you know, a guy who was a petty criminal and done a lot of really negative things, and then who through religion, through Islam, turned his life around.  And even then, it was a transformation.  And he turned his life around and became a person who was God-fearing and a respecter of the law as a, as a Muslim.  But then he, he never stopped growing.  He went from a person who followed Elijah Muhammad [and the Nation of Islam] to a person who really followed true Islam and understood that the negative racial things that Elijah Muhammad was preaching were not consistent with the tenants of Islam and became a person who appreciated all people, not simply black Americans, but white Americans, white foreigners.  And the constant growth of Malcolm X, the, the constant changing, the constant questioning was something that really had an impact on me.  I mean I was trying to deal with racial issues myself as well as being the only black kid in this predominantly white, academic world, growing up in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] a lot of racial things, a lot of questions going on.  You know, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the traditional civil rights organization being called Uncle Toms by what people would call black militants at the time and trying to figure out, well, you know, where do I fit on this spectrum?  And Malcolm X's book for me was, in a lot of ways, the affirmation of beliefs that I held, which is that ultimately, people are people.  You got to judge them as individuals and that you have to be centered as a black American.  You have to be proud of your heritage, that you can't be limited by--you can't let that, the negative experiences that happen to us as a people be things that somehow limit your ability to try to get ahead and make things better for our people and the future.
Story_ID: 8522
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: The concern I have is that, again, we're not people who are concentrating on teaching our young people our history.  I'm concerned about the way in which men, black men in particular, are not interacting with their kids.  I'm concerned about the rates at which the raising of our kids is, is put on the shoulders of black women, and without the assistance of black men.  For boys, in particular, you've got to have a strong, male figure in your life, and you will have a strong male figure in your life.  The other question is who is it gonna be?  Is it gonna be your dad or is it gonna be somebody on the streets?  Is it gonna be somebody you see on a television screen?  Is it gonna be somebody you see in, in the athletic arena?  And so I worry about that, you know, and the disintegration of the black family.  And it's happening to the society as a whole, I supposed, but the problems that we face as African Americans are more acute.  And our kids need greater protection.  They need a greater foundation, a more stronger foundation than perhaps white kids do.  And I'm concerned that our children aren't getting that foundation.  I'm also concerned about the split that we see.  Our community is really split between people who are really starting to, or have experienced the, the American dream and others who have been left behind.  People who are increasingly--who are left in, I guess we call them ghettos, are increasingly those people who have the least resources to get out.  And I wonder about whether or not this is gonna be something that will be in some ways solidified so that we won't have this permanent underclass of folks.  It's not a term that I like, but, and that's the term that I think that people use.  I, I worry about those folks.  I mean when I grew up, you had people who were doctors, lawyers, people who were engaged in running the numbers, you know, but there was a cohesive black community.  And now I see one that is really kind of split where everybody who can get out of, you know, for instance, Southeast Washington [D.C.], everybody who can does leave.  And that that the only people who are left are those who can't.  And I worry about those folks who are left behind.
Story_ID: 8523
Speaker 1: What do you think the, like twenty-one, twenty-two, you know, the activist you, would think of the "you" now, the fifty-three year old you?
Speaker 2: Well, if you had told me the guy who was protesting against the war in Vietnam, the guy who was, with the big Afro, and always pushing the limits at Columbia College [of Columbia University, New YOrk, New York], that someday he'd be a prosecutor, he'd be a judge, he'd be a high-level official in the Justice Department, I would have said, you're crazy, you know.  That's totally inconsistent with where my life is gonna go.  And, yet, you know, you know, one never can tell.  I would hope that an activist now would look at me and say, well, this is a guy who did the best that he could.  He never forgot who he was or where he came from; a guy who's proud of his heritage, and I was humble.  I'd hope they'd say that.  But I'm sure there'd be a generational thing that they'd say, well, I did, you know--you always think when you're young you can do it better than these old guys.  So I'd hope that's what they'd say.  And I hope that I've lived my life in a way that I would cause people to, even the twenty-one year olds to say something like that.
Story_ID: 8524
Speaker 1: You mentioned your family briefly, but tell us a little bit about your family?
Speaker 2: I have three kids, Mya, who is eleven, Brooke, who is nine and Eric the third, who is seven, born on my father's [Eric H. Holder Sr.] birthday.  He named--he was actually gonna be named John William.  We were gonna call him Jay, but he was born on my father's birthday.  It was my father's last birthday, and I thought, this is a sign.  He's got to--so he's, we call him, I call him 'E 3'.  I'm married to a wonderful woman from Mobile, Alabama, Sharon Malone, who's a doctor here in, in D.C.  And, you know, they're the light and light of my, of my life.
Story_ID: 8525
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  What is it about you that you want people to say when you're no longer here?
Speaker 2: Well, I would hope that people with a historical sense will take note of the fact that I was the first to do at least a couple of things, and they would say, that was a pretty good thing and, hopefully, also say that he did a good job with the, the chances that he was, was given.  I would hope that they'd look at the work that I did and maybe focus on the some of the problems that I tried to deal with and see, did I have an impact on, on these problems that we still have from whatever vantage point, you know, that they're looking.  And I'd like 'em to think that this was a guy who was a proud African American, a proud West Indian, and very connected to, to my past.  It's something that I try to imbue in my own kids, a sense that it's, it's a difficult thing.  It's not something that happens naturally.  You almost have to kind of push it to them.  I mean as a second generation African American, I was surrounded by West Indians and, and, and black folks.  So it was easy for me.  My kids, because I've had greater economic success, are not as surrounded by the African American experience and certainly not the West Indian experience.  And I want to somehow make sure that they understand that, that I sort of hope that people would say that, this is a guy who never lost track with or contact with his roots.
Speaker 1: And what do you believe your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's for, I guess other folks to decide, but I would hope that people would say that, you know, this is a guy who had an impact while he especially was on the governmental stage in the '90s [1990s] in Washington, D.C., that we can look at his work as Deputy Attorney General, his work as U.S. Attorney and that he, somehow, made a difference, that maybe I made, hopefully, D.C. a little safer while I was U.S. Attorney, maybe had an impact on national things while I was Deputy Attorney General.  I would hope that that would be my legacy; this is a person who did, who did good work and that had an impact.
Speaker 1: And do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No--I think I've been real fortunate and lucky in a lot of ways.  My life has taken unexpected, positive turns, and I've been real thankful the jobs that I've had, the people I've met, the opportunities that I've had.  No, I don't really regret much of, of anything.  You know, a couple of things I think about.  Maybe I would have gone to this school as opposed to that school.  But other than that, no, I'm--I've been blessed.
Story_ID: 8526
Speaker 1: And is there anything else you'd like to add that perhaps we didn't touch on?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing, I think that the importance of this project, I would hope that people who look at these interviews fifty years from now, a hundred years from now, two hundred years from now, will understand how, how important this effort is, to talk about black life, African American life in the twentieth century is important.  Again, as a student of American history, the--my involvement with you all over these two hours is, I think, is among the most important two hours probably I've had in my life because it not only is an opportunity for me to share with the people who will be looking at this in a contemporary way, but be--perhaps to speak to people, as I said, fifty, a hundred years from now, and give them an opportunity to not try to just look at newspapers, magazines, books about what happened, but actually be able to see and listen to people who experienced the things that they will be, they'll be studying.  So, I think that this project is among the most important things that, that I've ever been involved with.  And I'm proud to, proud to be a part of it.
