Story_ID: 8087
Speaker 1: Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers today.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles, sometimes more frequently called Chuck, Harrison  C-H-A-R-L-E-S H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 23, 1931.
Speaker 1: And where you born?
Speaker 2: Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is industrial designer.
Story_ID: 8088
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color?  Let's say blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Rice.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Just warm climates.  Wherever it's warm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's things are more like they are today than they ever will be.
Story_ID: 8089
Speaker 1: Can you state your mother's name and your father's name and spell them for us and give us their date of birth--dates of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Cora L--Lee, I think--Harrison.  Maiden name Smith, and she was born 1906--somewhere about there.  My father's name was Charles Harrison and he was born about 1903.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they both born in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was born in Louisiana.  My father was born in Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--did either one of them or did both of them have stories about their ancestors and where they came from and where--where their people were when slavery ended or where they were (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard much about that during--there was some--on my mother's side there was someone they use to talk about that--that they--that use--they use to have to hide them out.  No, I--I don't--I don't--I'm--I'm assuming that--he was hiding, he escaped some form of slavery somewhere, but I don't really remember it too clearly that I--I don't think it's very reliable for me to try to bring it up again.  On my father's side there's a very short history.  I don't know much about that at all, except--I, in fact I never saw my grandfather on my father's side.  He died when my father was seven years old and I--if you want a little background there.  There--there were three sons--they--he--he left a wife and three sons and--and they lived in Selma, Alabama and my grandfather had a sister who lived--one of his sisters lived in Texas, and was at that time married to a man who was the--some figure in administration at Prairie View A&M College.  This little college about forty-five miles west of Houston, and she was--she offered to take the boys there and give them a home and raise them because my grandmother had no means.  She was relatively an uneducated lady in the South and--three boys she had really no way to raise the boys, so they went to Texas and lived there and grew up raised on that college campus. That's--all three boys went to college and my father drifted into a line of education that was fundamentally--industrial arts they call it today, and I--I--you know enjoyed watching him do his work and--but prior to me being old enough to recognize it, he early on taught at a little high school in Shreveport, Louisiana, that's where he and my mother met, and then moved from there to Beaumont, Texas where he taught in another high school there and then from there to Baton Rouge, Louisiana at Southern University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana where--where they were living when I was born, and we lived there until I was about six years old.  That must have been about 1936 and then we moved--or '37 [1937] we moved to Prairie View A&M.  My father got a--was able to find work there and he went there and worked on the faculty there--back where he--he grew up as a kid and also attended college there--went--and we lived there for, I don't know, until 1944.  Then moved from there to Arizona.  He was a teacher out there in a school that was changing its name from Phoenix Union Colored High School to George Washington Carver High School.  School must have started someplace in the '20s [1920s] and it--it--about 1944 or '43 [1943] they changed the name and then brought a new faculty in and had a fellow named W. A. Robinson--came out of Atlanta, Georgia and he found four, five, six other people in a college--in various colleges throughout the South and Mississippi and Texas, Oklahoma and brought them out to Arizona to staff this--this high school--a small high school.  It was the only black high school--or African American high school--only high school in Arizona that was--I don't know if it would be fair to say that African Americans could attend but for certain was the only one in the state that was exclusively African American.  We could attend the other schools so, now there is--you know school--students who were high school level came from long distances to attend high school there. I know there's a Chandler, Arizona--specifically I remember some students who were in my class use to come--bus everyday and that was quite a distance.  Anyway, they returned to Arizona--they returned to Texas after staying in Arizona about four or five years, and then I--my older brother [Lawrence Harrison] had returned from the military.  He served in World War II and was working--had returned to school to get a--to work on his master's degree at the University of California at Berkeley, and persuaded my parents that I should come out there to attend school.  My principal of the high school that I attended, Mr. Robinson was--had me sort of pipelined to go to Atlanta to attend Morehouse College.
Story_ID: 8090
Speaker 1: Can you describe your household I guess at that time?  How many of you were there and--?
Speaker 2: There were four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were four of us and--and we'll go back to Baton Rouge where I was born, and at Southern University my father [Charles Harrison]--my father earned forty dollars a month teaching and there were four of us in the house and--and that money was not paid in real money.  There was a script issued by the State where we could only spend it certain stores, that, you know, that the State would--where they would honor that script.  So we really bartered and exchanged and gave things away and people would give us things and so we didn't have a real big base for money.  They used--we didn't use money a lot.
Speaker 1: Now how did that compare with other people's jobs--that you know, for instance a manual laborer could make what?
Speaker 2: We--yeah. Not as much.  You have--you have to remember this is--this is the Depression years, and so we didn't--we were--we enjoyed a very good lifestyle, believe it or not on forty dollars a month compared to many other people at that time.  We had--we had a house.  We had all the food we needed.  My father even had an automobile.  So--I guess--I don't--I don't know what you had to pay for automobiles in those days but--everything being relative I'm sure it was--it was quite a luxury, but we--we didn't have new things that required money.  You know, we did simple things.  Attending church was--was a big thing in our lives and school, that was about it.  Now, fortunately for me and for my family we lived on this college campus there and were able to enjoy, you know, some theater groups that the school had--some musical groups, you know, orchestras, bands, choirs, and athletic events, of course, you know, so, we were very lucky.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Southern has a strong tradition on athletic events and the band has always been good and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay now when you were small you actually remember--you now, oh, before I go on--where do you fit in--in the order of--?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest child.
Speaker 1: You're the youngest?
Speaker 2: I'm--I'm the youngest of two boys.  My--I had an older brother [Lawrence Harrison] who was about eight years older than I.
Story_ID: 8091
Speaker 1: Do you have early memories of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and the community?
Speaker 2: Very little bit, very little bit.  I have an image that we lived in this--was probably accurate--that the house that we lived in was like a little row of four or five houses that college teachers or professors lived in and it was on the side of--one road led into this campus and out.  And right across the street from where we lived was a training school where they used that school to train college students to teach.  They called it a training school once--and I remember that very vividly because I used to--I would go over there and play on the equipment--the playground equipment and at recess when the kids would come out I'd go over and play and--with them--I was kinda young, but they still--you know were so close to home I'd wander over there and play. And I vaguely remember a road that seemed like a long ways then but it probably was two blocks or a block, you know from where we lived to the campus where the buildings were, but I don't have a lot of memory and I know it was right on the Mississippi River--was nearby because we use to play in the river sometimes.  It ran right along the side of the campus but that's about all I can remember about that place.  The road--there was a single road that led up to Scotlandville which led to the main highway and led into Baton Rouge.  We actually were a few miles outside of Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did--how long did you all stay there?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember exactly what year my--my parents went there but I--I lived there until I was about five or six years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--and then--my family moved from there to Prairie View A&M College which was a little west of Houston [Texas], about forty-five miles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how--how long did--did you go there?
Speaker 2: We--I lived there all the way through my grade school--grammar school years and part of my first year of high school--I lived there actually--almost completed one year of high school there and so that meant we lived there from about 1936 to 1948.  No, not '48 [1948] I'm sorry, '44 [1944]--'44.  Then we moved to Arizona--either in '44 or '45 [1945] and--and lived there until I graduated high school in '48, but this was all during the war [World War II] years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, that's--that's the probably the place you (simultaneously)--remember (simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: or once you (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: I remember Prairie View pretty well and that was--I actually I was about twelve years old when I left there so I--I--and I've been back there several times since.
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells and--growing up in--in--?
Speaker 2: Prairie View.
Speaker 1: The Prairie View?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a prairie.  It was a--it was a open prairie and the school just sat out in a plain with a water tower that stood--when you--that's how you'd tell where the place was.  There was not--.
Speaker 1: Even the grass is flat.
Speaker 2: Grass--grass flat--just flat, flat plains, and--so--and a lot of wild flowers and I start--I was an outside guy--I spent a lot of time you know in the fields and the--but it was a great place to grow--to grow up, but that town--that little college campus--as I mentioned earlier it was called Agricultural and Mechanical College.  Well, they produced everything there they had all their own--they were a completely independent city. They had--they produced their own food, their own dairy, their own hospital--they trained nurses there.  They--they had their own bakery, you know, their own laundry, their own--everything, auto mechanics, fire station.  It was--it was independent.  It was very independent.  The only thing we really needed from the outside was a newspaper.  So, you know--when they would drop it off from Houston occasionally, but it was--it was great living, and I had--I had the privilege of--of kind of being raised by, by the neighborhood, you know. There were only faculty members' children for the most part there.  So there weren't a lot of us. And anyone was authorized to discipline you.  I mean I didn't get away with too many things there that was not acceptable to the whole community and--. But I was welcomed to come and probe and explore and all of those shops that they had there whether it was a mattress shop or shoe shop or auto mechanic shop or the carpenter's shop or the blacksmith's shop or welding, or radio repair, you know, they taught trades there.  They taught skills to people to go back--and so that they could teach again.  And I spent a lot of time around the farms and agriculture--around the animals and you know, I watched a lot of--a lot of--the veterinarian hospital, I could go hang around there--and they--they knew who my parents--they knew--I was just like their own.  You know we're just one big family or so to speak.  So, it was good, now I know that it was warm.  It was a very warm place to be and it was probably humid.  The--but there were fields filled with beautiful flowers and blue bonnets and there was another little red flower they called Indian paintbrushes and there were just nice odors and just a pleasant place to be.  Course, you could wander down around the dairy and you could pick up some real odors from the cattle and the farm, you know--some of the barnyard stuff, you could get--'cause you get a nose full of that too.  But by and large, you know it was a very pleasant place.
Story_ID: 8092
Speaker 1: What kind of--of little boy were you?  I mean what--what--what were you thinking about and what--what were your activities for the most part?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a learning disability that no one really knew about and I didn't know it either except they thought maybe I was--I had an eye problem they thought so they bought me some eyeglasses and at a very young age put them on my face (laughter) and--it really didn't change things much--while I was left-handed, but I was also--it was dyslexia and they didn't know.  In fact, I was through high school before it was determined that I was dyslexic and--and I--I learned later that people with that problem learn to compensate for it and--and manage to do some things, so I--I really had a--I didn't learn too well from reading or--in fact, I didn't read too well either, and--.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--can we explain like what--how--how you saw the world then in comparison to other people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't think I really saw it much differently except for me it was--I--I could not--I couldn't ingest.  I couldn't learn things through the written word.  I had to learn things from hearing it or seeing it, and so, I became a very visual person and--and I didn't read signs, I would read locations and--and what was in proximity to things and where--if I had to--you know, if I was given--I--I don't get lost--it's hard to lose me.  Even as a child--I mean I could find landmarks or trees or sticks or ditches or holes in the ground, things like that and I steered my way through them--not that they didn't have road signs anyway down there (laughter), but, you know I put--well, not that I'm in urban and have been in urban--urban life, I don't rely on signs too much to find where I need to go or to return to a place that I've been.  But, I don't think that I really saw life much differently than other people saw it.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't a visual problem?
Speaker 2: It was--no it wasn't visual for me perceiving anything visually, it was this that my mind--my brain just didn't work like it did for a writer or for people who weren't dyslexic.  Yes--I could--I could see numbers--I can see words--alphabets--but I don't get them in the right order.  I couldn't write them back.  I mean--I could repeat--you could give me a--a list of twelve, fifteen numbers.  I'll give you every number that you gave me that--but they might not be in the right order, and I read--and I look and when I see things on paper, I'll--I get them turned around.  You know, I--I'll see--I'll get a words--I'll rearrange the words or I'll--I'll in spelling--that there's a problem for me.  I'll misspell almost everything and because I put the alphabets in the wrong order and--.
Speaker 1: So you--you've done this all your life?
Speaker 2: It's been that way all my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But--the human body's--the human being is just a phenomenal thing and--and it learns to compensate--compensate and--and managed to make my way through and--after all--not only did I get out of high school, but I managed to get out of college and--and earn a master's degree, you know probably could have gone on but I--I had already exceeded my capability to get that far.  So, I managed to do it, you know, but my whole life is--has shifted to a--to a visual communication method, rather than--than a verbal communication type thing, and so, I--I just looked at shapes and at colors and lights and--it's also very important for me to be able to communicate.  I--later I--I had a tough time, you know in school and--and I feel that I was very, very fortunate to--to finally fall into a profession or pursue a--a career in something that was comfortable for me, 'cause had--because had--had I tried to do something in a literary sense, I--I would have been just one big failure.  I couldn't have achieved it.
Speaker 1: Now, how difficult was it in school, I mean what were the--did you--did you find teachers that were able to kind of help you--?
Speaker 2: They didn't recognize it, and--and so they were patient enough with me, and I'd memorize things, you know.  I'd memorize things and just find ways to avoid the embarrassment of not being able to do things that a lot of other people were able to do with words, and I--I don't think my--any of my instructors were abusive in any way, they just--I guess--I--probably patient with me, just thought that a little patience would help and I managed to it, but I was never--I was never on the top of the honor roll.  I was not an A student or--if I had a C that was good for me.  That was--that was really a good grade.
Story_ID: 8093
Speaker 1: When I really found a way in life to--to get things in an order where I was ready to take off and develop was in my early years of college.  The first year as a matter of fact, I--I--I went off for college as a--from high school in Phoenix to San--to--to [University of California at] Berkeley, I couldn't get in.  I mean I was not admitted to the university because of how my grades--were not acceptable for those college level--for that university.  Anyway, it was perceived as--and still is I guess as one of the leading universities in the country and they have high standards.  Well, my--I couldn't meet their standards and I--I went--my brother fortunately was out there doing work on a graduate degree at that time and was able to see--I didn't have money to go back home (laughter), and so I attended San Francisco City College.  I entered as a--as a major in business administration or economics and didn't do well at all.  Think I was--the first semester I was on probation.  So I--I knew my brother was a psychologist or he was about to receive a master's degree in psychology and I thought well, maybe I'll change my major to psychology and I can get some help--somebody can help me 'cause I was struggling out there--I was really--I needed a life preserver badly and he recommended that I--he looked at the catalogue for the school--had to offer courses and then I'd take a course in vocational guidance, which I registered for and he--every class met twice a week and one day each week I had to take some kind of test--an ability test or an aptitude test or some kind of test I-- and I don't know if it was Tuesday or Thursday, but then the other thing I had to do--I was required to do research and explore opportunities that seemed to be interesting for me and when I--course was completed the teacher--professor evaluated my scores and from all this testing and stuff and--and had an interview with me, or a session with me and explained what--what those scores showed and then he said that, "Harrison--it looks--your scores indicate that you should--would do well in art."  I had never tried any art prior to that time.
Speaker 2: None at all?
Speaker 1: Not--not structured, just on my own.  You know, I'd make models and I'd make things.  I--I was--that was one of the things that I did as a kid.  Made--I did a lot of things with my hands.  I made toys.  I made--I'd follow my uncle--my father and my grandfather around.  My grandfather was a carpenter, and my father also had--had a lot of skills in--in all of the trades, you know, plumbing, carpentry, electric--electrical and all auto. So, I--I spent a lot of time around them.  I--I got a lot of gratification from seeing things come to be--to build-- creating things, and so I had really never tried to paint or to make a sketch of--of a work of art.  I--you know, it was not intended for--it arrived--and something came out of it then it--it was--it was just coincidental but--but I was never approached or worked to make it a work of art.  But, I was pretty desperate by now to find something that I could do--that I could do in life and not be a failure, so I--I'd grab this--onto the idea of art like--like a life preserver and I registered the next semester as an art major.
Story_ID: 8094
Speaker 1: In high school and in college, I guess you didn't really have an idea--a good idea of what you really were best suited to do, I guess until you had that [aptitude] test, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.  That is correct.  I really did not know.  I was--I--I dabbled in so many things, you know, as I mentioned back at this college campus [San Francisco City College] where we lived.  I--I was in every shop down there and--but I--I somehow I didn't go to the chemistry labs.  I didn't go to the music department and I didn't go into the libraries, but I was around animals and shops where things were being built and repaired and so I--I just had the--an interest in creating things, and in high school I-I participated in some extracurricular activities around school.  You know, I was in the school band.  I was in the school choir--course I--a little athletics--I played--I was on the basketball team.  I was--I played tennis.  In fact, I won a few medals down there in the state tournament and I also had a--but I worked a lot.  I mean--I had jobs forever--I mean even--even as a kid about eight, nine years old--I had paper routes and worked for--I worked for painters. I worked for laundries.  So, I--I've--I had some kind of a job almost all the way through and the same was true when I got to high school. In the evenings, you know I had odd jobs to do--I had to throw papers again.  I delivered morning and afternoon papers in Arizona there, and I painted--painted houses for people after school and so--but--your question.  I had no real direction as to where I wanted to go.  I was very active also with model airplane building.  I--I did a lot that with my time and the Boy Scouts.  I spent a lot of time with that too, but--so--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seems like--I mean for--all you've been describing to me there's a pattern here of being a builder of stuff with your hands and working on--and being able to create things, but I--I guess you didn't really know how to translate it into a career?
Speaker 2: No, I had no idea.  I didn't know--I didn't know there was such a career as industrial design.  Absolutely didn't--had I stayed on a course--people thinking that I should have gone into architecture--that's were they were sending me.  Those people who had the sensitivity to recognize what--who--where my aptitudes were--would have--I probably would have--but I never--had I never learned.  In fact, I--I frequently say now, had--had I attended a black college I would have probably been--I would have either gone into architecture or been a teacher of something close to that like shop teacher or--or--because when I--in--this is this school's--when I was in college here--we are talking about 1940--'49 [1949] there were only five schools in the United States.  I learned this--well I'm getting a little bit ahead, but the fellow who analyzed my work and suggested I go to art--got me into art, then after getting into art, a lot of things changed for me.  I registered as an art major in--in the City College and all of a sudden I started making--I was getting high grades--A's and B's in art courses.  Now, my academic courses didn't--didn't approach that.  I mean, but I was able to do better with those.  I was getting some confidence and so my life really started to change right--right--right away, right away.  I was getting confident that I could do something that was what--the other thing was I was a small guy.  I was--I was a very small person.  I--I was probably five foot four, three?  Even--even though I claimed I played on the basketball team and I really did.  I wasn't a very tall guy.  I was a little guy and a lot small, but the largest fellow on our basketball team was only six feet and he was the center.  We use to call him the big one, you know (laughter), today, where would he be?  So, you know--.
Speaker 1: He'd be the point guard and he might be too short for that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, might be too short for that.
Story_ID: 8095
Speaker 1: I finished the two years at the [San Francisco] City College and the professor who was in charge of the--who--who was the--I don't know--probably was the dean.  I don't know if they had deans there but whatever his role was, he was head of the art department and he said, "Where--Harrison where--where--what are you gonna do, now, that you've finished up here?  And--and I said, well, well I'll either go down to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles]--I said, I'll probably go down to UCLA--and--and because I knew that they offered a course in interior design and--and I said I'd either study interior design or industrial design or something and he said, "Well you know if you gonna stay on the East Coast or the West Coast you'd better you know--there's nothing out here for you in industrial design."  He said all the schools for industrial design that are accredited are in the Midwest and on the East Coast.  You will have to leave the West Coast to do that.  He said, and "I would personally persuade you to go into industrial design rather than interior design", and--and he said, but I really would like to see you become painter.  He says "I think you'd make a fine painter", and (laughter) I told him, I said, I says, "Well that's a compliment, of course, but if I went home and told my father I was going to be a painter, he'd say, well great son, he says you can get started right now on the garage out there on the side" (laughter).  I couldn't--I can't go back and you know, and--and be a painter.  I didn't feel it--which turned out later probably wouldn't have been the case.  My parents probably would have supported it had--had I really chose to do that but I wanted to do--I wanted to build something I think and industrial design seemed like the thing to do even though I didn't know a lot about it.  I think only what I had read in the library and--but there were only five schools that were accredited in the United States at that time.  There was the Pratt Institute in New York City--in Brooklyn.  There was a Rhode Island School of Art and Design in Rhode Island.  There was two schools in Illinois.  The School of the Art Institute of Chicago and the University of Illinois at Champaign, incidentally, which was the only school--only public school in the country at that time that offered a curriculum in industrial design.  Then--there I think Carnegie Tech [Carnegie Institute of Technology] had a major--that was accredited.  So--did I name you five?  I think so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: If not, close.  And--and so I applied to all five schools and it was very difficult to get in school in those days because there were waiting lists to get in.  There were veterans back from World War II and--and they had priority, you know and--and so many people had to wait some time before they could get into some of the universities and colleges and I--I experienced the same thing, but I did get accepted at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and--and that's how I came to Chicago.  I didn't have--as I mentioned earlier, my father was a teacher and we weren't flushed with a lot of money, but I had an aunt here which made it easy for us.  In those days we were always looked to go where there was some family and--and also my brother and father was aware of a--of a law that was in place called the Gilmer-Akin Law, which--which had something like this--I don't know if I'll get it exactly right, but it was in practice throughout all the southern states that said that if you cannot provide in the black colleges what a student needs, they will pay your tuition and transportation to a school that--that will do that for you, just don't come into our high school.  (Laughter).  Well, so my father [Charles Harrison] knew about this and so did my brother [Lawrence Harrison], so we made an application and that's how I got--where I was able to find some money to come to Chicago to go to school--to attend school here.  So--.
Speaker 2: I've heard of that before--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's--.
Speaker 2: Especially in Texas. I mean they do a lot of--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Texas, Texas, Texas or Mississippi--I--I met other people during--during that time who--Alabama, Georgia and I imagine some other states, probably Arkansas and what--so--that--that provided me some funding to get here because I had to work here too.  I--I you know, it wasn't all just tuition and--and transportation, but--so I had to provide food and clothes and rent and stuff.  My parents helped some--they helped a lot but I had to, you know, part of it was mine--I had responsibilities so I always had a part-time job, but I learned later that the real--one way I--I was--I got into school 'cause it was unusual to get into school, as I mentioned earlier, upon a first try and--and the school--oh, the Art Institute of Chicago had a quota system, and I imagine most of those schools did too, but I just learned about that after I became enrolled there--that they accepted five black students a year and--and it just happened that there were only four applications in when I applied.  So I got--so that's--that's fate, you know that's how--boy, there's so much fate in life. So, I--that's how I got here, and I did very well.  The school was great.  I mean the people were nice, the instructors were nice, the students were nice.  I--I really was--I had--had a great time. I learned a lot and I did very well.  I scored high and I had a lot to learn though.  I had to come from a long ways back 'cause I had not much background.  I had no drawing--I didn't have a real strong base in art, you know, I just had the one to two years there in junior college, and I--I didn't also know much about mechanical drawing and I hadn't had--didn't study those things in high school and college and--and mechanics--and--of--now, I had a mechanical aptitude that was probably as strong as anyone and maybe stronger than most people.  But I did not--I was at a handicap with the other students when I first arrived because they had a better sense of how business worked and how the industries worked and how manufacturing companies worked and how things were made in mass production.  I--I didn't--I knew nothing about that and I knew nothing about tooling--very little about assembly lines and the order of things.  So, I had to learn those things kind of quickly and I did and fortunately my other classmates--we shared, you know, and--they--I was able to learn from them and my--so, I did okay.  Yeah, I graduated--but actually became a member of the honor society.  I was with this group they called the Delta Phi Delta, I think, which is a national art honor society.  So, every little bit of confidence helps, you know, a little--little bit of success breeds confidence they tell me.
Speaker 2: When did you graduate?
Speaker 1: Graduated in 1954.
Story_ID: 8096
Speaker 1: Where did you live here in Chicago when you moved here?
Speaker 2: When I first came to Chicago I lived in a--in a rooming house down on 63rd [Street] and--what in those days it was South Parkway, now-- its now called King Drive, and that was a--that was a melting pot for a lot of things and then, you know in those days--a lot--quite a few college students there from out of town were students at the University of Chicago, too.  So--we--they were able to find room--rooms around that part of the city, or that part of the South Side, and there was a lady there named Ms. Jones who--whose husband had passed away and he was a dentist and she--she had two apartment buildings and a two-flat and she rented the rooms on the second floor to college students and I--I got a room there on the--on the help of a fellow named Robert Browne and it's spelled with an E, who---who was raised in Chicago but was a friend of my brother's [Lawrence Harrison] in Texas.  They had worked together for some years in Texas and--so he assisted, he helped me a lot--make connections here with a place to--a place to live.  So, I stayed there and for several years--two--maybe three years--two--at least years and later, as I said different jobs--part-time jobs.  I--I landed a job with a--with a boys' home--the Randall House, which was a part of the Episcopal Church and it was a home for wayward boys who were wards of the state and they had a--they had a home on the west side of Warren [Boulevard] and Damen [Avenue], somewhere near there and I worked there and then later they bought a--they bought a building on the South Side and moved and they had space and they needed house parents and they asked me if I would move in and be a house parent, you know, and fill up one of those jobs--those roles, and I did.  It was on Ellis, South Ellis Avenue, about 48th Street--4700 block and Kenwood [Avenue]--that's where those big ole mansions in there. And I don't know if the place is still there or not, but I stayed there for oh a couple more--maybe at least another year or so and lived in there with a--with a--I was also a recreational director for the boys and we entertained them and helped them with their homework and stuff in the evenings when I'd get in from class and then that--that's kind the summary of it all.  I--I later moved out of there.  I had a friend, a very dear friend, that--that I knew from San Francisco who came to Chicago to study and--and so when he came I moved out to get a room with him and--and share so, and so he and I and two other people shared an apartment on the south side of--about Stony Island [Avenue] and 65th Street about that time and so I moved out of the Randall House and continued to work there for a bit until I--I--and now at about this time I'm a senior or last year of training at the School of the Art Institute [of Chicago], and an opportunity came around for me to--someone an interior design firm down on Rush [Street] or Walton--Walton Street between Rush and Michigan [Avenue] was looking for an interior--or looking for someone who could design custom furniture, and it happened to be an African American guy who had been working there, who didn't have the skills but he was leaving for some reason and somehow I heard--I learned about it and--and a fellow took me--hired me there to design furniture for domestic use, you know for home--for residential use.
Story_ID: 8097
Speaker 1: What does designing a piece of furniture entail?  I mean--or designing anything?  As a designer--.
Speaker 2: As a designer.
Speaker 1: You're not necessarily responsible for the mechanics of the thing are you, or--or are you--or are you--?
Speaker 2: In some things, yes.  If it's a highly developed piece of machinery, no.  It's--just requires a lot of engineering.  No, I don't--I don't do--the--that's--that's the engineer's responsibility.  The design--the industrial designer is a--I like to think of it as a synthesis between aesthetics and--and industry or--or--and mechanical and function and--and--and technology, and--but then also comes economics comes into it and so does social--social sciences.  Yet, you design for people--you design to make people happy--what's comfortable with them so you--you--you're--yeah there's a need--there's a requirement for a sensitivity to what people are comfortable with and--and this goes not only with the functional interaction with the product but also with its visual impact on how, the colors you use on it, the shape you give it, the human interaction with it is what the industrial designer addresses.  Where you put knobs, where people can turn them and make them so that they can be handled, not too small or--or too large.  You put them in a location where they can be turned--as you go to furniture--furniture--the designer really does that without the aid of an engineer, or without the presence of an engineer by and large.  Now, if now, you get into some--some plastics or some metals, but if it's a wooden product, usually the designer--not usually--more--in every case the designer has enough background in physics and--and to understand what it takes to--to make something stand and stay together and carry a load.  Those are--those are fundamental requirements that a designer has to--has to possess.  He--if you get into some metal furnitures--you frequently would need--need the--the skills of a--talents and knowledge of an engineer to--to know just how much stress you could put on tube or on a certain piece of metal because it--it quickly gets to the design--quickly gets to a point of economics where you try to not overbuild things or put too much--make it more expensive than--than it needs to be and--and in order to do that you need someone who really can understand the properties of a material at a certain gauge of a metal so that you have the appropriate strength to support what your requirements are for that thing.  So, I do--.
Speaker 1: There--there are probably governmental regulations about certain things too, right?
Speaker 2: Well, there are safety regulations more than government  There's--there's--the safety thing is--is where you're--you have to be very sure that you're satisfying those kind of regulations or requirements.  And the government does have some standards that--that you have to meet--that have to be met on certain products.. Now, there could be a new product never existed before, where there's nothing there.  I mean it could be something that--but with toys particularly there's a lot of--lot of safety measures that--that are--that have--that are imposed on--on product design.  But the--the industrial designer really is--is a people's advocate--the user advocate for the product--with in mind--keeping in mind however that's he being paid to--to put a product into the marketplace that--that will be profitable for the manufacturer or for the company that's---that's selling the product.  So, it--it--in--you have to have that presence of mind that what--what you're doing is--is really a business and you're doing it for a profit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suppose a business that's trying--that's competing with an other business for the same kind of product--.
Speaker 2: Exactly--
Speaker 1: Then the design is--
Speaker 2: --That can set it apart or make it distinctive.  I mean all automobiles for instance have four wheels and a steering wheel, four tires and you know, so--.
Speaker 1: Body by (unclear), but the design is different, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, so you--that's how you tell a Ford from Chevrolet from a Mercedes or from whatever else is out there.
Speaker 1: Styling used to be real distinct.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, especially in terms of cars and other things. We would always--my brother--when I was little we could always tell a Ford by the big tail lights--the big round tail lights.  I don't think it's true anymore.
Speaker 2: No, it's--I think you--you've made a fair assessment of--of the market out there--they--they--the--and I'm not sure why this is so. I frequently want to accuse the computer of--(laughter) of mediocrity and making us all fit into a--to a--to a mold of stuff that--that goes beyond what we really need to compromise for.  You know I think that many--particularly young designers and--and some older ones use software systems that are limited--they have limitations. And they can't go beyond the limitations of the software.  So they have to design within the framework of what the software will allow them to do, and--but if you find an old guy around who can draw and--and independent and doesn't need a computer, he's unlimited with his--with--with his possibilities.  He can just go on and on and on.  So--so I think we have self-imposed some--a lot--a lot of limitations with--now that's changing 'cause--'cause software systems are getting more and more refined, but, if you have a real keen eye, you can look at work and distinguish whether it's done--produced on a computer or produced by hand.  I--I just think that there's a spontaneity--there's--that--that comes from--from a hand--from--I think that the hand is attached to the brain and--and you can really get more--but people don't require it.  It's the--the--you know, our public is--they see it--and we get--you don't see anything else so you learn to accept it, and--and you take what you have out there and--and so, it's really not an issue.  Although, I don't want to take this too far, because to make it appear that we're really getting garbage out there because that's not the case either.  Yeah, we get--we get good work, we get good design and--and the emphasis on--on what things should look like has made some shifts in--in recent years, and I say recent--I--probably in the last twenty years.  The design used to have a flair that really, probably leaned a little too heavily on aesthetics first and then tried to--they built a package and forced--build a shape and force something into the package.  Now, I think we do a little more of having it all evolve together and the aesthetics grows out of how it's made and how its--what its function is.
Speaker 1: I think I know what you mean and--and there's--there's a couple of examples--I guess growing up in the '50s [1950s] in automobile now.  They--they seemed to be designed--the--the body is what was selling the car pretty--pretty much, and the look it seemed to be--can--can you tell me about it 'cause all the cars had such wild, distinctive--.
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Designs.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I think--I think you've really touched on--on the point I'm trying to get across here, and--and remember Cadillacs had these fins on them and a lot of other--those fins had absolutely no function.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Absolutely no function at all.  It's just expensive things to build stuck up on the rear to get--create excitement, to create interest to get the customer to--to purchase that--that particular model.  Today, things are a little more functional--thank goodness, and--and I think that has also led to the similarity in design of a lot of cars--a lot of automobiles because they don't--they don't do as much--frugal--I mean frivolous kind of things with the design anymore. And there's another issue that has--that has recently come in--into the scene and the training of designers for automobiles has shifted also recently, and I'm talking now within a five or ten year period.  There was a time when--when people who designed automobiles were called stylists, automobile stylists and they came out of only two or three schools in this country.  One very popular one, well known was early was The Art Center School out of Pasadena, California--the [Los] Angeles area, and they produced stylists.  Well, these people were trained to draw exciting pictures.  They had no idea how to make it, whether it could be made or--they just draw some exciting pictures and--and then--so Detroit had a pipeline sort of and these guys all for the most part all went straight from Pasadena to Detroit and they'd work for one of the three big motor companies or whoever you know--then--then--at that--and then in that era we didn't have competition offshore from--from foreign manufacturers to amount to much.  There might have been one or Jaguars around but you know, and a Rolls Royce show up,  you know once in a while, but we didn't have real competition.
Story_ID: 8098
Speaker 1: The--the trend really has--has shifted from the type of individual--the training for--for automobile--they are not called stylists anymore, they are called transportation designers and they--and they study design just like an industrial designer does today--that was separate and apart.  Many of those stylist guys would go to Detroit, work two, three years and--and run dry and--and they throw them out--and--and they were done and then they'd have to get jobs doing something else.  They weren't really qualified to--to do an industrial design--fill an industrial design profession--position, because they knew nothing about manufacturing, they didn't know much about strengths and materials.  They--they really were just artists--not just artists--they were artists that drew nice pretty pictures and--and--and then those drawings would probably be turned over to an engineer who would try to interpret that or figure a way to make that together.  Well, today the designer--the industrial designer bridges that old gap and they--they now engage people in Detroit who are product designers--total product designers who can take a concept all the way to the product--to a finished product.  So that's the major distinction between what was popular, you know in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] and maybe even into the '70s [1970s], but today we have a lot more functionality in--in and I think that's what leads to similarity and appearance in--in many of these products.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Good marketing drives that very hard also.  I mean and make no mistake about, the designer does really not determine what goes into the market place.  The designer may offer a lot of possibilities and a lot of suggestions but marketing really dictates and makes the selection of what they actually go to the market with.
Story_ID: 8099
Speaker 1: How I got from--from interior design into--back onto where I--well, as I said I was near the end of my training and--at--as far as the undergraduate study at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and I was able to land a job as an interior designer and it turned out that--I didn't really work there very long.  I worked probably six months at the outside for a fellow name Maurice Sternberg who--who was, you know, had a substantial interior design business at that time and he--and then I was drafted into the military.  I had actually been deferred from induction into the military until I completed my training there.  They allowed me to do that.  My draft board was out in San Francisco, and they let me--let me finish school and then I--I became eligible for the draft.  I had to go.  It was time for me to go and I was drafted into the military in 1954--right the day after graduation or very close to it--and the graduation ceremony, but I had actually finished my work in March and didn't get drafted until June--and I didn't march so to speak with the class until June--and then the military--I was there for two years and I was sent to Germany.  I was trained--I had some special training at Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri.  Fort Leonard Wood was basic training.  I went to Ft. Belvoir, Virginia to train as a cartographer--I was a map draftsman and--and then they sent--I went--they sent me right straight from--quickly to--to Germany and they divided the class that I graduated in into three groups and they sent one small group to Panama.  They sent quite a large group to Korea.  The Korean War was still cooking at that time I think and--and a group that I went with--they shipped us to Europe and to Germany to remap West Germany after World War--you know there was no maps after World War II up to date.  The old maps were not of any service anymore they--they were all--the bridges had been destroyed.  The roads had been changed.  The--many of the railway terminals had been moved and they just--so they needed new maps and that's what I was engaged in for the two years that I was there.  I was--was a draftsman drawing--drawing maps and--we finished the map--map assignment.  There was a--I was assigned to a group in Frankfurt, which was a small unit that was attached to Fifth Corps Headquarters which was really a division of Seventh Army and the Seventh Army had a battalion, a large group of guys down at the Heidelberg and--but we all worked in concert--these troops that I was with I--I don't really know why the general had his own special troops cause I was one of those in--in Frankfurt--but for this job we--we all worked together and completed the maps for West Germany, and--and when that was finished then we had to do targets.  I--I later became a draftsman of targets for guided missiles in--in aircraft bombers and we--these groups--topographic groups would--would draw these targets and they'd run control into these--whatever it was--it was a depot for fuel--a fuel depot or a bridge or any strategic spot that looked like a strategic military installation.  They--we would plot it onto their surface within several hundredths of an inch so that they could diffuse that--those--those figures, those numbers to coordinate how to lob guided missiles or--or where to find it on the earth's surface, and I--I worked out on the field most of the time--that time when I stayed out in the field--we slept in the woods, we slept under bridges and I did a lot of that drawing right on the spot.  In fact, all of it was done right--right there.  The maps were not all done in the field although I did have some outside assignments where I had to go out into--those maps for the most part were made--initially started from aerial photographs and they would fly over with airplanes and photograph the whole area and then bring the maps back into the drafting room and we would use equipment to then extract, you know, the information from the photograph to draw maps. And then what sometimes would happen when a heavily-wooded area like particularly in Bavaria--there's so--the woods were--were so thick--the trees that we couldn't really tell what happened to the terrain underneath the trees--we didn't know how high or how low it was or where the roads went under, so I was assigned to a group of--a survey team of guys and we took a few small trucks and we'd go out and draw these maps in--in the forest.  I'd actually set up a drawing table there and draw the map.  They would run the control in from some benchmark, real old church or something that had a location or other surface on it, and then they would run the control over to the spot and I'd draw the map right there on the spot to fill in where they couldn't see from the photograph.  And that's kind of what I did for two years and then had a chance to get out the military.  I was told that I could get a month early or two months early if I--if I wanted to--to attend graduate school.  Now, I really thought I had finished with college and--when I--I thought I had done as much as I could do when I got a bachelor's degree, but you know, but I really didn't like the military and I--and I took the challenge of going to graduate school to get out of the--to get out of the military and--and did.
Speaker 2: Before we get out of the military, can you--now you were in the military just after--I guess the Korean War was closing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Korean War was closing.
Speaker 2: The military had just been integrated not long ago before, I guess in 1948?
Speaker 1: That's absolutely right.  I was the only guy in my--the only African American guy in my outfit in--in at least in the--in--as a draftsman--now that, in a--I have to explain those--I was in a topographic company and in that company there were people who were involved in mapmaking that were not draftsman.  They had surveyors and some other functions.  I don't know.  It doesn't come to me quickly, but we even had our own--they had people there who maintained the vehicles that we had to use and so they had the quartermaster's people who helped out supplying stuff.  So there were some other African American guys in my unit--in the company, but there were only probably about two or three of us--four. And so, I yeah to your point--there was very little integration, in fact happening then, no. But some--it was starting--it was starting to--to take place.
Story_ID: 8100
Speaker 1: In a lot of settings, you know, I guess from this--from the time you were in college on, were you the only black person--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: In this setting?  I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: From the time I--from--from high school graduation from there on to the rest of my career, I--I was very lonely in terms of (laughter) being able to find--to have, you know, a black person as a--as a--someone to share in my experience and my daily challenges with, but--.
Speaker 1: Now, were you married at this time?
Speaker 2: No, I--I didn't marry until--well actually, yes, I did get married while I was in the military, but it was--it was almost a joke.  I--I got married and stayed with a lady two weeks and--and she decided--she came to--we were married when I took a leave--she came with me to Fort Belvoir when I started training--the map training and she decided that she wanted to go back to Chicago.  So we stayed together two weeks and--and when she got back to Chicago, she--she had found an old boyfriend and decided she wanted a divorce, and so that was that, you know.  So, I--I--initially my initial reaction was to resist it, but in my better judgment better--better sense came in and--and it is harmless.  There were no children so nobody was injured in that regard and--and we didn't split as enemies.  I mean you know, I was crushed, but--but that soon wore off, you know, I--I did okay.  You know, lived through that one, and--.
Speaker 1: Now--now were you--did you get a lot of, you know, guidance from your older brother [Lawrence Harrison] and your father [Charles Harrison] and--I mean your mother [Cora L. Harrison], were you--did--were you--you know, was your family real close in terms of that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a--I had good support from all of my brother, mother and father, and--and that--that was valuable. That was, I--I you know, they--they supported me through school, through everything I tried to do.  They really did, and my brother was sort of a role model.  He was a older guy, as I said he was eight years older, eight to nine years older than I was and I admired the guy.  He was a handsome guy, you know, and he's very brilliant, very smart guy and he--he--I saw him, in fact I was living in his house when he and his wife, first wife--out in California when I first went off to school, I saw the guy come in and--and shut himself up for--for two days or three days in the kitchen with a typewriter and type his thesis for his master's degree in psychology, turn it in and have it accepted it the first time he turned it in.  Never had a note, didn't--didn't make any notes, nothing.  Just sat down there to the typewriter and typed his master's degree thesis and turned it in and it was accepted.  Now--I--that--that's exceptional, that is rare and then he went to teach at Texas Southern University down in Houston for a year or two and--and I stayed out in San Francisco at the last year--that second year--my--you know, in the dormitories though.  This time I moved into the dormitories and didn't--I lived on my own, and then later he went on to New York to work.  He worked at Bellevue Hospital in New York.  He--he--and he did an internship first at Homer Phillips Hospital, Homer G. Phillips Hospital in St. Louis as a psychologist and then--then to New York to Bellevue and, in fact when I came to Chicago to start school at the Art Institute of Chicago he went to St. Louis to--to start his internship there and then from New York he--he worked there with Dr. Wechsler who somehow knew him--I think from Berkeley or from--you know, they--they had some kind of a relationship that--
Speaker 1: Dr. Wechsler was his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Dr.--yeah, Axel, yeah.
Speaker 1: Axel Wechsler?  Wechsler?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wechsler, and he worked with him helping develop some tests--there' a Wechsler-Bellevue Apperception test or something--I can't remember, but there he met a girl--lady who was actually a classmate of mine at the Art Institute who was--lives in Chicago and they developed a relationship to the point they got married.  He moved here to Chicago and went to work for Chicago State Hospital which was a mental hospital here as a Chief of the Diagnostic Clinic out there for a while, and he stayed here and--and that marriage fell apart and he went back to California, and when--when he went back to--when he returned to California then he returned to teaching at--at Berkeley had--he was actually working at two schools.. He was teaching at the University of California at Berkeley and also at San Francisco State in San Francisco State University I guess.
Speaker 1: So you had a lot of stimulation going on from your older brother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, yeah and my father, he was--and my mother was just right there, you know, she's just a constant--she--she was a housewife, in the--in the, you know in the old sense of the word.  I mean she (laughter)--she provided stability for the family, kept everybody balanced and--and kept the buttons shut on--everybody's buttons buttoned up and--
Speaker 1: That--that can't be minimized--.
Speaker 2: No, oh, no, no, no that's valuable--that's invaluable.  That's invaluable, yeah.  Always there if you needed them.  Day or night, you call home, she's there, you know. So.  You know it's--it was--it was good support from the family.
Story_ID: 8101
Speaker 1: The divorce thing happened while I was in Germany.  I mean I was still in the military.  I--I--I actually was inducted in the Army in June.  Finished basic training in September.  Studied cartography from September to December in Fort Belvoir, Virginia and they shot me right to Germany.  I was in Germany before Christmas, so and then I--and then she asked for a divorce in December--soon as I got there.  I meant--just so--so that process probably took two, three months and--and then I stayed in Germany to live out--serve out my term of duty there--tour of duty, I guess they call it and then returned to--to school, now I applied to schools because I was looking for--I--I decided at that point maybe I'd go study architecture, and--and I applied to schools (laughter) in South America.  I didn't know no real reason to come back to Chicago.  I mean--my parents lived in Texas so I had no family here.  My brother [Lawrence Harrison] was here though, that's right he was here at that time, and--but I applied to schools in Sao Paulo, Brazil for architecture--Quito, Ecuador, Bogata, Colombia 'cause I--I was ready to go, you know, off out of the country to--to start a life, you know to--to really go do something . Well it turns out that those schools did not cycle at the right time to help me get out of the Army--military a month or two early, and would you believe it--in fact, you will believe it, because the School of the Art Institute of Chicago was right in time--you know, so I--I (laughter) contacted the school--told them I would like to return to graduate school.  They had no industrial design--no graduate program for industrial design and my professors created a program for me--a master's--a graduate program in industrial arts.  I was probably the only student that ever studied--graduate study in industrial design at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, but--because later they--they just abandoned--they don't--don't even teach industrial design there any more.  They--more shifted their emphasis more on fine arts and not on things that make money--I mean things that are professional (laughter) so, that's not fair, but I've said it now.  The--so that's kind of the way that went.  Then I met a lady--I didn't just meet her.  A renewed acquaintance with a lady that I knew before I even met the girl that I married, and she--she was at that time living in Indianapolis and she came back to Chicago and our relationship developed--developed and we got married and I stayed married to her for forty-three years, and we had one son--still do.  She passed away two years ago, and--that's--she really put meaning in my life, you know.  I then started--I completed--I had to work--I had to stop working 'cause I couldn't--I had no money.  The money I had from the Army was--from the military--was not sufficient to--to--the Korean G.I. Bill was not as fruitful--not as bountiful as--as the World War II veterans had and it wasn't enough--so I had to work.  I stopped day school--I ran out of money quickly after that first quarter and kind of started looking for a job and I pounded the pavement--I pounded the pavement.  Fortunately, during that one semester of graduate study those two professors that I had were both professionals.  I mean they had their offices--practicing designers in Chicago, and they taught there on a part-time basis.  So--and they really got (it?)--shored up my--my skills and training and I was ready for a job, but I had a heck of a hard time getting one.  I--I uncovered--oh, I think it was almost every rock in Chicago trying to find work and people wouldn't hire me.  Just--it was--the racist thing was still very strong and I jokingly say that you know, I was the answer to anybody's--almost everybody in the business that had a shortage or an employment shortage--all they had to do was to ask me to show up and they didn't need anybody anymore (laughter).  They had all the people they needed (laughter).  You know they'd say, oh, we don't need anybody anymore we're fine.  So, in any case I did get engaged.  I got connected.  I--first, I actually did a little freelance work and that was some people that hired me on a freelance basis.  I did some toy design. and then I--there was a fellow out at Sears Roebuck and Company who--who was sympathetic to anybody that--that needed help and Carl Bjorncrantz was his name.  He was the manager of industrial design for Sears and he--I went to interview with him and he--he saw my portfolio and the strength--I was really pretty strong in furniture design because one of the professors at the Art Institute, Henry Glass, was a well known furniture designer--internationally and I did a lot of work with Henry, and Carl Bjorncrantz at Sears wanted some additional furniture support.  He had a furniture design group.  In his staff he had about four designers but he--he--he also was looking for some more creative ideas to--to supply these designers.
Speaker 2: And can you spell Bjorncrantz?
Speaker 1: B-J-O-R-N-T-R-A-N--C-R-A-N-T-Z--B-J-O-R-N-C-R-A-N-T-Z--Bjorncrantz, and he--so Carl--he let me--he--he was--wanted to employ me and I started interviewing and went through an interview and then I had to go for testing--Sears has a PR--what they call--in those days it wasn't called--it was called--it--what the heck did they call those things?  Where they hired people--unemployment--today--well whatever it was.  Personnel departments is what they call them and now they have a different name, but--so I went for testing and--and then turns out though that they had started--they would send me--one day I showed up and Carl was--was looking very uncomfortable.  I came back for another interview with him and he says, "Chuck", he says "I--I have to tell you this."  Says, "I really--I am embarrassed by it but I have to tell you that Sears has an unwritten policy against hiring blacks."  Now it took a lot for that man to say that you know.  He--he wanted to--he said you know what, but if you will, he said I'd like to hire you as a freelance designer for me and have you do work for me and bring the work in.  He said, I can't hire you in--in the inside the company and--oh, I needed a job. I mean so--I--I mean--it wasn't a matter of being proud, I was just glad that--not only to get some money, but I--I needed to do something in the field that I had worked so hard to train for.
Story_ID: 8102
Speaker 1: Once about every week or so I would come out and bring my work (laughter).  I had no car.  I was living in the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I'd get on a bus--ride 55th Street all the way to Kedzie [Avenue].  It would take me almost two hours to get out there on the bus.  I had my work under my arm and--and I'd go to Kedzie and wherever it is--Homan [Avenue]--and Arthington [Street] and Kedzie and get off the bus and walk in there with my stuff (laughter) and I'd make little models--markups and bags and--and take them in there and I was really--what it needed help--wanted help with was developing what they call KD furniture, "knockdown furniture".  Today they call it RTA, ready to assemble", but this meant shipping it flat and having the customer assemble it.  That would save space in shipping and save a lot of damage in shipping also.  So, I would create ideas and drawings and sketches and markups and--and take them in and he would then pass them on to his design team and they would develop the ideas and sell them, you know, which was fine with me.  But I did that for, oh, several months and--and I began to feel uneasy again.  I said, Jesus, I need to be in a place where somebody's watching over my shoulder.  I'm young--I'm new and I want the same benefit these other guys are having--somebody to train them--teach them and watch them, and wouldn't you know fate or God or whatever--Henry Glass called me.  He was my instructor at school--called me one day and said, "Chuck," says--"We're gonna--my partner and I've decided to separate our businesses."  He was--he was merged with a--with an architect, Lou Hebner (ph.) and they did a lot--some architectural things around the city of Chicago, buildings and homes and residences as well, and he said, "We've--we've decided--I've decided to pursue more industrial design and Lou wants to pursue more architecture and so we are gonna separate and I need some help.  I'd like to ask you if you'd come and work for me."  I says, "What time do you close?  I'll be there (laughter)," you know so I did.  I went over--Henry hired me and I went--started working for Henry, in his office and he was able to watch me and you know--really put the pieces in place and I have to tell you I was pretty good anyway by that time, but with Henry's policing I think I was doing okay.  I was really at the top of my--for my level I was--I was worth my--my salary. And then people started calling me from--people who had seen me before when I was going around and couldn't--couldn't find employment--once I got a job, Henry kept me in there at the boards and doing what I needed to do for him--I--I started getting calls from other people said, you know, I--I had just heard from so and so who said that they saw your portfolio and you seemed to be promising.  Would you mind coming over and having an interview?  And, so I'd go--I did and I got another job with--with Ed Klein and Associates, who was heavy in electronics and did a lot of stuff from radio--television stuff, but what got me in there was the furniture again, because I was strong on furniture.  In those days they were putting console television sets together and--and stereo systems and--and big pieces of furniture.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the cabinet is huge--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so yeah, and I had a lot of strength there so I--I went to work went--I took employment with Ed Klein.  I wanted--I was at a point too where I really wanted to expand--I wanted to do things in addition to furniture.  I felt that I had a pretty good handle on furniture design and Henry really did teach me a lot, and so I hated to--I was--I was reluctant to leave but I felt I had to grow.  I felt I had to go and at this point--just about this time Janet and I got married.  So I--I really you know wanted to--to get on with building a career and building a life for both of us and in fact she earned more money than I did at that time.  She was a secretary, but you know, it soon caught up with me and--and I was able to be the source of support for the family, you know, shortly.  Then I worked for Ed Klein for two or three years and actually I was his first employee.  Well I was the only employee for a while and then he began to build and add and add, and I was kind of like a senior designer in the--in the studio there and he had offices over on Michigan Avenue.  Henry's office was over on--what was then called the Furniture Mart and Henry Glass was up in the tower--it's 666 Lake Shore Drive right on the--on Lake Shore Drive across from the what's now the Olive Harvey Infiltration--Filtration Plant not infiltration plant, but it's a condo now.  I think the building is a condominium--big building.  Anyway, I--I took this job with Ed Klein who was on Ohio Street, on Ohio and Michigan Avenue, upstairs on--over the Lake Shore Bank then and--and I started with him designing things in addition to furniture.  A lot of--as I said--a lot of electronics.
Story_ID: 8103
Speaker 1: When I started work for Henry Glass as--at between the Sears [Roebuck and Company] and the Henry move, I continued to do work for Sears Roebuck at night and I would work for Henry during the day and go home and work--do the work--freelance work for Sears at night for several months and then--then I ended it and then didn't do that anymore and I--'cause Carl [Bjorncrantz] was a very, very wonderful man and he had a lot of empathy for people who--who--I don't want to say handicapped, you know (laughter)--I don't want to (laughter)--but needed help, he had a sensitivity for it. Anyway to get on with--with Ed Klein's product mix and so forth it was--it was--90 percent of his work was--was radio and television. And so I--I got really immersed in that and--and got a real solid footing and background in--in that industry. And I worked for Ed until he--his business--his firm [Ed Klein and Associates] started growing and--and I was--as I said I was really his first employee and we were in a very small room above the Lake Shore Bank there on Michigan Avenue at Ohio Street and then we began to grow and grow.  We had at one point there, probably five--four, five, six people there and I had an offer to go to another firm and it was really time for me to do that.  I had--I had learned as much as I could or was going to with Klein and Associates and--and then this other fellow was Robert Podall Associates and he was over on--just a few blocks.  All these designers at that time were very--scattered right around the river there and Michigan Avenue--at the Chicago River and so I--I went over there.  He was in the Lincoln Towers Building and started working with him and he was small too at that time.  There was one or two people there and--and he was a wonderful man to work for.  He had talents--the guy--he could draw.  I mean he--I don't know of anyone that I worked for who could draw as well as he did.  I've met some other designers along the way who've--who were good--staff people who were good, but never a--I never had a boss that was really as strong as he was. And I stayed with Bob for oh, maybe two years, three years and I got a call one day again from Sears Roebuck.  Carl Bjorncrantz called me.  He said, "Hey Chuck," he said, "I can hire you now."  I said, "Well, that's nice Carl," I says, "But I got a good job now.  I really--really don't need Sears Roebuck anymore."  I'm the--you know, I was the key man in Bob's outfit.  I was doing the estimating of the jobs and--the jobs and--and I was doing some client interaction and stuff.  He said, "Well why don't you at least come"--Carl says, "Well just come on out and talk, at least come out and talk."  So I said, "Okay."  Truth of it was, I was really kind of looking for a job in a corporation or someplace.  I had worked in these consulting firms and it's very stressful.  Those guys work all hours, day and night, weekends--I mean I'd work you know all weekend sometimes--work all night, with a couple hours sleep you know.  Small firms just have to--have to scurry and they're always under pressure 'cause if you had work in the place you had to get it out quick to make money off of it.  If you didn't have any work, you're chewing your nails wondering if you are going to have a job come Friday, you know so (laughter), it--I said, you know, and I knew guys.  By this time a lot of classmates of mine and people who've worked in other situations who worked for manufacturing companies or corporations of some kind and--and I said that's the kind of job I'd like to have, you know, where I can I not be at so much stress or worry about whether the jobs are going to (unclear). And--so I actually really did want to get on with Sears.  I went out and talked with Carl and he said "Okay, let's--let's go."  He said, "We can it do it now."  So, I interviewed again with Sears and I was the first black--African American or whatever word you want to use for it now--to be hired at Sears Roebuck as an executive.  This was in 1961, September of 1961.  It was--there was no--there were no other blacks out there--in--in--there weren't even any black secretaries working at Sears then, and--and there were a couple of African American guys there, but they were not in--in--they--they were timecard people who worked in the cafeteria--washing dishes and porters.  There were a couple of porters and some people washing dishes.  So that was--that was the start of my hookup with Sears and I stayed with Sears thirty-three years.
Speaker 2: Did--did they ever--and this may seem superfluous, but did they ever talk about the rumor that [Alvah] Roebuck was black?
Speaker 1: Yes, oh yes.  Yeah, they--they really did and--and--and in fact I've even heard American Indians claim that Roebuck was an Indian, you know--I tell you I don't really know, but he didn't look like he had any more--he probably--you know, it's very likely that he had some mixed heritage, but pictures of him--he looked like all--all the other Caucasian people to me.  He didn't look like he had--was--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it took to me too, but it's--it's an old Chicago story and the black community would always say that Roebuck was black and Sears took the business from him or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, those stories--I've heard the stories and that's--that's--so, with Sears I really developed a solid--I really became a real solid designer there 'cause I--I at that point got to know all aspects of the business.  I worked with manufacturers and with marketing firms and with marketing people within Sears--with buyers--buyers were my clients and I worked for so many, many manufacturers through out the world, as well as in this country on an array of products ranging from hearing aids to tractors, you know, to shoe soles and to you name it, hair dryers to--every--every product--I--I worked on every--at some point during my--there I had involvement with every hard line product that Sears Roebuck sold.  Batteries for automobiles, campers, tents, bicycles, lawnmowers, you just--just--you know--cameras, watches, you just name it--it's everything that they--that they--and I may--there might have been some product lines that I didn't directly design for, but after a time--after a while I began to--and this happened much later--I began to get promoted.  I got--I was the only African American that I know of that ever worked at Sears Roebuck in design.  Now they began--after I was at Sears two maybe three years they added on one or two more blacks and by--African American guys in--in you know, in buying assignments and in executive jobs--and it grew and grew and then they started hiring secretaries and so, you know.  We use to have a joke early on.  We'd say, would all the African Americans at Sears Roebuck please attend the meeting today in the telephone booth of the administration building. You know (laughter).  So, but, you know, we had to have some laughs you know, but it was three or four of us and we still--I still see some of those guys.  Some have passed on, but--but a few of them are still kicking around.  None are at Sears anymore, obviously.  In fact, but--not obviously, but there are none at Sears that--that started out that early and were involved--either encouraged to leave or left for whatever other reason.  I think I am, and I am probably one of maybe two or three of the African American guys that will retire in full retirement.  In other words, with the years and service.  There have been several groups to take early retirement and incentive retirement things, you know, to go, but I don't know of many--if--maybe one other one that--or two that--that had enough, you know, full retirement in terms of age and--and time and service.  But you know, whatever that means--not a lot.  I traveled all over the world designing products for Sears Roebuck, you know.  Japan, Mexico, South America, Canada, Europe--all--you know, Italy, France, Scandinavia, Germany and I had--I had a good--good life.
Speaker 2: This is during the heyday of Sears basically--I mean Sears was really--.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, that's right.  When Sears was really cooking.  I wanna tell you though.  I was--now I've--I've been a designer now at this station for maybe ten years or more, maybe twelve years.  Never met one other black industrial designer.  One day I picked up a magazine, 'Ebony' magazine and there's a picture of a guy in Philadelphia who's an industrial designer.  His name is Noel Mayo and--and--and he's--we're friends today.
Speaker 2: You called him up?
Speaker 1: I called him.  I went right home.  I went right home and--and--called--I called him--called him and said, "Hey, good to see you," and he and I still have a friendship you know.  We meet.  I see him at a lot of the OBD Conferences.  That's Organization of Black Designers.  They have a national organization that meets nationally every year or two.  Maybe--if they don't do it every year, they'll do it every other year or something at some city around the United States and now this includes--this--this organization goes--it includes all kinds of designers, you know.  Interior designers, book designers, fashion designers, architects, industrial designers.  You name it, they--they all come and it's a really wonderful experience for me.  I'm just so happy to see so many of them.  Now, I see you know--I see twenty or thirty black industrial designers.  I mean I could find twenty there, you know at every conference that I go to.
Story_ID: 8104
Speaker 1: The whole country is using so many more designers today than they were, you know as I mentioned there were only five schools when I started--started out--today I don't know how many schools there are, but there's rarely a state in the country that doesn't have at least one school and many states have two or three.
Speaker 2: Do you think this is an aspect of--of the workforce that most people find invisible?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't know about it.
Speaker 2: They're surrounded by design--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Don't know about it.  They don't know where it comes from.
Speaker 2: --Everything you use was designed by someone.
Speaker 1: You're right. Everything you use is designed.  I go into peoples homes and I've stopped it now, but I could see things that I've done, you know and--and I used to say, "Oh, you have one of those"!  I say, "I worked on it."  "You did, that thing stopped working."  I said, "Oh!"  I really didn't work on it. I worked all my life.  (Laughter) I got--you know, I don't do that anymore, but I go in there and I--in many homes and see products that I--that I've designed or--or worked on, and so, you know, it's--it is, as you said, almost an invisible profession, but it's--it's getting more and more visibility and--and one of the things that's doing it is--is the competition from offshore. Even--and American manufacturers have to have it now to be competitive.  You can't go out with this ugly product and--and expect people to buy it just because you made it any more, you know.  I mean if it doesn't--if it doesn't function well, if it's not nice to look at and easy to operate, you know, you're chances of having a sale is not--not as good. But you know, a lot of people I've heard that you know--credit has been given to this field of industrial design for helping the United States get up out of the Depression of the '30s [1930s] because prior to then products were just made.  If the work people needed it then they bought it no matter what--what it did.  I mean if it was difficult to operate--it was like that product you were talking about that you saw, a Russian product and--and--and I feel a little bit facetious but it wouldn't be probably impossible to find some nice product like a range or--or a television sitting with a big old nut right in front and a garter pin running through it (laughter), 'cause by and large they--they really didn't care.  They were pressed to sell it, cause people just needed whatever they could get. But then industrial design began to make products easier to use--make it more customer friendly, make it more pleasant more appealing and people opened their purses and bought--bought it at a faster rate.  So that's kind of a thing that I--I think has not given--the field was not given enough credit for--is--is what it is--to help the American economy do.
Speaker 2: Now how does it make you feel when you--it must be--I mean to be an industrial designer, designing products that people use every day--it must be like living in a different world 'cause you see the world differently than other people?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) You do.  You really do.  Industrial design and I--I think probably in some other design disciplines--even architecture.  You--it's a--it's a--it's a lifestyle.  You live it.  You really live it.  You don't memorize it and read it and tuck it away, you--it's a part of your life and you really do--if you're--if you're good at--that's--that's where you come to a place in life where it's part of your living--you eat and sleep it and breathe it and--and it's very comfortable, a very comfortable place to be.  It's a very honest, straightforward thing.  You can't mislead people too long with a--very well with a designer suit, (laughter) they'll find you out very quickly and so it's--it's a good honest kind of thing to do.
Story_ID: 8105
Speaker 1: I wanna go back a little bit to my career with--with Sears [Roebuck and Company] and I had some experiences there that along the way--that were pretty tough that involved racial things.  You know, but I learned how to just keep going and--and kept--get through those without a lot of upset and concern, although at one point I did go to the hospital with an ulcer (laughter) early on, but I--I learned to--to handle-I learned a little of these things.  So, I could cite some incidences but I don't know if they really would be of any use to anybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they probably would because people are looking at this as history and it's hard for people to--I think to come to grips with a generality. So, I mean, so you know, so I always encourage people to tell their stories.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Well, I can give a couple--a couple real true, true stories
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) We wanna hear the good and the bad the good ending.
Speaker 1: There was--there was a time when I---I worked--the industrial design department was you know in a laboratory called Sears Development Testing Laboratory--Evaluation Laboratory and in this laboratory was hundreds--was four hundred people and all different--there's a lot of different disciplines represented there.  There was industrial engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, all kinds of chemistry, physicists, home economists, all these people who interacted with product, 'cause Sears really did in--in those--in there--build a fine product.  You probably could not buy another product in America at a better value than Sears.  You--you paid a buck for it, you really got a buck's value out of it.  Not too sure I can that's true today, but from the 1940s through 1970s that was probably true.  You would be hard pressed to beat--to beat your value.  The--in any case we would test the products.  They still do some testing I'm sure, but we would actually use-test these products and one day I--I had a chance to test--or an opportunity to test some automobile tires on my car.  They would actually put them on and ask people in the lab to drive them around because they were close to the chemists and the tire engineers and we'd talk frankly openly about our experiences with these products.  So I--on this one particular occasion I brought my car around to have the tires mounted on my car and it was early in the morning, just before work and--and I drove, I had to go through a little area where you had to get back to the tire lab--testing lab or the tire lab to have the tires mounted and as I was on my way back out of the alley I had to walk back through to go around to the front door to come in the building, the flashing lights came--police was--the security people all came and said, "Hold it, hold it, where are you going?"  I said, "I'm going to my office."  He said, "Going to your office, are you?"  I said, "Yes," and he said "Where is your office?"  I said, "It's on the third floor of this building, you can almost see the window from here."  He said, "Well", he said, "Let's see your identification."  So I did, I had my I.D. in my pocket I showed it to him.  He said, "Well, okay, sorry we bothered you but there was some guy up there from the window on the next level floor up there and the buyer said that he saw some well dressed-black guy walking between the buildings.  He looked suspicious and we thought we'd better come back here and check him out."  Now, I had been working at Sears ten years, you know, probably was longer than this guy had who had called--called security on me.  Another--another story that--was some materials missing in this laboratory.  This--we were in a separate building and on the floor above where I worked was a materials laboratory where they kept different kinds of materials and some of it was very valuable stuff.  Well some of it started disappearing and course I--not of course, but I did become a suspect. And so one day I got--I had a call from Henry Glass again  He said, "Charles--Chuck," he said "Are you gonna leave Sears?".  I said "Why, not that I know of."  He said, "Well if you are I'd like you to come back and work for me again."  I said, "Well thank you Henry, but I really wasn't planning to go anyplace but if you know something that--that I know I would like to know about it."  He said, "Well I'm getting calls here from some detective agency out in Elmhurst asking about your work history." And I said, "Oh, no kidding."  He said, "Yeah.  It's a detective agency out here". He said "And I--I thought maybe you were going to leave Sears."  I said "Well, Henry, I don't--I really didn't know about that."  So then I got--somehow I called this agency--no, I went to--I went to one of my bosses and--and he was the assistant manager of the department.  He was a big guy, big, big guy, big John. And I told him, I said "You know I really am upset and I'm angry that you guys have put a detective agency to tail me and question me about something."  I didn't even--at this point know that something had been missing from the laboratory.  But it turns out that they had also been checking the females--and they went after one black guy and some women.  They're gonna check all us before they suspect anybody else of missing these things.  So, these women back there who were in the home economics lab had also been investigated by--by this detective agency.  I said--I said, "I really don't like it."  He said, "Oh, it must've been personnel--must have done that."  I said, "Well you check on it."  I said, "I--I really am--I don't like it."  I said "I've been working in this company over ten years now and all of a sudden here you are gonna have somebody check me."  He said, "Okay, we'll--we'll check into it."  Well I went back to my office and about a half an hour later he called me in his office.  He said well, he said "That was--that was a mistake.  We--we shouldn't have done that."  He said "I'll tell you what we want to give you an increase in pay."  They gave me the largest raise I ever got in my whole history of working for that company and--that day, you know.  Now, things had changed.  See, initially when Carl [Bjorncrantz] hired me on, Carl could tell me anything.  He didn't have to tell me this, but the nature of the state of life in the--in the U.S. at that time was--you--you--they didn't have to explain why they didn't want you there.  They just said you black, we don't want you here.  But now civil rights and the Martin Luther King [Jr.]  thing happened--we had the riots and then there were some issues and now we have civil rights in place and--and now people are getting a little sensitive to what--how they treat you.  Now they still don't want to treat you right, but they didn't--so, that's another story that I think is worth telling, you know.  There were others, I mean I could go on and on and on, but it was a--you know, I--I think this will probably do for now.
Story_ID: 8106
Speaker 1: Civil rights agitation in the '60s [1960s] really changed things at Sears [Roebuck and Company] and at a number of different levels?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Oh, no question, absolutely, absolutely, no question.  Oh, not only at Sears it did it all over the country. I--I know with that--that agitation or whatever you want to call it--prevented those riots and things.  Right after that a lot of young African American guys decided to form an organization.  We were all entry-level people in--in the--in--in the corporate life around Chicago [Illinois] and we formed a group and used to meet every Sunday morning at the--on South--it wasn't called King Drive.  It was called South Park--at about 48th Street at a old fraternity house--a Sigma [Pi Phi] house or something over there and we'd get together there and strategize how we could confront the chairmans of boards of these corporations about some upward mobility because all of us--all of these people there are entry level and are not about to move anywhere.  They just stay in these entry level jobs, and--and so with those--with those efforts--and we would put committees together and go and sit across the table from the chairmans of the major corporations in Chicago and guys started getting promotions and going up in to the corporations and that move--that--that worked.  It really did.  It was a very peaceful way to handle it.  We'd just tell them and would just try to lay the facts out there as simply as we could that we felt that there would be no mobility unless somebody helped us with some upward mobility.  Help, and it happened.  A lot of people got promoted during that time including at Sears Roebuck.  You know, Sears was probably just another company like all the others.  I'm not--I just happen to know it because I--I was working there for so long.  In any case, one more story.  I go to--as I said I was at Sears thirty something years and--and after we moved from the West Side to the Sears Tower, I--I was servicing some buying departments that had been relocated to New York City and also I would travel a lot to Japan.  I was traveling frequently to the Far East to do design work.  And on a couple of trips right close together there, I was--I was--I was in New York and this guy who's the president--vice president of the New York group saw me. He says, "Chuck," and he knew me from years--through the years.  He said, "I've just heard that you are gonna be the new manager of industrial design at Sears Roebuck."  I said, oh, I said, I said, "Thanks, I really didn't even know anything about that."  He said, "Well--well, I think so."  He says that Carl--Al is retiring--he's the manager now.  He says your name is--is being talked about.  A few weeks later, I'm in Japan and I'm in Tokyo and--and I meet the guy who is the vice president of--of the East--of the Far East Territory--Far East--Far East and he says, "Chuck, I hear--I hear you are going to be the next industrial design manager."  I said, "Well, great." I said "I don't know anything about it. No one's told me anything yet."  So, I am beginning now to believe maybe something is really going to happen, you know, that--and I felt that I could handle it, you know, very well, in fact probably better than the people that was there, but that's probably not uncommon for something to think you can do the job better than your boss.  I--so I came back and right about that time almost that same week the federal government--oh, I know why this was about to happen.  The assistant manager, and the manager were gonna leave at the same.  The manager was leaving and the assistant manager was going to have to leave because of his age.  At that time you had to leave corporate America, at least you had to leave Sears Roebuck at age sixty unless you were requested to leave.  Well, they had already, you know they put the good-old-boy thing in practice and they can request whoever they wanna request.  Well they--the assistant manager had already lived out his request to age sixty three.  So, it was time for him to go.  I mean, he had no other option so that was going to leave the whole--the entire management thing open and somehow the federal government at that point said this is age discrimination--pushing people out.  You cannot put--force people to retire at age sixty five or whatever it is they can as long as they want to.  So, they--they scurried around and--and took the assistant manager and made him the manager--the guy who had it--'cause I didn't get the job, which was just another--another day.  I didn't know--I was--I had no guarantee I was going get it, but it was--was a chance.  It went on and went on.  A few years later we moved into the Sears Tower.  No, this was when we were already in the Sears Towers.  But some movement took place there that--that the senior vice president of merchandising had a plan that he wanted to explore and look into the buying activity.  He was a little suspect of what the buyers were doing and that there was some playing going on amongst the ranks down there that was not up on the up and up, or not as--that he couldn't discover--couldn't discern what was happening.  So he developed a thing--a system for looking into their closets and it was called a merchandise review or quality value review and--and he'd have all their support departments take the product line of the buyer and analyze it against competition and--and look at the pricing, the quality, you know all the aesthetics, everything about the product, the manufacturer, the distribution and to--to-- so that he was satisfied that everything was on the up and up.  Well, it required a shift.  At this time they also shifted some of the other management--organizational management--things changed and they made groups of managers--they made merchandise groups within the company and I--I think it was four or five--six groups and they restructured the support groups to support these groups and I was taken out design and made a manager of a support group they called them some market--what do they call them?  GLM?  Group laboratory managers. So I have managed all the disciplines in the laboratory for technical support for a specific merchandise group which in my case included automotive--automotive, sporting goods, food, something else, I don't know what.
Story_ID: 8107
Speaker 1: I was a group laboratory manager for a merchandising group [at Sears Roebuck and Company] and I did--I stayed in that job--I don't know two to three years and I really didn't like it.  I mean it was not my cup of tea.  It was the management stuff and I'm--doing a soft-shoe dance between things that are like ghosts I couldn't get my hand on, it wasn't tangible and the people that I was working with didn't want to--didn't really want to--to do what was asked of them and people were doing it--Farr (ph.) didn't want it done and I was really between a rock and a hard place there and I didn't want to--and one of--just prior to going into this job, however, they had divided the management responsibility.  The other guy retired, who--who--who got--who succeed the manager that got the job I thought I was gonna get.  He retired and they divided the management between three people.  Myself, and two other designers.  They were senior designers.  We were senior designers and we had groups, small groups of guys that reported to us.  Then I was pulled out to--out of the design group to--to be this group laboratory manager where I stayed for a couple of years, and I--one of the other managers that was left from the original three, his health began to fail and--and I thought maybe there's an opportunity for me to go back to that job.  So I went to the national manager.  I asked him could I return to the design group, which he didn't have to do he could have just said, you know you've got a job.  If you don't like it I'm sorry, but he did allow me to go back into industrial design as--as a manager so at this point now there two of us managing the design group and that went along for a year or so and the guy--the other guy's wife passed away and he decided shortly after that, that he didn't want to work anymore.  He was wealthy, independently wealthy.  Anyway he really didn't have to ever have to work.  I knew a guy from school and he's a nice enough fellow but he's--he's, not but and decided that he--he was time to go--leave--leave this.  So at that point I became the manager of the design group, the only manager for--and I stayed that way for several years up until 1990 oh, it must have been about '92 [1992] or '91 [1991].  They moved to a--they--they--there was a movement that actually started in the '90s [1990s] of downsizing.  Corporations all over the country started downsizing and downsizing and they would come back through every few months and--and ask us to cut some people from our staff you know and tell us--really not ask 'cause they'd tell us to cut them, and--and so these groups started diminishing and diminishing and diminishing and it came down to about four people--four of us left and we weren't doing anything like what we had done in the past.  We weren't really doing any designing anymore, we--now we are trying to coordinate the design efforts that were now being done by outside people and was--was virtually it was almost impossible to do that but we--we tried and then another wave came through, and we cut--now we're down to two people.  Pretty soon we're down to one.  Me.  Now isn't that ironic you know, here I'm left.
Speaker 2: The only one in the beginning--
Speaker 1: The only one left after all that.
Speaker 2: --now you're the only one left--.
Speaker 1: The last one in and--and I survived everybody else and--and--and there were twenty three--at one point I was managing--I had twenty-two industrial designers and eight model makers and lot of those guys, well probably five or six of them were--were much older than I was, but that kind of the irony of--of a thing.  In any case we went to Hoffman Estates [Illinois] and they relocated the whole Sears Tower thing.  I mean, not the building, but the people--the administrative--the--Sears main offices and--I stayed out there about a year, but in the meantime my wife [Janet Harrison] got very ill--my--my wife was diagnosed with cancer and so now I am looking desperately to come out of there.  I really--really wanted to come and be home with her and take--do what I could to help make her life as comfortable.  She had a type of cancer that was--no one has ever been cured of.  It was multiple myeloma.  I don't know if you've ever heard of it.  It's cancer of the bone marrow and so I kept trying to come out and they'd tell me no, you can't go we--we--they'd give me some song and dance why they wouldn't give me one of those packages.  Well, people were getting these packages and I wanted one.  So finally in 1993 they had a big sweeping package that--that they just placed out to everybody and they could--they could not be selective with it and I got a hold of one and came out, and in 1993 I retired, but I was--I had--by this time had been working out in the new location in Hoffman Estates and at that point I said goodbye to Sears Roebuck and that's kind of the way it was.
Story_ID: 8108
Speaker 1: I stayed to, you know, to attend to my--to be there with my wife [Janet Harrison], and I had a call from the University of Illinois asking me if I would come over and help them out, that they were in a little bit of a pinch that they had a professor from in Europe someplace that couldn't get back into the country and they wondered if I'd come over and teach for a semester to help them out.  And I--I'd teach one class--met a couple of days a week. So I said you know, I'll give it a try, it might be good for me to get out of the house for a while and I did and I liked it.  I enjoyed really working with the students.  I had never taught before, even though I, you know had an advanced degree, but it was--my--all my family were educators.  My brother, father, uncles, aunts, you know all those people were educators, but I sort of broke the mold.  Cousins, well, they're all educators. But after I did it I really liked giving something back, seeing the students develop and really, you know, come around, and so I taught over there for--up until last semester.  I--so from '93 [1993] to ninety--to 2001--2002 all the way through, yeah.  I taught over there and--and it was good.  I had a chance to see a lot of students develop and go and go on to great things.  School is rewarding.  You know, really nice, a nice life.  My wife in the--in the meantime did--didn't--you know she struggled, she gave it good fight.  They diagnosed her--with the multiple myeloma today they don't--as I said, no one's ever been cured and they--they say that it is treatable when they do treat it, but the normal life span is two to five years.  You're lucky to get five years out of it.  My wife made eight years which was rare, extremely rare and in the meantime I--I've managed to--I was glad I was teaching. I think that really helped me in a time of going through some tough--some tough struggles there after--after she, well during the time she was sick but even after she--she died and the grieving period was rough.  In fact I'm still in it, you know, so I'm coming up three years now.  The--I was in--the university just terminated my contract so I won't be there any more.  They said that the state of Illinois is having budgetary problems and they--they cannot retain any more adjunct professors.  So, so, well, wouldn't you know last week I got a call from Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois] and some guy asked me if I could come down and teach a course in industrial design.  So, I'm gonna do it.  Just 'cause I like, you know, I don't--I want to be paid but I don't care for you know, what the salary is.  So, I just--I think it's been a great life.  My wife is--was dynamite. I mean she really added a dimension to my whole being and was just phenomenal.
Story_ID: 8109
Speaker 1: I have a great son.  He lives out in California now.  He--he's a composer.  He writes music for the film industry out there, but he's still associated with Chicago.  He comes here fairly often.  He's assistant--associate director of the Chicago Jazz Orchestra, and they do a winter or--or a season subscription series of jazz and he does most of their arranging and writing and--and their transcriptions, and so he comes in for their concerts, whenever they do a concert he comes in and he also performs with them, although he's not much of a--he doesn't perform on a regular basis.  He's--he most of his in--90 percent of his income comes from his composing.
Speaker 2: What does he play?  How does he perform when he plays?
Speaker 1: When he--when he performs he plays the guitar.
Speaker 2: Guitar?  Okay.
Speaker 1: But he, you know he can do very well on some other instruments. Keyboards he uses a lot when he's writing.  Piano and he does very--pretty good with a piano and he plays some bass, you know, he--he plays a few other instruments--trumpet, yeah and fluglehorn, but he's--is--when he's really serious on the job he's--he plays guitar.  He has--you know he's pretty well known in the industry now.  He's, you know, he use--when he was her he did a lot of jingles--jingles for commercials.
Speaker 2: What's--what's his name?  (Laughter).  What's his name?  Give us his name.
Speaker 1: Oh, his name is same as mine--Charles Harrison.  Charley Harrison is his name and we just recently added another Charles Harrison 'cause he has a son now.  So I have a grandson of six months old and--and my son sometimes calls him 'IV' for number four, roman numeral four (laughter), but he's--it's great.  So, that's kind of my story.
Story_ID: 8110
Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy is, I guess in terms of this design work.
Speaker 2: You mean Charles Harrison having lived as an industrial designer.  What--what did I do?  Well, I--I really believe that I--I put in--put--I've made available to humanity--to human beings some products that made their life better.  I made it--I made them happier and pleasant.  I made products that are easy to use, that are more pleasant to look at, that--and I've been able to be involved in--in reducing the cost of products to making them available at a lower cost and--and I--I hope that's what I've done--I've done you know is that I've given something to--to the human--to humanity, at least that's what I hope.
Story_ID: 8111
Speaker 1: You also have a history of--I know--know you're involved in some union hall agitation too.  What--what was that about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well actually it sounded like a union, but it really is a--I'm involved with several volunteer groups since I've retired and actually even before I retired I use to be involved with a lot of civic things, but the thing that you remember is the--the is this group called NARSE, the National Association of Retired Sears Employees, and this group came into existence to resist the decision made by Arthur Martinez who was the chairman of the board of Sears [Roebuck Company] at the time of this decision to take away our life insurance plan from us, and he found a way legally to--to go and--and renege on the benefits--on our benefit plans and--and so he's reduced every retiree's life insurance to five thousand dollars.  Now, five thousand dollars is--is something, but we paid for that by--I'm sure that was deducted from our--from our insurance--from our payrolls and we were promised those benefits when we came to work from Sears as a benefit.  When you leave Sears you will have paid up life insurance and so he--he managed to get the legal guys to find a way to legally do it.  We--we had--so this group came to resist that decision and we went out, we went on the road.  We went marching, demonstrating.  We placed class action suits against--against--against the organization, against Sears Roebuck and--we would--called the old yellow shirts.  We had yellow tee shirts--printed on there--"Sears unfair to retirees", and we'd show up everywhere he went on a corporate airplane or--or we'd show up at the airport in these yellow shirts of retirees--there's eighty some thousand of use out there across the country.
Speaker 1: So there was nowhere to hide?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so wherever he's going, there's gonna be some retirees and we'd come out with these shirts showing our dissatisfaction--displeasure with his decision.  We'd show up at all the corporate meetings of shareholders' meetings and demonstrate.  Well, I was marching up and down Peachtree Street in Georgia carrying a casket on my shoulder and my sign, you know.  I went--went places and (unclear). We'd hire airplanes to fly around overhead at the meetings with banners saying, "Sears unfair to employees" and we did a lot of things, and--and it was a good fight and well we didn't get nearly the settlement out of it that we had hoped.  Martinez left, retired with bundles of money--additional bundles of millions of dollars that, you know, that he said that he couldn't afford to have the employees, the--the retirees couldn't--said the company couldn't pay the retirees. But--we--so we went through a lot of lengthy battles--legal battles, you know in the courts and so that's what that was all about and those pictures, in some of those pictures you will see of standing out picketing, it would be in front of either a Sears store someplace or--or a shareholders' meeting or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have--I do wake for up a cause if there's a fight and it's a fight I believe in, I'll go out and take it on, and I felt very, very serious about this thing 'cause it was--as I see it and--and I think without any doubt it's just an unfair blow that we got and--and beyond that I felt particularly attached to some people that I am aware of who--who are in nursing homes.  Who fought for the--put up their retirement plans as collateral against their care, so that when and if they pass away, well not if, but when they pass away that the--that the nursing home would be able to recover their life insurance benefit to pay for their care.  Now, here comes Arthur Martinez and Sears Roebuck--can take away.  Now, what's gonna happen to these poor people in these nursing homes, you know.  Sit them out under the tree someplace near a fire plug or something?  And that bothered me.  Really--still does and so I felt it worth--worth me getting up off my duff and going out and--I mean I couldn't go punch the guy in the nose but I could carry a sign (laughter).  I could carry a sign expressing my dissatisfaction.
Story_ID: 8112
Speaker 1: You have a lot of life left, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.  I'd like to--I'd just like to be remembered as old Chuck Harrison that tried to--wherever possible to help somebody, and whether it is with design or otherwise, so you know.  At this station, I just--I'd like to use my remaining time being of service to--to people, in a constructive way, obviously, and if--if I get a call to do some designing--that some design that would people, and I do occasionally.  I--for a home. There's a home in Evanston for the severely disabled, called Over the Rainbow Association, and I'm tied to that and I--I have designed equipment and things to go in there that give those people who are in wheelchairs and have disabilities more independence and I--those things just--just lighten me right up (laughter).  I can see a smile--there are people who--who have never been able to some of the things without help that they can now do with the aid of some of the devices that I was able to--to contribute to and some of it I didn't do alone.  In fact most of it I did in a team with other people but I had a hand in it and that's--and that's enough for me.  That's all I need.  I--I think that's why I enjoy teaching those students is to see the student light up or be able to do things that--and to also contribute to--to the betterment of the rest of human beings.  Plus, I'd like to think I'm a pretty simple guy.  I--I really don't wear too many faces or disguises, you know.  I may get in a pinch where I have to use a little fancy footwork, but not--not often.  I usually come pretty straight across the plate, and so that's the way I'd like to go away from here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just being an honest guy.
