Story_ID: 482976
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Irma Crayton [Irma Hall Crayton], Addie Carroll [ph.] and Briana Spears [ph.] are observing.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: My name is Irma, I-R-M-A, Dolores, D-O-L-O-R-E-S, Player, P-L-A-Y-E-R, Hall, H-A-L-L [HistoryMaker Irma P. Hall].
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: June 3rd, 1935.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Beaumont, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is our occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a professional actress.
Speaker 1: And tell me the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Dallas, Texas, the museum of African--the African Museum [sic. African American Museum in Dallas] (laughter), that's all.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 12th, 2008.
Story_ID: 482977
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) red.
Speaker 1: And what about a favorite food, what do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Rice, (laughter) that's my favorite food.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: And what about vacations, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And tell me, do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: I have, I guess I--yeah I have one that I guess you could say--it's something that my grandmother said, told me and I use that to live by and she told me that when you're born you're like an empty vase, and as you grow people put flowers into your vase that determines what you'll be and 'til you get to an age where you have to empty your vase into other vases, 'cause you don't wanna leave here with your vase still full, and so I tried to do that (laughter).
Story_ID: 482978
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, your family and your ancestry, and I would like to talk about your mother.  Can you tell me your mother's name, spell it for me and tell me where and when she was born, if you know?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Josephine Thomas Player, and she was born in Tyler, Texas in 1915.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifteen [1915]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she talk about her growing up in Tyler, Texas at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell, share some of the stories she told you about?
Speaker 2: Well, she came from a large family; there were twelve of them. And when she was born there were about six, six or seven of them still at home, and she use to tell me--they, they lived near Texas College in Tyler so my mother and a lot her sisters and brothers went to normal school there, and--what kinds of things, like--?
Speaker 1: Did, did they live--where, did they live on a farm, did they live in the city?
Speaker 2: They lived in town. Tyler was a small town then; it was not very large, it was a college town but it was a town.  I believe, I'm not sure when, when all the various colleges, but one of the reasons that her parents had come to Tyler was because the college there, because her mother wanted her kids to be well educated so they had come to Tyler I guess about 1900, yeah.  His--her father, my, my mother's father was a gandy dancer, he worked on the railroad and he was with--
Speaker 1: He was a gandy dancer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me what that is?
Speaker 2: They work on the railroad and had something to do with laying track I think (laughter) and this was--I'm not exactly sure what all it is, I just know that he--that, that, that's what he was (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: Tell me your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Alex Thomas.
Speaker 1: Do you know where he was born?
Speaker 2: In Louisiana, but I'm not exactly sure where.
Speaker 1: And your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother name was--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mary Elizabeth Griffin [Mary Thomas], and she was from Timpson, Texas.  It's a small town in Texas, near Louisiana.  I've never been there but--
Speaker 1: And your grandparents, where did they live?
Speaker 2: From what I have been able to find out, for a number of years they lived in Louisiana because a number of my mother's older brothers and sisters were born in Louisiana and she had sisters and brothers who were as much as twenty years older than she was (laughter) so and there were about five of them that were born in Louisiana.  I don't know if any were born in Timpson or not, so I know that my--that Mary and Alex did live there, and I believe, from what I've been able to find out too, that Alec may have been a twin because my mother used to say twins ran in the family and I do know that my mother had a set of sisters who were twins, and one of them died, so and that's, that's about it and they--but as I said before, they moved from Timpson, Texas to Tyler, Texas.  My mother was born in Tyler, several of--and the younger brothers and sisters were born in Tyler.
Story_ID: 482979
Speaker 1: They grew up, a very close-knit family.  S- said we always had someone to play with.  My, my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] never worked in the fields, but she--her some of her other brothers and sisters did, and my grandmother [Mary Thomas] did, especially after her husband [Alex Thomas] died, my---he died when mother was ten years old and my--so she had, still had children at home to take care of and, and had to come up with some novel ideas of doing that, but they were really encouraged to go to school.  Education was the most important thing, yes.
Speaker 2: What, how much education did your mother--what grade level did she achieve?
Speaker 1: My mother finally went to college, finally she finished college, but she was a freshman in college at the same time when my daughter [Irma Hall Crayton] was a freshman in college, because she had promised her mother that she would finish college so she did in Chicago [Illinois], and I'm, I'm not exactly sure if, if, if it was the college (laughter), the name of the school in, in Chicago where she went.  I know she went to Kennedy-King [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois], I know that, and I do know that she worked teaching in an alternative school, teaching reading to young people there.  That's my mother, but her--yes?
Speaker 2: So your, your grandmother and your--?
Speaker 1: My grandmother never went to school a day in her life; this is why education was so very important to her.  She also was influenced by working with Marcus Garvey and his stand on education you know.  It was very important, she did not agree that we should go back to Africa because she said no we had invested too much in this land, but she learned to read and write from her husband, and her children taught her to read and write.  I understand that my grandfather, who died when my mother was ten, so I never met him, that he was well educated.  I'm not sure exactly how much education he had either.
Story_ID: 482980
Speaker 1: I want you to describe your mother [Josephine Thomas Player] to me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Beautiful (laughter), my mother was short I guess by today's standards, she was about 5'3" and she was dark brown-skinned like I am and she had very thick course long hair, extremely long at times (laughter) in fact, and would get on her nerves because she said she was tender-headed so she wanted to cut it off, so cut it couple of times but--she was very interested in education and etiquette correctness.  She was very generous and I can remember that--I think they got--both my grandparents on those--either side, my grandmothers [Mary Thomas and Carrie Willis Player] believed that life should be about service.  So I can remember my mother always finding ways to do something for someone else making fruit baskets, and passing them out, and different things like that for kids.  My mother was very politically conscious and aware she had me working in campaign offices and things like that when I was a kid (laughter) getting coffee and emptying trash baskets just so I could be in the atmosphere and she always worked with YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] (laughter), and she's laughed a lot, she smiled a lot, smiled all the time, you know (laughter) and she--I guess because she had been told that she could not have children, and then I came along, she was very much interested in me being exposed to as many different things as she could, so.  When my father [Samuel Player V] was not with us because he was at his job, he was a musician, my mother still would take me places and show me things.  The earliest thing that I can remember about my mother, I was very, very young.  I must've been about two or three years old.  The reason I say because when I was three I was in school the first time.  So, and I remember my mother teaching me how to turn flips (laughter).  She would, yeah spend a long time with me, and I also remember her because she lived with the people that she worked for.  I can remember her coming on Sundays and if I had been good she would give me a, a Hershey's Kiss, I can remember the--it was huge then to me this huge, big piece of silver candy that I would lick on to try and make it last, and that was--yeah.  Things I--and my mother was very, very religious yeah.
Speaker 1: And what church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And God was really real to her.  I'm--my mother was Methodist until, excuse me, until I was about two or three years old, I think.  I could--I remember her taking catechism classes and she became Catholic.  So my mother was Catholic and my mother went to Mass every day, every day.
Story_ID: 482981
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, and tell me his name, spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Samuel, S-A-M-U-E-L, Phelps, P-H-E-L-P-S, Player, P-L-A-Y-E-R [Samuel Player V], and he was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, and he was a musician and a mechanic.  He was a mechanic because he grew up in his father's garage (laughter) so he learned it from him, and he wanted to play some instrument.  His mother was a music teacher, so she gave him the down payment for his, his first instrument, was a C melody saxophone and then he would pay on it and go down to the store, music store where it was, he told me, and practice.  Otherwise, his time was spent in school and in the garage with his father and, and as a young man he was the, the oldest and the only boy.  He had three sisters, so.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, his sisters' names were Beatrice [Beatrice Player], Mattie, M-A-T-T-I-E [Mattie Player], and Vivian [Vivian Player], yes, and Vivian was the oldest.  Aunt Beatrice was the middle sister and Aunt Mattie was the oldest--was the youngest. She's only eleven years older than I am (laughter) so I can remember asking her if she was a lady or a girl (laughter) 'cause she would play with me, yes.
Speaker 1: What other stories did your father share about his growing up?
Speaker 2: He said he had to work, and he had to help advertise his father's place of business, so his shirts had Sam Player's Garage [ph.] on the back of them (laughter), but he always wanted to, like I said play an instrument for several reasons for--one, he felt that as a musician it was a way out of from where he was to do something else, and he was raised to be like the, the prince of the family that--he was in command after his father, so he always, he was raised to be very responsible, and his father was strict with him he said, stricter than he was with the girls because he had more to do, he had responsibility, but he wasn't harsh but he was just very strict with him, yes.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My father's father (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Father, yes.
Speaker 2: My father's father's name was also Samuel, the same exact as his.  He was Samuel IV [Samuel Player IV], my father was Samuel V, so it, it that's helped me a lot in tracing back.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: On my father's side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your father's mother [sic. grandmother]?
Speaker 2: His--her name was Maggie Adger [Margaret Adger Player], and she was also from Louisiana.  All of these people came from either Caddo Parish [Louisiana] or Bossier [Bossier Parish, Louisiana].  I think my grandfather was born in, in Benton, Louisiana, but they came from Plain Dealing [Louisiana], Benton, around in that part of North Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Your grandfather was Sam Player IV (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) IV, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And his wife was Maggie or Carrie, Carrie?
Speaker 2: Carrie Beatrice.
Speaker 1: Willis?
Speaker 2: Carrie Beatrice Willis [Carrie Willis Player], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so your great-grandfather was Sam Player III [Samuel Player III] is that right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yes, yes and his--
Speaker 1: His wife was Mag--
Speaker 2: Maggie Adger, yes.
Speaker 1: And, now do you know anything about your grandmother's mother and father, Carrie Beatrice--
Speaker 2: Carrie Beatrice Willis?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I just know that her father and his brother were undertakers.  They had a funeral home [Willis and Hebert Undertakers and Embalmers] in, in Galveston, Texas for a while.  I'm not sure where else they had--I know they were undertakers, they were--yeah.
Speaker 1: And his name--your great-grandfather (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His--my great-grandfather's name was Robert T. Willis [ph.] and his brother's name was Columbus Willis, and--
Speaker 1: And your grandmother--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --great-grandmother's?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother's name was Mattie Morris [ph.], and I have not--it was rumored that she was part Cherokee, part black, I'm not sure though 'cause I haven't--I've been researching but I haven't had--she died when my grandmother was a small child.  I have pictures of her and I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was there any talk of any of your ancestors being in slavery?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, I--that, I heard that Mattie Morris was and that--
Speaker 1: That she was a slave?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that she had been a slave, and she'd been born in slavery and my--and Samuel one of the Sam Players (laughter) had been a slave, yeah and Maggie Adger, yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 482982
Speaker 1: There were a lot of relatives--I had a quite a few relatives around who had been slaves when I was a very small girl 'cause I used to ask them questions about it.  My mother [Josephine Thomas Player] had an uncle who was then about--oh, he was almost ninety years old (laughter), so--and he had been a slave and he lived in, in Houston, Texas but we would, we would see him occasionally and he would write letters and, and I'd--and his name was John Griffin [ph.], but at the time I, I didn't ask him a lot of questions but yeah they would tell me what he was like 'cause I'd, I'd ask questions.  What was it like, what did you play (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do, do you remember anything that they told you?  Do you remember anything that they told you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that it was very harsh--my, my mother told me that her, her father [Alex Thomas], her, that her father's sister had very, had come to visit them, and she had had very harsh treatment because she was mulatto and I don't know whose child she was, but the lady of the house would pull her hair out by the roots so she had bald spots and she always wore her head covered, but I, I haven't been able to even find her name.  I didn't--everyone's gone so there's not many people for me to ask them, but I remember all of the other stories that my mother has told me, they had been so, so.
Speaker 2: You remember you said, you remember some of the other stories?
Speaker 1: Yes, I remember my--them telling me that, that my great-great-grandfather had, had been a blacksmith, and, and my great-grandfather was a blacksmith, my grandfather was a blacksmith until cars got real popular and then he changed over and, be- you know and was, but I remember yeah them telling me that they--how--some things that you hear not, not just that way.  For instance, it--my grandfather was a, was--well he was a blacksmith, his wife was a house servant, but she was very dark, that all of the house servants were not very light.  That was one thing, so they said no, that's not so because some of them--it depended on different skills that they had.  I remember them telling me that about how they got--some of my great aunts and uncles telling me about how they were--received new clothes at Christmastime they--when would celebrate that, that's, they had a day off, half a day off, something they got.  I'm not too sure anymore, but that's when they would get clothes and they would--they remembered that, they'd get new clothes and what they ate and in--
Speaker 2: What did they eat?
Speaker 1: --(laughter) in Louisiana how they would go--crawdad, crawfish and they'd tie some, a piece of fat meat on the string and, and drop it down in holes to get crawfish that would--supplemented some of their food, little things like that.
Story_ID: 482983
Speaker 1: Do you know how or if your grandparents owned the property that they lived on?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I don't know exactly how; I'm researching trying to find out.  Most of the time, it's for, I want to have this information done so my grandchildren will know.  As soon as I find out anything I'll share it with my daughter [Irma Hall Crayton] and my grandchildren because if I had started checking earlier then I would know more and now all of those people--'cause let's face it I've been here seventy-two years (laughter) and I was born seventy years after slavery so I missed a lot because I asked questions mainly of, of the ones who were still alive.  I wanted to know what they did when they were little and what they ate, what they played games and they would show me and teach me little things like that you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of games did they play, do you remember any of that what they taught you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--some of the same games that we played when I was a child that I don't know if they play anymore, you know.  We played a lot of hand games you know Mary Mack [Miss Mary Mack] and the, the clapping hand games and we played--most of the games I noticed had the--were singing games, you sang.  The things that they did for fun: hopscotch, mumbly peg, they don't that anymore I don't think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mumbly peg?  What is that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was played with a knife or an ice pick or something, you know, you, where you drop, drop it so that it sticks in the ground a certain way.  Marbles, they shot marbles, and they showed me how to make dolls, corn shuck hair dolls.  You, you took the corn shuck and you stuck that down in the bottle, and we called it soda water, soda water bottle, and then split, kept splitting it and just kept splitting it until it was like consistency of hair, then you could braid it, or you could comb it, then we'd make--. Then they use to make furniture that you could really sit in and I mean little children could sit--save the bottle tops and, and they would stick wire through them and make chairs, tables, things like that.  I can, I remember those.  I wish I had one now so--I remember those, all--they showed us how to make slingshots, we played with slingshots, and what else did they show us how to make?  Now, my grandmothers [Mary Thomas and Carrie Willis Player], both of them showed me how to do art craft things, like make flowers out of tissue paper, or ma- cutting paper or things like that, quilt.  My mother's mother taught me how to quilt (laughter). Yeah, so they used to do that and they used to play--I, I mentioned hopscotch already didn't I? And 'Go In and Out the Window,' I remember that, 'Go In and Out the Window,' (singing) "Go in and out the window as you have done before," and that was in, I remember that little game that my grandparents taught me.  I'm trying to remember the games they taught me because those were more than likely the games they had played when they were little.  My [paternal] grandfather [Samuel Player IV] told, showed, showed me how to make what we call tom walkers and you would take a stick and you nailed a can on the s- on the stick and it makes like stilts, but we called tom walkers and they showed us how to make scooters where you would nail two boards, one board going up, one down it, and you'd find some old roller skates, the old fashioned roller skates and, and nail them and it would run.
Story_ID: 482984
Speaker 1: Now you were telling me about the things that your grandparents and your aunts and uncles might have taught you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were telling me that you learned to sew. Who taught you how to sew?
Speaker 2: My, my mother's mother [Mary Thomas], my mother's mother could sew anything and she could, she could tack, she just called it making lace (laughter) and she could knit, crochet.  She could not read a pattern but she made a pattern.  She taught me how to measure you, and she knew what different things looked like.  Like she knew what the bodice, she knew the shape of sleeves, she--you know she could draw those things out and she could do--she knew how to do tucks and kind of little things that I don't know how to do and she taught me how to, how to sew.  Started off with quilting pieces and I would sew and then she would pull it and if she could see the thread she would rip it out and say we're grinning stitches, she'd call it.  She'd rip it out and, and have, have to do it again and (unclear) then. And to me these things were fun, I probably mixed them in with my games.  She also, her daughter, my aunt in whose house I was born in Beaumont [Texas] taught me to embroider--all, they could all embroider.  My mother [Josephine Thomas Player] did beautiful embroidery work.
Story_ID: 482985
Speaker 1: My father's [Samuel Player V] mother was music teacher, I think I mentioned that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right and then you--she, she went to college so where did she go to college?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she, she--from Wiley [Wiley University; Wiley College, Marshall, Texas], she went to Wiley, she was, she was the only one.
Speaker 2: And this is Carrie [Carrie Willis Player] you're talking about?
Speaker 1: That's Carrie Beatrice there.  Carrie Beatrice was college graduate, Mary Elizabeth [Mary Thomas] never went to school a day in her life, but they both felt that college was very important, but Carrie Beatrice also made candy.  She could make all kinds of candy, and she would let us help, pull taffy, I could remember her even making candy canes. And I don't remember, I'm--she did it, my, my Aunt Beatrice [Beatrice Player] the one--she's still living and she, she also made candy.  She would make candy like her mother, so she knows how to do that too.  No, I can make a sucker (laughter), I can make what we call spoon suckers.  My grandmother used to make spoon suckers for me sometimes just--
Speaker 2: How did, how was that made?
Speaker 1: Oh, just with sugar, but we had sugar cane so because I--my relatives in South Louisiana had, had cane fields so they would send us cane sugar.  We had sugarcane and you just make it, you make a syrup.  You add flavoring, color or whatever and you keep dipping it in the, in the syrup and into cold water, then back into that.  A lot of things--oh, I know (laughter) something else yeah they taught as a child I learned to make candles, yes, and I learned to make soap, let's see I learned--
Speaker 2: Were these things that you needed to use--the things (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they used them, we played because we had had like toy replicas of--I did and lot of the kids that I played with I know in Tyler [Texas] 'cause I was born in Beaumont [Texas], 'cause I remember had a little toy woodstove that was just like my grandmother's woodstove, so I know how--because when I, I spent those early years in circumstances where we didn't have electricity and we didn't have gas, we didn't have running water, we had wells and we had--we, we had to do a lot of these things ourselves.  Mama [Josephine Thomas Player] made soap like I remember I was, when I was seven that's when I finally churned my first butter.  I was determined, I was so tired, (laughter) I was determined I was gone do it and she came in and she lifted up the lid, she said, "Look baby," and there was little yellow things.  She said, "Look, you made butter." (Laughter) Those things we looked forward to and they were kind of like games to us, you know we, we used to, we used to go hunting.  We had BB guns and we had--you graduated, I remember you to get Daisy rifles this, that and the other in, in Texas.  Girls and boys we, we learned to shoot early but we also learned--I don't, I don't remember anyone ever getting shot.  We didn't aim at each other, we weren't allowed to kill birds either (laugher), not unless we went hunting and we could kill the wild things like that you know and I didn't want to kill rabbits and things like that so we just shot at stuff, but we, that was one thing that we did--oh, jacks and oh, I'm--jacks, marbles, I already mentioned those.  (Sigh) It was a long time ago, darling (laughter).
Story_ID: 482986
Speaker 1: Now you told me about a memory when you were two or three when your mother [Josephine Thomas Player] had taught you how to flip.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is that your earliest childhood memory or can you remember something else?  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory is either getting burned on the leg, there is a scar I still have, on the woodstove in Tyler [Texas] and there was snow, and I bumped against the woodstove and I burned my leg and I remember my grandmother putting something on it and making a tent of the cover so they wouldn't touch it.  It was either that, now I think that was the earliest from what my mother told me because she said I was still wearing diapers then, and, or it was when I was two and I remember I was two because s- my mother took me to where my father [Samuel Player V] was playing--a dance--and I sat on the bandstand next to him.  He sat on the end 'cause he played baritone saxophone and I, I remember telling him, "I bet you don't know how old I am?"  And he said, "How old are you baby?" And I said, "Two." (Laughter) So that's how I know I was two years old.
Story_ID: 482987
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Josephine Thomas Player] and father [Samuel Player V] met?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my mother had decided that she wanted to learn--I told you she was very interested in etiquette and things--that things were done right so she hired herself out to work for a family before she went to school in the mornings.  She, at the time, was a junior in, in high school and she was on her way to work one morning and this man drove passed, this boy and he wanted to know if she knew a new family that had moved to Tyler [Texas], the Players, where they lived?  You see my father, my father's people had moved from Shreveport [Louisiana] to Tyler and when my father was a senior in high school and they just, they left him there to finish school himself.  He, he was playing with a band and he was going to school so they moved to Tyler and they left him there, and he stayed with relatives and you know stayed by himself.  When he graduated from high school, he got a scholarship to play football at Texas College [Tyler, Texas], so he drove to Texas College.  He had his own car, but he always had a car, worked in a garage, he could make a car.  In those days you could and he met, he saw this girl and he asked her and she said, "Oh yeah, the Players," and she told him how to get to their house.  That's how they met and she went on about her business, went on to work.  Then later on he, he saw her on the campus then she saw him and he was playing in the band.  This was quite later because he had come on a football scholarship but he got hurt (laughter) right before football season even opened.  So he asked the president of the college, President Glass [D.R. Glass] if he could form an orchestra and go out and play in town and make money for the school.  If he could do that for scholarship and he said yeah.  So my father started the Texas College Collegians, the jazz orchestra; it still exists at Texas College. And then when my mother saw my father at the socials--they had these socials because it was a church school, they couldn't dance face-to-face, front like.  Now, they, they marched (laughter), I'm tearing up things here okay, because it was a Christian school they couldn't, they couldn't dance face-to-face you know holding each other.  They marched, they had different formations and things, they marched and my mother said she thought my father was the silliest thing because he would be doing silly things like taking the, the mutes and putting 'em on his head like little hats and things like that you know. But also there was something about him that she did like because he was so intelligent, and she thought that maybe he was gonna be a minister.  Most of my mother's uncles were ministers (laughter).  That's my grandmother's brothers; we had ministers and teachers.  So, finally he came and asked my, my grandmother [Mary Thomas] for permission to, to come and see her and he would bring her half a pint of ice cream and, and won, because she didn't like him at first 'cause he was playing the devil's music.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year they got married?
Speaker 2: They got married in 1934, in fact I have--let me see I have--I can tell you the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, I have a little, it's a little prayer booklet that my mother wrote things in 'cause it was very interesting (unclear) her father [Alex Thomas] died.  Her father was died or he was buried, I'm not sure which.  I just see the name, it's June 3rd, 1925 and I was born June 3rd, 1935--she was saying well the connection with her father, but yeah I remember she got married March 16th, 1934.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And it was a secret marriage because my father was in school and on scholarship and he wasn't supposed to be married so they, yeah, they got married in Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 482988
Speaker 1: Then when my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] found out that she was pregnant, she had to leave town so that they wouldn't know, so my father [Samuel Player V] could finish college.  So she went to Beaumont [Texas], where her sister lived and that's where I was born in Beaumont and we didn't come back to Tyler [Texas] until my father had graduated from college.
Speaker 2: And so what year--
Speaker 1: In '36 [1936] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How old were you--in '36 [1936], so you were--
Speaker 1: Well, I was born in '35 [1935].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In 1935.  And he graduated in 1936.
Speaker 2: So you came--you moved to, back to Tyler in 1936--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You were only a year old?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, do you remember where you lived in Tyler when you were young?
Speaker 1: I just remember that it was very near Texas College [Tyler, Texas], and very near an, an elementary school that's when I s- I had both grandparents there so I had, I had--my father's people lived on Vance [Street].  I remember a street called Vance and I would have to look at.
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Speaker 1: I have, I have a little book with it in there, but--
Speaker 2: Well what, what home do you remember?  What community and neighborhood and friends do you remember when you were say in elementary school age?
Speaker 1: I started school in Beaumont, Texas a school called Carroll Street [Carroll Street Elementary School], but I was--
Speaker 2: So did you all move back to Beaumont?
Speaker 1: Well, I would go back--I was in between the two all the time, sometimes I would be in, in Tyler, and I would either stay with my mother's mother [Mary Thomas] or my father's mother [Carrie Willis Player] and sisters 'cause I remember them.  I remember going to Texas College--both Aunt Bea [Beatrice Player] and Aunt Viv [Vivian Player] went to Texas College, they graduated from Texas College, and I remember going up there.  I remember my grand- my mother's mother lived across the street from school.  I believe she was the one that lived on Vance, I'm not sure, I would have to--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, well tell me--
Speaker 1: --look at my notes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Tell me where did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then--
Speaker 2: --you attend elementary school?  Tell me where you went to elementary school?
Speaker 1: In Beaumont, I would be in Beaumont, sometime I'd be there with Aunt Darlene [ph.], it just depended.  I don't know why I was at these three places, but I was either one place or the other.  Finally, the principal of the school, Carroll Street, I remember came one day and told my aunt that I should be in school because I could read and print and, and I could, could count and all of these things. (Unclear) well yeah she needs to be in school, so they put my age up--I guess that's what they did, I don't--I just know I went to school, and I was so happy for--until I had my vaccination and then they put me out (laughter).  They had to show my birth certificate, and they found out I was three so they put me out.  So I had nowhere to go 'cause I was too old for nursery school or kindergarten or anything.  There was nothing for me to do in those places so I just--. Every day I would get up in the mornings and there was like our backyard and then there was a ditch and then the other side of that ditch was the campus of Carroll Street Elementary School, and I'd get up every morning and eat my breakfast.  I'd put on my clothes and I'd go over there in time to say the pledge and, and sing the song and I'd play 'til lunchtime and I'd come home and eat and I'd go back until school was out.  Just, I'd, I'd have school outside, I couldn't see what they were doing inside, that's where I--um-hm. And I was a mascot for Charlton-Pollard High School [Beaumont, Texas] there, I used to be on their programs doing poetry, I used to be--they used to have a parade that went to, to the fairgrounds every year and I could remember Aunt Darlene marching with me.  I remember two years of doing that.
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was three, four, five 'cause I didn't start back to school until I was six.
Story_ID: 482989
Speaker 1: What school did you go to when you were six?
Speaker 2: I went back to Carroll Street [Carroll Street Elementary School, Beaumont, Texas], they put me in first grade for two weeks, then they put me in second grade.  So I never went to first grade, never went to kindergarten, nursery school, yeah, and--
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers in your elementary school?
Speaker 2: A lady named Ms. Toles [ph.], she was the principal's wife.  I remember I had a friend named Mary Louise Harmon, Mary Louise Buffert Harmon [ph.], and I remember she was--yeah, she was my best friend in, in Beaumont [Texas]. That's the only one whose name I remember in Beaumont, then in Tyler [Texas] I had--now her name is not, not coming back to me--Shirley Ray, Shirley Ray Anderson [ph.].  The Anderson family, I thought that Mrs. Anderson, she was like another grandmother to me and I would be at her house all time 'cause I remember Shirley Ray and I used to get in trouble because we would go in the hen house and get eggs and put 'em in our mud pies and (laughter) yeah, Shirley Ray.
Story_ID: 482990
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in Beaumont [Texas] in school?
Speaker 2: Just that year.
Speaker 1: Ju- okay and then you moved to Tyler [Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then--what happened was my father [Samuel Player V] got a job playing as a par- as a member of the house band in Chicago [Illinois], and also I--every year when my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] would go with the family that she worked with, they would go to north woods to hunt or something and my mother would take me to Chicago and I would stay with her sister, Aunt Edith [ph.], there, and then she'd bring me back because when I was four I remember being in Chicago and I had the mumps.  I stayed with a lady named Ollie Anderson [sic.] at 208 East 53rd Street (laughter) I still remember the, the address.  And she was a la- but, I, I have many reasons to remember her because I used to love pray out loud.  She was sanctified and she used to have prayer meetings and I used to pray and she would call me to pray and that was my opportunity to do what I could do and I would pray and I met Mahalia Jackson at her house because Mahalia was her, her hairdresser at that time.  So I reme- and I remember getting the mumps because I will never forget how that felt and this lady use to--Ms. Anderson, Ms. Adams, Ollie Adams [ph.] was her name.  Ollie Adams would beat up, she'd get big peppermint sticks, about that big and round and she would beat 'em with a hammer and chop bits and pieces, give 'em to me to soothe, soothe my throat.  I remember that, and also remember she had a collection of beer steins for some reason.  They were, and I thought they were so interesting and I still think about them sometime and wonder what happened to them.  Yes, so I know I was four then, she was a friend of my mother's, I don't know how my mother met Ms. Anderson, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: So your mother was a, a domestic?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother was a domestic at the time.
Speaker 1: Now did she live away from home or did she come home every day?
Speaker 2: No, no, she lived away from home, she lived, we called it working in service, yeah.  She lived with the people, she worked for the Geisers, Dr. Geiser [ph.], uh-huh. And they--then after she stopped working with them I could remember they were still, they were friends of the family.  They used to come to visit us in Chicago yeah, and come to our apartment.  So--
Story_ID: 482991
Speaker 1: How old were you when you moved to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said your father [Samuel Player V] got a, a job?
Speaker 2: Yes, so when--at the end of my, when I was--I remember my birthday party.  My, my--I had two birthday parties that year.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I was seven, my--I s- I remember that year 'cause there was a lot of things that really stuck with me.  I remember in 1941--we had a radio in Beaumont [Texas], I remember, and everybody in, on the block didn't have a radio and we had a radio that you sat in the corner.  It was a tall radio. I still have it, or I have possession of it and the war [World War II, WWII] started and I remember--I still have my ration book in fact, yeah.  I had a ration book, and then I remember having a birthday party in Beaumont and I had told my aunts in Tyler [Texas], my father's sisters that I wanted a birthday party.  They had one for me there too.  So I left Beaumont and I went to Tyler and my mother's sister was expecting a--her first baby and she asked if I could stay with her until the baby was born so she wouldn't be alone.  So my parents said yes, so I was late starting school and then I remember--that was my second trip alone to Chicago.  The first time I went to Chicago when I was four, I went by myself.  (Laughter) I remember that was so funny because they would put a sign on me where I was going to and from.  It was like I was a little package of something now when I think about it, and I remember the first time when, when I was four and I went and I was singing--a lot of things happened when was four.  I won my first contest, I won an opportunity to be in 'Our Gang' comedies and won a talent contest singing 'Maria Elena' in Beaumont and then I went to Chicago, went to visit my parents and I was so proud of myself when I got there because I had--I told my dad I had when I went to sleep, I went, I put my purse under me (laughter), like that was gonna stop something (laughter).  Somebody could've picked me, purse and all up and then the--when I came back when I was seven I came alone again on the train.  I liked to travel by myself it was--they had, well they had those people that--. We had to change trains I remember that then, change trains in St. Louis [Missouri] and this time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about it being segregated, did you have a problem with that as far as--?
Speaker 2: No, you know I knew, I would--you knew those things.  I can remember for instance on the occasion that we went downtown.  I remember something happened to my mother [Josephine Thomas Player].  I don't know how old I was but (unclear) I remember it frightened me, I didn't know what was going on until she explained it to me when I was a teenager.  I just remember she had set me on the ground and then she stepped one foot down on the ground, the bus took off and it scared me so bad and this man ran and he just pulled the door and then she fell out on the ground.  I remember that and when I was a teenager she told me what had happened.  She had not said yes sir to the man, and--he said, "You wanna get off here?" and she said, "Yes," and he had done that to her, but usually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But traveling on the train, traveling on the train.
Speaker 2: Traveling on the train we, you had--you could sit anywhere until you got to St. Louis and then you had to go to--all to one car.  I remembered doing that, it didn't, you know it didn't bother me one way or the other.  I was a little bitty girl so I mean you just did what you do, it didn't--I didn't know why we had to, but in St. Louis we had to change, you had to change trains period anyway.  And the train that you got on going from St. Louis to Texas you sat in a different car, and coming back you sat in this--all the, all of the, the black people sat in one car and then you, and once you got to St Louis, and I know everybody said, "Oh, you can sit anywhere you want to now," and they would move to different cars, I remember that.
Story_ID: 482992
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your, your move to Chicago [Illinois]?  You said your father [Samuel Player V] got a job?  Where, where did he work?
Speaker 2: He was teach- I mean, teaching, he was playing with a band, Milton Larkin's band [Milton Larkin and His Orchestra] at the Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois].  The Rhumboogie was a club that had been bought by Joe Louis and I can't remember the other man's name [Charlie Glenn] now, in Chicago, and they were looking for a house band, and they choose this band.  I think they were out of San Antonio [Texas] at the time.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Josephine Thomas Player] come with you to Chicago?
Speaker 2: My mother was there already, see that's--my mother would leave me with my aunts and my grandparents and they--I didn't know the difference.  Everybody's treating me the same, I remember going--like for instance, church, I was Catholic.  I was baptized, I was born Catholic, and so I would go to Mass and then I'd go to Sunday school and you know and, church, wherever they went, so.  It was like I grew up multidenominational (laughter).
Speaker 1: So there were a lot of black Catholics back at, during that time?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, not a lot, there were quite a few at Beaumont [Texas].  They used to say that Beaumont was part of Louisiana (laughter) everybody was so Frenchie they called it.  It was a lot of people from Louisiana in Beaumont.  So they had, they had a lot of people yeah, Catholic, a lot of Catholic. And I was born--There was a black church in Tyler [Texas] where I was baptized, St. Peter Claver [St. Peter Claver Church] and--
Speaker 1: Was it an integrated church?
Speaker 2: It was, no, it was black.  I mean, I don't know, I don't remember if the church in--you know, I must've been about six or seven years old before I really knew what white people were, you see. I didn't know how you tell when somebody was white.  There were members of my family who looked white, they had blonde hair and blue eyes, green eyes, gray eyes and all that so I don't know if it was integrated or not.  I just know--I didn't pay any attention to that.
Story_ID: 482993
Speaker 1: So we were talking about the church--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and, and the fact that you were Catholic?
Speaker 2: Right, I was Catholic.  My mother's sister was a Catholic, my godmother.  I don't know how or why because (laughter) she was the only one in the family, and she, and then I guess her influence over her or something.  She was my godmother, then I remember my mother taking, going to--when I was older, I remember my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] taking catechism classes.  And I remember when my mother was baptized Catholic and then my father [Samuel Player V] was baptized Catholic when I was about ten or eleven years old, um-hm, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Now, there was one other game that you wanted to, to mention that you played.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter) well yeah I guess I don't know if you could qualify it really as a game.
Speaker 1: Well, okay tell me.
Speaker 2: But it was a celebration of something we used to play, and, and we remembered, hog killing time.
Speaker 1: When was that, when was hog killing time?
Speaker 2: In the fall, in the fall and we had, community hog pens so we had you know several hogs in there and they would slaughter them all in the same time, and so I knew how they did that you know and how they killed the hogs and they'd hang 'em by the side of it so that the blood would drain out you know through the head and they would--we'd g- my job as children was carrying water, carrying water all day, took a tremendous amount of water 'cause this washing so much stuff and the women making crackling, we'd get fresh crackling, that's skins, what you call 'em.  People call skins now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They would fry 'em?
Speaker 2: They'd be frying, they'd be baking 'em in the oven and we'd get fresh crackling and, and also we got to play with the hog bladder 'cause you could blow 'em up like a balloon and we'd play with them and then they'd finally get hard and we'd throw them away, but yeah I remember hog killing time.
Story_ID: 482994
Speaker 1: We left, really left off with you going to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Going to Chicago when I was seven, and I was very proud of myself that time because when I got to Chicago I had earned some money. I had been singing on the, on the train and people paid me and I had ten dollars.
Speaker 1: What kind--
Speaker 2: And (laughter) ten dollars in 1942 was a lot of money, I had earned ten dollars on the train, so yes.
Speaker 1: What were you singing, what songs did you sing?
Speaker 2: All--then I knew a lot of song then, 'A-Tisket, A-Tasket,' 'Five O'Clock Whistle,' I remember those two in particular, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What about spirituals, did your grandmother teach you spirituals?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes, oh I knew lots of spirituals because my mother's mother [Mary Thomas] was always be singing when she would teach them to me and I remember 'Couldn't Hear Nobody Pray,' I remember that song.
Speaker 1: You remember--
Speaker 2: Hug?
Speaker 1: You remember how it goes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (singing) "Couldn't hear nobody pray, couldn't hear nobody pray.  Way down yonder by myself and I couldn't hear nobody pray."  And I remember I used to imagine, try to imagine where in the world was this you know, and then my grandmother used to sing--she, her favorite song though really was in the morning she used to love that "I come to the garden alone while the dew is still on the roses and the voice I hear singing in my ear" ['In the Garden'].  Oh I--and I could just see this 'cause she had flowers, red flowers all around the house so I remem- then when I--I'm came to Chicago and my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] like continued this and we would sing her favorite 'My Heavenly Father Watches Over Me,' and she taught me how to sing alto and she--I would harmonize with her and we sang the spirituals.  We sang them (laughter) and I would get in trouble because I went to a Catholic school [Corpus Christi Elementary School] in Chicago and it--when they--we'd have a program or something and I would be singing these songs, I would sing them the way I had heard them in the Methodist or Baptist church (laughter) depending on which one I had been to, or I wanted to you know, just things, little things.  I remember things like that yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now who, while you were on the train and you were singing and you were earning this money, who, who was y- who was your, who was your audience?
Speaker 2: The people on the train.
Speaker 1: Just everybody and anybody?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was, I--we'd talk I would laugh and talk with anyone.  I had a sense, like I said of, of protecting myself you know and protecting my little money or whatever, but I would talk and ask questions and--I was not never short for words (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so now you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they would, they'd pay me, they thought it was cute, and I said, "Oh I, I--." And they'd they--then someone else would come along and say, "Oh, that is so cute, can you sing such and such thing?" And if I knew I--I knew a lot of songs 'cause I listened to the radio a lot, we had radios and I listened to them and I knew.  Oh, I remember 'Hey Daddy' [sic. 'Daddy'] yeah (laughter) cause I really I didn't know what they were talking about and I called my father [Samuel Player V] my daddy and I loved my daddy, I'm a daddy girl, and so I would sing it for him, you know I thought that was a little girl singing to her daddy.  "Hey daddy, I want a brand new car, champagne, caviar--." Didn't know what all that was, but I know your daddy would get you things, you see (laughter).
Story_ID: 482995
Speaker 1: Now when you get in to Chicago [Illinois], you say that you went to a Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: --Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi Elementary School] on 49th [Street] and it was called South Parkway then [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], yeah on 49th and South Park, and I had been promoted to fourth grade instead of third grade from second grade but my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] said no, she didn't want me to skip another grade 'cause I didn't go to first grade as it was so I stayed in third grade. I remember my teacher's name was Sister Estelle [ph.] and I was terrified (laughter).  I was terrified but yes, and we lived on, we lived on 53rd Street and then school was on 49th, so I could walk back and forth to school.  Then we moved, we lived in one room, all of us, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many people?  Do you have a bro--
Speaker 2: My mother, my father [Samuel Player V] and I, we lived in one room.  I--no, I have no brothers and sisters--and my mother worked then at a hospital.  She stopped working private home and stated working at Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], and my father would pick me up from school then because my mother would be at work and so my father would pick me up from school and take me with him to rehearsal at the Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois], he'd go to rehearsal and I'd get on the end of the chorus line.  I wanted to be a chorus girl, I thought that was the most wonderful thing. And the chorus girls would say, "You might as well just give her dance lessons 'cause she's just gonna dance."  So I started taking, I started studying dancing, I started with ballet and tap at Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] when I was seven that, when I--that same year that in the summer I started, I remember.  Then I saw, I saw [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.  I either saw 'Stormy Weather' or 'Cabin'--I don't know 'Cabin in the Sky,' I saw 'Stormy Weather' I think it was 'cause I saw Katherine Dunham and I said, oh, no that's what I wanna do, that kind of dance.  So I, I took another year and I went to a woman named Katherine Hightower [ph.] who taught Afro-Cuban and primitive dancing, so I started taking dancing from her.
Speaker 1: And this is when you were about eight?
Speaker 2: I was about--
Speaker 1: Eight or nine?
Speaker 2: --nine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about eight or nine.
Speaker 1: So we're talking about 1943, '44 [1944]?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1942 is when I came to Chicago, yes because I remember it was after the war [World War II, WWII], I mean the war was still going on. And I remember singing 'Any Bonds Today?' (Laughter) Yeah, bonds for freedom, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I remember singing those little song- all those little war songs and I remember this, the, the music of the day.  I remember 'G.I. Jive,' "This is your G.I. man alive."  It starts with (singing) "A bugler blowing reveille over your head when you arrive," Louis Jordan, and then I remember Andrew Sisters [The Andrews Sisters] and a lot of those you know, war time things and the songs of the war time--
Story_ID: 482996
Speaker 1: The only thing, it bothered me because I remember--I didn't like war, I didn't, I remember wondering why they had to fight and I remember being very sad when we would go--we'd see the newsreels and I would say, oh.  I would tell my parents [Josephine Thomas Player and Samuel Player V], I bet that the, the Japanese and the German, I bet, oh I bet their mother and dads are sad 'cause they getting killed you know, and why we have to kill each other you know, and then I couldn't understand why we had to call 'em names, because I remember in, in Beaumont [Texas] on many of the corners there was a store that--Italian people.  I didn't know Italian people were white people, they were Italian, but I know I had been told that I must not say dago 'cause a lot of people call it the dago store and my mother said, "No, that's equivalent to saying nigger."  Don't ever call people--there's no country called dago land, these people are Italian, they come from Italy and you never call people out of their names. And I knew the Geisers [ph.] were German-Jewish people and they, I, I couldn't understand why we was supposed to all of a sudden start calling Japanese people the names that we called them and japs and this and, and I couldn't understand why we were supposed to call people krauts and this.  I said, "Why, why they calling people out of their name?"  I remember that, things--that's the war [World War II, WWII] struck me--yeah, and my mother had--she had a brother in the [U.S.] Merchant Marines at the time and a brother in the, in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Did your father not get drafted?
Speaker 1: No, my father didn't because by then the band leader at the Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois] got drafted and my father was 4-A, then he went back on the road 'cause that broke up the band and he went back up, he went back on the road and he was classified as--you know and he came back to Chicago [Illinois] he quit the band that he went back on the road with and came back to Chicago because he expected to be.  So while he was waiting to go he started to work for Hertz [The Hertz Corporation] and (laughter) as a mechanic and he kept wondering why and I remember us even asking, he said--asked the, the pastor at Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois], you know, he said, "I'm still waiting on them when they gonna call me," and he said, "Oh you work at Hertz?" (Unclear) it's part of General Motors companies [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], that's a defense job, so he always, he worked for General Motors company.  Even though we didn't know it (laughter) we knew he worked for Hertz, that was, but we didn't know that so he kept wondering why and that's why he didn't know, he didn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 482997
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Catholic school [Corpus Christi Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the activities at the school that you participated in?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I was in the choir always, we used to have spelling bees.  There was a nun in the fifth grade who finally discovered what my problem was 'cause I used to be like class clown.  I'd like to make people laugh and I'd be laughing and talking and playing and--in the fifth grade--and, and getting in trouble for drawing all the time.  So--which is very confusing to me because I was encouraged to draw at home and then I'd get to school and then I'd get--have to take it home, get it signed because I was drawing and I couldn't figure out what they want, especially one time when I got once sent home and I had gotten sent to the office about that 'cause I was drawing naked women (laughter) and I couldn't figure out what in the devil I had done wrong because I used to go--my parents [Josephine Thomas Player and Samuel Player V] used to take me to the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] a lot, they would take me to places like that and I would go down there and I'd see, and I said, ah.  And I'd sit there and try to sketch you know and think.  I was trying to draw a human body that's all, I wasn't drawing naked women like porno or something (laughter), so anyway but this particular teacher had me tested and discovered that I was (laughter) like four grade levels ahead of myself in, in the humanities.  So, then they had this program for children gifted and talented and I say, talented, gifted and, and problems (laughter) at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and I was all three I had (laughter) so my, my I, my mother wanted me to stay in the class with my peers and I had a little, I had different work.  I had some different work and I had to take different tests, so I was a little ahead of myself, but she didn't want me to skip grades, and so that happened in fifth grade, and what else--what did you ask me?
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the activities in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In school?
Speaker 1: --during elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had I remember we had--I started taking piano, I studied piano 'cause I went--played piano and I started taking piano lessons there and we had a number of activities in--we used to have a lot of programs I remember.  I remember one especially where we were to--we, we sang the Angelus and we had on, we had these little costumes that looked like peasants with the, with the, the scarves and everything like in the painting you know, the Angelus.  I remember that because my mother would always make these things for me and we had programs and we--like I said you could, you could study piano.
Speaker 1: Did you ever take art lessons (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went to Mass.
Speaker 1: Did you ever--
Speaker 2: Oh, when I was in fifth grade the same teacher who had me tested bought a set, bought me a set of pastels and paper and she said, "And when you finish, if I don't have to you know reprimand, you when you finish then you can draw," and I said, wow! She's not sending me to the office, in fact she's buying me some things to draw with.  Yes, and--
Speaker 1: Do you remember her name 'cause she encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Sister Angelis [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and yes she was, she was quite wonderful I--and that's still my medium, I still draw and I still--pastels is my favorite medium even though I like watercolor and oil, but I still use that, yes.
Story_ID: 482998
Speaker 1: So what school do you go to after Corpus Christi [Corpus Christi Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--okay Corpus Christi then I went to--we--by that time we had acquired a building so we had a high school, so I went to Corpus Christi High School [Chicago, Illinois].  It was on 46th [Street] and South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], almost across the street from the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter) which I used to frequent.  I'd get out of school and I'd run over to the Regal 'cause I used to love to go.  I'd get--it didn't cost that much then and I'd go over to the Regal so I could see the comics.  They had a stage show in between each, the--they would have a movie, the movie, the newsreel and comics then they'd have stage shows.  So I'd get over there so I could see the stage show 'cause I loved the comics, I used to love to watch them.  Didn't pay the other people a lot of attention, the bands, because I was so used to bands, I was used to them.  I had known people--I didn't know they were anybody important.  I remember when I first started taking piano 'cause Duke Ellington was a friend of my, my father's [Samuel Player V], mother's [Josephine Thomas Player] and he had come to the house and I was remember--I was playing 'On the Bridge Down and Yonder' [ph.] and still playing one hand and I played it for him and he said, "Oh, that's so nice," and I just felt good, he was a nice man, he was nice to me and I had no idea who he really was until I was an adult (laughter).  I knew Louis Armstrong and, 'cause--I was a--I started twirling baton in elementary school and so I was the feature twirler for the musicians union, Local 208 [Chicago Federation of Musicians Local 10-208] so I was in a lot of parades and things and my father knew these people.  He knew them from having played in territorial bands, so we met them.  Eddie Vincent brought me a record, Billie Holi- I knew Billie Holiday, I--I didn't even really pay her any attention.  She had a dog, a little black dog; I remember I played with that.  I remember meeting Sarah Vaughan because she had a low pitch voice and my father said, "I want you to hear her."  So he took me around to the DeLisa [Club DeLisa, Chicago, Illinois] where she was in--for rehearsal you know, I would--'cause I meet a lot of these people.  My father still played music even though he wasn't playing at nights, I mean he, he started working for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] full-time, and he worked, played with another band, it was billed as sixteen colored and white musicians (laughter).  Now, now the name? It just left me but I have pictures of them and, and yeah they would play and they'd go out of town sometimes but not--over, just over weekend or something like that. And in high school I--while I was studying dancing, I was twirling a baton and, and, and I was quite interested in science, and at that time I wanted to be an endocrinologist, I had this thing that the endocrine glands were where everything lay. But in elementary school I met--I also met someone who had a profound impact on my life I think.  I met Mary McLeod Bethune, met her on the street, on fi- on the corner of 51st [Street], 51st and South Park and I remember walking--I was eight, eight years old and I remember walking up to her and, and this lady and telling her "You know you look like" (laughter) "Ms. Mary McLeod Bethune," and she says, "Because I am Mrs. Bethune, who might you be?"  And we talked and so I talked a lot like I'm doing now (laughter) and we--. I remember, the funniest thing out of that was that I told her when--she wanted to know what I wanted to be when I grew up?  And I said, "A sporting woman" because (laughter) I said I could, I can run fast and I always beat all, beat the boys out of their marbles you know and I can even make a bow and arrow, so I can shoot, and I wanted, and (unclear) and I wanted to do sports, that's what I thought sporting was when she was asking what it is (laughter) and my mother said she was so shocked when she said, "You're telling people you wanna be a sporting woman?" (Laughter) I didn't know what it was yet, then.
Story_ID: 482999
Speaker 1: In high school [Corpus Christi High School, Chicago, Illinois] did you ever have a job?
Speaker 2: No, I was not allowed to work, my father [Samuel Player V], my father would not--. I, I was raised very interestingly.  I wasn't allowed to go most places alone, I had to be chaperoned.  It was like old-fashioned Louisiana family.  I had to have a chaperone and no, girls in his family, you weren't allowed to work so, also you were not allowed to live way from home unless you were married so (laughter).
Speaker 1: What about college, had you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) College?
Speaker 1: --thought about what college you would go to?
Speaker 2: I knew I was going to college because it was understood that you start school, from the time you start school you don't stop 'til you finish college, and it was also understood there would be no money.  I only had one person in our family got sent to college, and that was my [paternal] grandmother [Carrie Willis Player], whose father [Robert T. Willis (ph.)] was a mortician.  So, I got, I was--I got a two year Bishop Scholarship [Bishop's Scholarship] to Briar Cliff [Briar Cliff College; Briar Cliff University] in Sioux City, Iowa in music and drama because I sang well.  I was singing in the high school operetta and I had been taking piano and I had my own, you know my piano recital.  I was a senior and I got this, it was called a Bishop Scholarship.  So Briar Cliff was, was a school in Sioux City, Iowa, it was all an all-girls school then.  For the first time that year they had seven black girls, it was the first time they'd had that many in 19--I started in 1952 and I went there two years then I transferred to Texas College [Tyler, Texas] when the scholarship ran out and I transferred then to Texas College and I--by then I had decided that I be- was interested in foreign languages, I wanted to be a buyer, I wanted to be a buyer for Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company] so I changed my major--I never studied theater, never studied the drama part.  I always studied the music part, took piano and voice all the way through college.  I studied dance all the way, all the way through college, yeah, but I never danced professionally at all.
Story_ID: 483000
Speaker 1: We didn't get an opportunity to talk about the neighborhood that you lived in in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So would you talk about who were your neighbors, the type of occupations that if you knew that your friends and who were some of your friends in the neighborhood, what, what was the makeup of the neighborhood in which you lived?
Speaker 2: In--well where I first lived at 208 East 53rd Street the most of the neigh- most of my neighbors worked either at the stockyards or oh, a lot of 'em worked at the stockyards, then some of 'em owned little restaurants, and things because I grew up South Side of Chicago, 47th Street was like I was downtown, and so we knew a lot of people because my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] worked the hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], and then my mother started working at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and we knew a lot of interns, she would have dinners at--when we got an apartment, when I was ten we finally got an apartment and stopped living in one room.  So for three years we lived in one room then we got an apartment in the building that my aunt, my father's aunt owned which that's why we moved in there.  I guess that's all, we would--see she treated us like any other tenants you know, but we were there and I had my cousins, her, her grandchildren were there and I remember Yvonne [ph.] that particular cousin who also played piano and she would play 'Moonlight Sonata' for me, she knew I loved Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] and Chopin [Frederic Chopin]. (Laughter) Anyway the house on either side of us though were kitchenettes and so I was, I knew about kitchenettes where they just had--everything was in one room, the family lived in one room, they had the kitchen and everything in one room.  They had, they--like if they had five--like our apartment was five rooms, then they would have five families living instead of one family living so I knew what that was like.  It's--I was lucky, like I said my aunt owned the building and she only--we--it was--they lived on the first floor, no one lived in the basement.  Someone lived across from her, we lived on the second floor and someone lived across from her.  Then on the third floor there were two families like that, and some of the people worked at, at filling stations or little stores, but the main thing seemed to have been stockyard.  Most of the people seemed to work the stockyards and my father [Samuel Player V] had a lot of friends.  They knew, or they worked in hospitals, they worked, they and there was still a lot of women who worked private home at the time, so.
Speaker 1: Were, were these two parent households?
Speaker 2: You know at the time--when I was growing up I remember just about everyone having a mother and a father.  It was odd when people didn't have a mother and a father, and you felt sorry for them, and divorce, oh, I don't remember too many--.  My very best friend who still lives in Chicago now her--I remember that was odd to me because her father, she, she lived with her aunts and her father and her mother, she didn't live with mother and they were divorced, and I think I knew one other--I, I just didn't know anybody divorced (laughter).  I mean everybody was very poor, but we didn't know we were poor either.  No, I used to know we didn't have any money but no, my mother had said we weren't poor because I wanted us to get on the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] and she said, "No, that's for poor people, and we're not poor."  Everybody worked, we worked, we had--we just didn't have any money, we didn't make a very large salary.
Story_ID: 483001
Speaker 1: I wanna talk more about high school [Corpus Christi High School, Chicago, Illinois] before we go on to college again 'cause there are a few things that we missed.  Tell me about your exper- your teachers in high school, who were your teachers?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: In high school my teachers were priests except for one nun, we had all priests, Franciscans, that was elementary [Corpus Christi Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and high school I had Franciscans, so and--
Speaker 1: And they were all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had--
Speaker 1: --were they all--
Speaker 2: We had one lay, we had Mr. Bingham [ph.], that was our coach, he was like our surrogate father or something, yeah, Mr. Bingham, yes.
Speaker 1: And tell me about things that influenced you or other people that influenced you during that time?
Speaker 2: Well, starting when I was younger than that from the time I was about eight years old.  My mother [Josephine Thomas Player] used to go to these parties at this lady's house on Michigan Avenue and I met Dr. Burroughs then and I met--
Speaker 1: Is that [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs?
Speaker 2: Margaret Burroughs, and I met I met Langston Hughes and I met, oh goodness (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Gwendolyn Brooks?
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Brooks, yes, I'm--her name because that was the first time I had ever met a real live poet and she encouraged me to just write.  I said, "What do you write about?"  She said, "Write about whatever you see, whatever you see every day."  And I started writing every day and which I'm--still write and, and also I was fascinated because at that time Langston Hughes was writing a column for the Defender [Chicago Defender] and the--I was--the Defender was--wow, that was something to me.
Speaker 1: Well, how--what year was this, the Defender (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh, this was--
Speaker 1: Well how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was eight so it must've--it was in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And The Defender, do you remember reading the column?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I remember selling that paper.  I was a Billiken [Bud Billiken Club], yeah.  I couldn't have a job outside, but my father [Samuel Player V] let me sell papers to everybody anyhow.  We still lived in one room in this, in--when I became a Billiken, we lived one room in one of these, (makes sound) I don't know how many people lived in that apartment building (laughter) because everybody was renting out their rooms you know, but I could sell the paper to everybody in the building.  That was it, that was my paper route (laughter), so, and I remember it was a very--and, and they had the Billiken Parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic] you see, and--
Speaker 1: Tell me about the Billiken, what is that?
Speaker 2: Bud Billiken was--it was like a little elf-like thing I guess we could call it.  It was a thing that somebody made up this little character you know and it was like our little mascot for, for an organization of young people who sold the Defender, and, it, it kind of bound us together you know.  We also had--I, I won a turkey too, singing--we had a day at the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois] near Thanksgiving where they had this, this--a competition, a talent contest and I remember I sang a song called 'Gone' [ph.]. Yeah, (singing) "You said you loved me, but I knew you were wrong."  I remember that, and I won a turkey, a lot of people did.  We just, but it just brought us together and it was a wonderful for young people because you didn't feel, you felt like you belonged to this big organization.  We had this big parade, which they still do every year and when I started twirling, when I became the featured twirler for the musicians union band [Chicago Federation of Musicians Local 10-208] and I would always be in the Billiken Parade, and so we looked forward to it yeah.
Story_ID: 483002
Speaker 1: In high school [Corpus Christi High School, Chicago, Illinois], did your class have a prom?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah we, the--we were old-fashioned, you got a chance, the juniors--you looked forward to being a junior so that you could raise money to give the seniors their prom (laughter) and so we did that and remember because I remember having to use most of my allowance to pay for the candy I was selling, supposed to be selling, but I was eating it, Junior Mints (laughter) and there's--we'd have to turn in (laughter), I'd have to turn in like my whole allowance of two dollars, fifty cents a week (laughter) 'cause I had eaten the candy (laughter), and I had been--I had known all the time that I could not receive company until freshman year of--'til my freshman year in college, yeah, 'cause that--until I was seventeen, my freshman year in college.  And that was fine with me, it didn't bother me.  Now I was an athlete you know I ran track and stuff and I, I had lots of friends, you know.  I had mainly boys as friends--I couldn't imagine dating and stuff like that.  I mean, I was a bit of a tomboy then, I wanted to, I wanted to--I liked boys, I liked to be around them, but I didn't--I couldn't imagine a boy buying me popcorn or anything like that.  Now I use to like to go to the movies with my dad [Samuel Player V] so, it didn't bother me that I couldn't date, it was--times were different then.
Speaker 1: So who was your prom date?
Speaker 2: I didn't know I was going to the prom, my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] took me to get, try on this dress and I thought it was my dress for my senior recital 'cause I was a senior, and then she got these little gloves and things.  I said I can't play piano in gloves, why is she getting these gloves and things and then find out I said, "Mama, I don't know why you getting this 'cause I can't--." You know she said, "No, this is not for your recital; it's for your prom."  I said, "But I'm not going to the prom."  She said, "Yes you are."  I said "With who?"  Well, the boy across the street, Eddie [ph.], who had graduated the year before and was in the [U.S.] Air Force and his sister and I were good friends.  We were like sisters--he treated--it was like my big brother, he--how his father and I--he--my father had asked his father and they had gotten together and he came home on leave and took me to the prom and my father drove us to the prom and then afterward drove us to Chinatown [Chicago, Illinois] and we ate and I had a very--had a good time, yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 483003
Speaker 1: And how old you--were you when you graduated from high school [Corpus Christi High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: When I graduated from high school I was sixteen, but I was seventeen the next month (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, okay so now you told us that you went to Briar [Briar Cliff College; Briar Cliff University, Sioux City, Iowa]--
Speaker 2: Briar Cliff.
Speaker 1: --Cliff--
Speaker 2: Right, and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) College.
Speaker 2: --was--at--when I first went I was still majoring in science but I liked the arts so I joined an organization, a club--they had always even though they had never had as many as seven Negro girls at one time.  They had always had a chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], so I worked in that 'cause I had been a member of the NAACP since I was about fifteen.  Then also we had a club called the Gold Mass Club [ph.] and what--it was about theater, it was not acting, but you got a chance to study makeup and things like that.  I was interested in that, in fact I won a prize for doing the hair for a play they were doing called 'Lute Song' [Sidney Howard and William Henry Irwin].  I was happy with that but it was an all-girls school and we were doing a play called 'Amahl and the Night Visitors' [Gian Carlo Menotti] and they needed a black wise man (laughter) I got drafted to be Balthazar (laughter).  I think I had one line, I don't even remember the line but I did that and didn't even think about it anymore.  I just did that one play, 'Amahl and the Night Visitors' that was my very first, that was my first play-play like that.
Speaker 1: And so you stayed there for two years, now you went, went on scholarship, you stayed there two years, this is all-girls college.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you transferred to Texas College [Tyler, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Texas College, that's like our family school.  That--well I had a choice of going there or Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana].  Now I've decided that I'd better go to Tyler [Texas] because I still had relatives living in Tyler and said if I'm gonna go that far away from home, 'cause see Sioux City, Iowa was not--it was about six hundred miles from Chicago [Illinois], that wasn't that far but Texas, that's a long way so I (unclear) a choice between Texas and Louisiana.  I said no, I don't know my relatives in Louisiana that well even though I have them ranging from down in the bayou all the way up along the coast but I went to Texas College, yeah 'cause I had relatives in Tyler.
Speaker 1: So talk to me about the difference of going to this--'cause Briar Cliff is a Roman Catholic university.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And now you're going to a historically black college [HBCU] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A black Methodist college, yeah (laughter) I, I had been doing that all my life though, so that really, that, (makes sound)--I felt right at home.
Speaker 1: Well tell me the differences in the colleges, how did you experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Texas College was a lot more strict because like on weekends you could--well you could go downtown, you could go off campus anytime.  We had a curfew, you had to be in the dorm by 9:00 except on weekends and then you could be out until I think it was 12:00 on Friday night, you had to be in early on Saturday nights because in hour that's when the farmers came to town and they didn't want us girls out there then so we had, we had to be in early on Saturday nights but Sundays you could be out 'til twelve I think.  When I got to Texas College, you couldn't go out unless you were a junior or a senior and you couldn't go off to--(unclear) you were a senior could you go downtown by yourself, so (laughter) it was very strict, girls couldn't even, girls had to be in the dorm by nine, I don't care what--whether you were a freshman, sophomore, junior or senior you had to be in the dorm.  I found out 'cause I got put on restriction.  I was standing outside the dorm at 9:00, the library had closed.  When the library closed you had to be in.  We, we still studied religion, only thing was we had, we studied from the Bible.  I had to get a new Bible 'cause I had a Douay-Rheims version, which is what we used in the Catholic church.  I had to get a new Bible, but I had--all my life I had been going to two or three different churches, so it didn't bother me.
Story_ID: 483004
Speaker 1: What about the teachers, the professors, tell me about the differences in the professors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they're--I think--and when I got to Texas College [Tyler, Texas] I wasn't prepared.  Texas College they were like, they treated you like high school almost.  I mean they were there, they'd get on you, you, if you didn't have your homework (unclear).  The nuns would call you in and they would reprimand you, but it was--they--you were expected, you were adult, you were young women so you know you had--you but at Texas College they would get on you, they'd write your parents.  If you, you know if you didn't do it they would send you home too (laughter) if you--so you--and they knew you and they stop you on the campus and they would teach you all the time.  They were really hands on, really, man they were hard and everything had to be just right.  I remember the first few papers things that--like everything had to be typed.  I had been handwriting and printing things at Briar Cliff [Briar Cliff College; Briar Cliff University, Sioux City, Iowa], but not at Texas College, it had to be typed and they would be--everything had to be right you know they really were a lot stricter academically I think and then my daughter [Irma Hall Crayton] said she found that same, the same thing when she went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and she was saying all this little nitpicky stuff is just really not--(laughter), it's different.
Speaker 1: Was there a professor that encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Or someone that inspired you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my major teacher, Dorothy Samuels [ph.] because I was the only French major and so I, I had no one in my class and, and when I got to a certain point I was her only student, and she had to get special permission from the president to teach me and sh- if I wanted to learn she wanted to teach me, and she did.  And she, (laughter) she was very strict, she would do things like, she would make me stretch you know.  Like one time she gave me a French syllabus and told me in--syntax book, I'm sorry.  She gave me a French syntax book and told me that "Be prepared in six weeks for a test."  That was it (laughter), she never spoke to me in English, but when I graduated from there and I went to Chicago [Illinois] and I passed the exam just--(makes sound) just like that, to be a teacher (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was your course of study?  Oh--
Speaker 2: Oh, a foreign language, from--majored in French, minored in Spanish and so social studies and of course everyone majors in education at Texas College.  It is an educational institution so you do your student teaching. That's when I fell in love with student teaching, that's when I decided I wanted to be a teacher.  Before then, no, because I was the editor of The Steer, which was the newspaper, my senior year and I had, I was going (laughter) to put this editorial in about why we no longer had to just teach as, as, as Negro people.  We were Negroes then (laughter) and, and he said, "You can't put this in."  I said, "Why not? I'm not gonna teach."  He, he said, "Well you're gonna do your student teaching?"  I said, "No, I'm not doing any student teaching, you don't have to."  And then, oh yes, Dr. Nelom [ph.] yeah, they just signed me up and sent me to Emmett Scott [Emmett J. Scott High School, Tyler, Texas] where Julius Cameron, who had taught my parents [Josephine Thomas Player and Samuel Player V] Latin and Greek, 'cause in, in their day they had to study Latin and Greek in high school and I said, oh I'm gonna make an F, but and then he tested and then I saw that light go on behind the eyes.  It was something we were doing and it was just--I wanted to see that again, and again and again.  This is what I wanted to do but I had, no, I had resisted teaching.  I didn't want to be a teacher.  Number one they didn't make any money, they were all--we knew a lot of teachers in Chicago.  My parents had lots of friends who were teachers.  They didn't make any money, and it, it wasn't interesting to me and then they're not--in, in my family we had teachers and preachers.  I didn't want to do any of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and tell me who was the, the president of the Texas College during that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time? His name was Glass [D.R. Glass], Dr. Glass and his wife, Willie Lee Glass [Willie Lee Campbell Glass], yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you participate in athletics during college?
Speaker 2: At Briar Cliff I did, at Briar Cliff I ran track and, and played volleyball.  At Texas College, I didn't.  At Texas College I was a majorette again and a dancer and I--I didn't--no, I just was, no I was a majorette for the band and a dancer and I was--and I sang for the school orchestra, for the jazz orchestra yeah, but no I didn't do any more.
Story_ID: 483005
Speaker 1: So you graduated what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]--I got married 1956 the sa- got married on the day they were closing the campus.  I was doing my comprehensive examination up until forty-five minutes before I got married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well tell me how did you meet your husband and what was his name?
Speaker 2: He was--yeah, he was a veteran, a Vietnam [Vietnam War] vet, I mean a Korean [Korean War] vet, he was a Korean vet and he was in the band, (laughter) played saxophone like my father [Samuel Player V] (laughter).  Yeah, very nice man, very nice man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Shed, S-H-E-D, William Hall [Shed William Hall] and then he lived in--he was from Greenville, Texas, and I remember it was very interesting because I was su- I--at the last minute they told me I needed, I needed three hours and something and I, I couldn't march, so I said, oh. So I had to go to summer school.  I said okay, but I did get my--I got an award, I got an award for outstanding foreign language (laughter)--that wasn't that hard wasn't nobody majoring in foreign language but me (laughter). I was the president, I remember I was the grand president of the circle de francais; that was the French club.  Nobody else was majoring in French but me, so you know, but it was--I had to go back to school and it was so funny and to show you how strict the, the historical college [HBCU] were, I had to have permission, written permission from my husband to leave the campus, like to go downtown shopping or something.
Speaker 1: Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when do you get your teacher's certificate, after that summer?
Speaker 2: I got my--yes, I got my teaching certificate at the end of that summer yes because then I had--that's when I officially graduated at the end--I had six weeks of summer school that I had to go then I got all my credentials.
Speaker 1: And what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Well I started subbing, we were living in Greenville, Texas and I was a, Hunt, Hunt County [Texas] sub and my husband was working in a little community called Neylandville [Texas], it was an all-black community.  Neylandville school, and I was a county sub, and so I, I and so worked in a lot of schools, wherever they sent me; schools out in cotton fields, a lot of one-room schools, very interesting.  I really grew to have a deep respect for teachers, but then I started to really doubt that I could do that because I saw people coming with I mean they, they didn't have any books, or, and if they had books half the pages were missing and this, that and the other and they were teaching with what they had brought from home, teaching using--you know with their dictionaries, they're using the Bible, they're using ca- Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] catalogues or, anything, any books, any books they had at home.  They would bring and this is what they were teaching kids, and I'd say gosh, I don't know if I can do that, I don't know how to teach people like that you know. I had been studying in a school we had--then, I said, but then I remembered that I had seen kids come out of schools like that, come into Texas College [Tyler, Texas]. For instance, we had kids who, who came and they didn't know one note from another, maybe they, they played instruments, they played by ear only and when they left Texas College they were writing music, they could go to any university and get a master's [degree] or a Ph.D. 'cause they did offer a master's program.  You can anywhere in the world and get a Ph.D., that's how strict they were on you and how they took the students where they were, but I had so much respect for these teachers who taught all grade levels and when I would have to sub and it's like--you teach all twelve grades you know.  Man, that was something (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How, how did you handle that?
Speaker 2: I just did it, I did the best I could.  I learned, I would ask questions, I asked questions.  Sometimes it would be--you would have like two or three teachers but you only had one room, classroom.  You had to--they would be like maybe sometimes you had--the elementary school teacher and the high school teacher, and so they would, they would help you, you know.  In the mornings they'd tell you what to do and then there the students would tell you what they had been learning, and you, you just you try to continue on and you observe a lot, you know.
Story_ID: 483006
Speaker 1: So how long did you substitute teach?
Speaker 2: I was a county sub [in Hunt County, Texas] from fifty--from '57 [1957] to--let's see there was one year in there, I don't remember exact- oh '58 [1958] and '59 [1959] I was in West Texas, I taught in West Texas, at Plainview [Texas].  Then after Plainview I was in Amarillo [Texas], I wasn't--I didn't sub there.  I was only there--I was there for a year.  I remember I, I didn't sub--I was pregnant.  We moved to Amarillo because you couldn't teach school and be pregnant at the time, so and then we--I got a job working in the supermarket I remember which led to me getting, becoming an apprentice butcher (laughter) because--I wanted, I just wanted to know how to cut up a chicken and there was a woman butcher, a woman who was a veteran and she showed me how to cut up a chicken.  Then she got sick, I was working cash register at the time and we ran out of chickens and the manager wanted to know if there was anyone who knew how to cut up chickens and I said, "Yeah, I do" 'cause I wanted to get off cash register (laughter) anyway and I went back there and I cut chickens.  I cut up chickens that night and next he said, "You wanna come back here and work tomorrow?"  I said, "Yes, I'd love, I'd like that." And so they and he said, "You like working in meat?"  And I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well we have an apprentice program so you can--." So I, I never got any further than apprentice.  So I can cut a side of beef, can't lift it but I can cut it--
Story_ID: 483007
Speaker 1: Tell me how much did you make as a teacher?
Speaker 2: When I stopped teaching school I was making $21,000 a year.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm--I wanna know in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Oh, when I first started teaching (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you first started fifty--'57 [1957] through '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, god about $100 a month, uh-huh because I remember, yeah 'cause my husband [Shed William Hall] who was a band director--he was working in Neylandville [Texas], he was making $199 a month, uh-huh, I remember that and when we went out to West Texas that was li- that was the lure, $300 a month, gross.  Then when I started teaching in Dallas [Texas], $300 a month.
Speaker 1: So what year did you go back to teaching?  After, you had your children?  How many children did you have?
Speaker 2: No, no I had, I had my daughter [Irma Hall Crayton], I had my daughter--my daughter was born in 1957, which was the same year I went out to West Texas and I was out there until I got pregnant again the next year in '58 [1958]--I mean, yeah '58 [1958] then I had to stop teaching 'cause you couldn't be pregnant and teach, so I lost that baby, so.  Then I came back to, to Greenville, Texas and I was a county sub again, and I remained a sub, I worked as a Hunt County [Texas] sub as well as teaching--we moved to Plano [Texas].  So I was a Hunt County sub and whatever the--I subbed at the one--they had Plano Colored School [Plano Senior High School, Plano, Texas] and they had--that was just the one school that taught all twelve grade levels.  They didn't have that many kids, I mean you could walk all over Plano.  I think we had--I remember I subbed a, a lot and I was there so much they made me the senior class sponsor (laughter).  We had about five seniors (laughter), that's all, and, but because in the summer--I just, something to do.  I used to form these little clubs.  I had formed a little art club and at the--we would go walking up and down the streets and roads and picking up stuff and come back to my house and we'd make things, and then I had some watercolors and some chalk.  Now I didn't even have pastels, I just had plain chalk that you, you know buy in the five and ten cent store, and my kids what--drew pictures and things and we would, we had a little art contest and the mayor and everything came and--. So, this led to when the schools integrated there the, the, they were waiting for the kids to come and they hadn't come and the superintendent--'cause you knew everybody and they--I had subbed so the superintendent said, "Ms. Hall [HistoryMaker Irma P. Hall], why you think they didn't come?"  And I said, "Well they haven't had a lot of those subjects and they just didn't want kids to go up there and just fail in everything."  So he said--well we had a plan, we had (unclear).  So I would talk with the parents and I told 'em I would tutor, I would tutor in all of the--in the humanities and so I did and they helped me. They would bring--we would come over to Dallas and bring kids to the museum to the di- various libraries this, that and the other.  We used facilities--they would--we would carpool bring kids. It wasn't that many kids like I said you know and I taught them--of course I, I taught them beginning French and Spanish, English, I loved geo- and geography, history, I knew those things and I was very proud.  So when school opened the next year and they integrated when--they had integrated the year before but kids just didn't come.  Then they went, then the superintendent after then came one day and told me that they needed a foreign language teacher in Dallas.  They, they were building a new--opening a new school, a new black high school, Roosevelt [Franklin D. Roosevelt High School, Dallas, Texas], and the--they were losing a teacher.
Speaker 1: So they asked you to come?
Speaker 2: And he said, "I suggested you," he said, "I know you'll do us proud."  So that's how I started teaching in Dallas in 1963.  So I was a sub from '57 [1957] to '63 [1963].
Story_ID: 483008
Speaker 1: So in 1963 you moved to Dallas [Texas] to teach?
Speaker 2: No. I, I--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) still lived in Plano [Texas], but I commuted because my husband [Shed William Hall] was working at--and still working at Plano Colored School [Plano Senior High School, Plano, Texas] and I got a job--I, I would commute back and forth, drive, and it was North Dallas [Dallas, Texas], it was relatively simple.  I was at Booker T. Washington, then it was called Booker T. Washington Technical High School [Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas] and I was teaching French and Spanish, first year French and Spanish and Thelma Richardson became my first play mother there, and Jewel Ross [Jewel Price Ross] was like--I would, had been placed in her--like she was my mentor and my best friend there at Booker T. Washington Technical High School, I was teaching French and Spanish.
Speaker 1: Now, this is also the year that Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] killed, do you remember the assassination of President Kennedy?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I remember it was so sad, it was interesting because my student, we--they had been saying why couldn't get out of school so we could go, and, and we're very close, we're on Ross Avenue and said, boy we could've walked down there, we could've get to see the president.  They wouldn't let us out of school, so they--each week we were taking turns going to the, the audio visual aid room looking in on the big television and I remember we were waiting to go and we heard the news that somebody shot the president, "What?" And I remember--I'll never forget that because my students were so shocked and they didn't know what to do and they just started, they started singing 'La Marseillaise' yeah, and somebody started (singing) "Allons enfants de la Patrie," and singing, they didn't know what to do and they were just crying and singing it, you know, "Aux armes (unclear)," yeah, yeah it was--I remember that and it's like--we said, "Let 'em sing it," they didn't know what to do, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so what were you thoughts though about, about the assassination?
Speaker 2: I just, I (makes sound), it was unbelievable, I mean I could not believe that somebody would actually--you, you know you had read about [President] Abraham Lincoln and stuff, but someone would actually and then in the city where I'm living, I wondering who did it and why and then of course we were out of school, we were--everyone was glued to their televisions watching this unfold, and it was just like unreal, unreal, and, and then people would come in sometimes and they would wanna go, that's where they wanna go and you know it's like we'd say, "Why do you wanna go down there?"  "Oh, we wanna see where he got shot."  Why do you wanna see something like that? You know it's just like, ugh, we just wanted to forget it.  It was--it was just horrible and it was embarrassing but they said well we didn't do it.  All the people of Dallas didn't do it, I mean we were honored that a president was in town--it was a crazy man [Lee Harvey Oswald] who did it so, it wasn't us.  But it was just very, very sad, yeah.
Story_ID: 483009
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long did you stay at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington Technical High School; Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Until 1967, then they were closing Booker T. because they were going to do some renovation on the building.  Also they were building a road I think through North Dallas [Dallas, Texas] or something, but it closed down.  So I went to the--in 1967 I went to Zumwalt Junior High [Sarah Zumwalt Junior High School] in Oak Cliff [Dallas, Texas] and I--there it was the first I'd ever teach--I said how am I gonna do that (laughter), you know they only have seventh, eighth and ninth grade, and I couldn't teach anything below ninth grade, but what I taught was what they call exploratory foreign language and then first year French and Spanish, so that's--. And I--at, at the same time I became the publicist for the school so and I would get the school news in and I, I noticed that the Dallas Express, which was the oldest black newspaper in Dallas [Texas] at the time, was--it had so many mistakes and things in it and, and everybody would be complaining.  I said, well I'm go on down and see if I can do--if can offer assistance.  We're, we're just complaining about it, maybe it's something we can do.  We're all teachers.  So I went down I said, "I'm a language teacher, can I help in any kind of way?  Can I proofread, can I do something?" (Laughter) And they said, yeah, they were short, they were very short staffed.  They only had three or four people.  They said, "We need another reporter." So they made me the entertainment editor and the sports editor, so I had those two things that I did. And I also had to take my own pictures because we didn't have a photographer and I, I had to--I was responsible for my own photographs, so I either had to take 'em myself or hire a photographer and I learned a lot, I learned because everything--it was a weekly.  I learned, I learned how to lay a page. I learned how to do headlines.  I learned how to do all of that stuff.  It was, yeah, oppor- (unclear). And I also got a chance to cover the Muhammad Ali, Ellis [Jimmy Ellis] fight in Houston [Texas] and talk with Muhammad Ali and get to know him so, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and what was that, that like to talk to Muhammad Ali?
Speaker 2: He was just so, just such a wonderful young man, he was just beautiful and he, he loved children, babies and old people, had such respect for old people, and I talked with him a lot.  I've said, well I don't know that much about covering sp- covering a fight for a sport but at least I can write my story from this angle, and I remember they would tell, like the old people would come up and he'd--and they would say, "But you know you gotta rest now, you need the rest." And he said, "No, I can talk to them, come on up." And he would take 'em to his room, and babies, he'd hold them, so, very nice man, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And who did you, who else did you meet while working at the newspaper?
Speaker 2: I, oh, I met a lot of people.  I did--I met representatives from forty African nations for one thing and got to talk with them and do their story and got to know some more about Africa.
Story_ID: 483010
Speaker 1: Then I belonged to an, an organization called Advancing Artists and Writers [Association of Advancing Artists and Writers, Inc.], we were a young organization of poets and painters and so forth and so on, and I was working for them at the time and a lady who, who would always take out ads told me that Raymond St. Jacques was coming and I should try to talk with him.  I knew he was a famous actor and he was coming to Dallas [Texas] to look at it as a possible location for a movies he was planning to shoot called 'Book of Numbers' so I, I did interview him and I wrote the story and he liked it and he called me and asked me if I would work as interim publicist for his film?  And I said, "Yes, if you tell me what a publicist for a film does," (laughter).  (Cough) For me it was an opportunity to learn to do something new, and, and I was gonna get paid for it too, yeah.  And so he hired me, and that's what I was doing.  I learned a lot of things about promotion.  It was fun, and he heard me--I told him that we had gotten a grant to work with young people, and we were gonna be working at, at this mall, Langski [ph.] shopping center mall and he said, "Well, that's where I'll have my auditions, and that way it'll focus attention on what you all are doing."  So we didn't know any better, we (laughter) planned the entertainment and all, we didn't know people needed to be quiet so they could study the scripts to learn their lines.  We entertained, we had dramas and everything, had the art all out and the poets were doing their stuff and he heard me reading some poetry and asked me to read for a part in the film, which I considered.  It was just, he was just, you know, just telling me I did well, and I ignored it for about a week and he finally cornered me and got me to read for it and he said, "You read well." And I said, "I teach school," (laughter), "I teach language in fact, course I can read." And I, I didn't even know what he meant.  And he said, "No," he said, "We're (unclear)--." I, I got the role it was originally a one part, one day and it's--wait a minute.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay and, and he expanded the role and told me that I had natural ability, I was what they call a--how did he put this now an instinctive actor and that I should develop the craft and I said, "Well I can't do that because I'm teaching school," but the next year another young man that I had met named Montgomery [Reginald Montgomery] asked me to work with him to start a community theater [Dallas Minority Repertory Theater, Dallas, Texas], and they wanted me to be the executive director 'cause I knew nothing about artistic directorship, which now I am the artistic director by the way of a theater [African American Repertory Theater, DeSoto, Texas], and I knew about fundraising.  So we did that and for the next five years I was plunged into theater, and so that's my beginnings of theater really (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And you were still teaching school?
Speaker 1: Yes, oh yeah I didn't think of acting as a career or anything, I just wanted to--I believe that if God gives you a talent you're obligated to develop it as much as possible.  You--I still don't know why He has me doing this.  I had no idea.  I thought at first that it was so that I could introduce my students to all of these jobs and careers so I would take them with me whenever I was working on a film or anything so that they could talk to all of the people behind the scenes, the camera people, the electricians, grips, gaffers and all those people and find out what they needed to, to do in order to get some of those careers because those are careers that--where you could work all time.
Story_ID: 483011
Speaker 1: I continued until--for the next twelve years doing that, 'cause I thought that's why God had me doing it, and then finally I had to stop teaching because of arthritis so, it got too bad and I had to be absent a lot. And my daughter [Irma Hall Crayton] got a master's degree in special ed [special education] at that time so--I said I've replaced myself (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this--what year are we in?
Speaker 1: We're in 1984, we have gone from what?
Speaker 2: Well it's--we went from (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, we didn't go there--okay maybe--I, I did the movie, 'Book of Numbers.' And then--
Speaker 2: And that was in 1971?
Speaker 1: That was in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, and, and it was released in '73 [1973].  In '71 [1971] also I changed schools.  I went to T.W. Browne Junior High School [T.W. Browne Middle School] and--
Speaker 2: Is that--that's in Dallas [Texas] as well?
Speaker 1: That's in Dallas also.
Speaker 2: So are you still commuting, your husband's [Shed William Hall] still working at the other school?
Speaker 1: No, by that time I was divorced.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was divorced in 1968, yes, so I was divorced by--. And then in--from 1971 from 1976 I was at T.W. Browne Junior High, and I was working on stage a lot as well as, was doing film.  I was doing a lot of educational and industrial films, and when I went--I went to James Madison High School [Dallas, Texas] was my last transfer because they took the ninth grade off of junior high and put it back on senior high, and I can't each anything below ninth grade, so I had to go, and I went to James Madison High School, and I had wanted to be teaching at an inner-city school anyway because I felt that's where I wanted to give back and I knew what it was like 'cause I had grown up South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. And T.W. Browne was an upper middle class school, predominately white at the time, and I didn't feel that I was doing--but the principal there told me he said, "Yeah, well they need to send you here because a lot of these kids had never seen black teachers, period, and they need to see you here."  And, I, I you know he said, "You have to decide, are you gonna be a teacher of children, are you gonna be a teacher of black children?" You know and I prayed over that and I said, well God gave me a gift to be able to reach children at all I'm obligated to teach children, they're all children to me, I don't care what color.  So, that's what I learned there and took that with me and as, as there are several people from T.W. Browne who are in this industry by the way and they say it's because of me so you never know. And I went to Booker T. Washington [Arts Magnet at Booker T. Washington High School; Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas] and that was in, in 1976 and from 1976 to '84 [1984], I taught.  I taught Spanish, English--they needed, they took me out of French; they got another French teacher because they needed a strong grammarian.  They needed someone to teach a course where students were entering ninth grade on the third grade or below reading level and they needed a strong grammarian so--they needed a teacher to teach a course that would bring them up.  So they put me in that English thing and then we did it, we brought kids up to where they were supposed to be and like I said in--I taught there and I finally started to teach, I had to teach theater arts because they assigned me to the arts magnet because I was a professional actress--I had--by that time and they--I wanted to stay at Madison and the principal there said, "Well I need a drama teacher so you have to teach drama." (Laughter) So I had to, I taught theater arts there, until '84 [1984] and then finally stopped.
Story_ID: 483012
Speaker 1: Well what were some of the acting jobs that you had during that time?
Speaker 2: I worked at a lot of theaters here.  I worked at Theatre Three [Dallas, Texas], Granny's Dinner Theater [Dallas, Texas], the Dallas Summer Musicals.  I also got hired--which was a combination of, of what I had done, the experience I had, had working as a publicist I was working for Stan Levenson and that work, he--at the time it was Glenn, Bozell and Jacobs [Glenn, Bozell and Jacobs, Inc.; Bozell Worldwide Inc.] and Stan Levenson.  I was working directly for him for the Kool Jazz Festivals [Newport Jazz Festival] for five years because I knew, I knew of jazz musicians.
Speaker 1: Which, which years was that, those five years?
Speaker 2: That was from '71 [1971] to '76 [1976]. Then I worked, I worked as a publicist for a number of different things. I think it was about 1978 I'm--hosted a radio program on an independent radio station, KCHU [KCHU Radio; KNON Radio, Dallas, Texas], called 'Gemini' [ph.] and I played music that you didn't hear every day, old jazz and I also had a program for teenagers to talk on and it was called 'Teen Talk' [ph.] at the time.  Then I was trying to mainly do these things really to expose my students, as my parents [Josephine Thomas Player and Samuel Player V] had exposed me to so many things.  I was still trying to expose them to things so I was still filling up my car and taking kids and exposing them bringing them out here to Fair Park [Dallas, Texas] because there were a lot of kids who lived right here in South Dallas but who had not been to Fair Park other than for the fair day, so you know we--I was doing things like that until finally like I said the arthritis became so bad and my daughter [Irma Hall Crayton]--I figured I'd replace myself, so and before then I worked in films.  I started getting larger roles, I did 'Dallas' twice, I was Tilly the caterer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Dallas' the TV, the TV show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I, and I kept doing different films here.  The last three films that I did in Texas before I went to Chicago [Illinois] to take care of my parents who were ill, were 'Square Dance' with Jason Robards; the remake of 'A Long Hot Summer' [sic. 'The Long Hot Summer'], and that again was with Jason Robards (laughter), Don Johnson and then--
Speaker 1: The 'Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders,' were you in that TV show (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did two of the--I did Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders I and II ['Dallas Cowboys Cheerleader II'], and I got a chance to work with Denzel Washington in 'The George McKenna Story.'  I think they're calling that something else now.  It was--'cause it's a true story. And I got to work with--Horton Foote film on--'Valentine's Day' and then I went to--my mother got very sick and I had to go to Chicago in '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: In '87 [1987], but in '81 [1981] there, there's a role that you played with Joanne Woodward.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, 'Crisis at Central High' that was about the integration of, of Central High School in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Little Rock [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: --Little Rock, yes, and that was, that was very interesting. And I got a chance to do that.
Story_ID: 483013
Speaker 1: You know, I just can't remember all of the different things that I did.
Speaker 2: That's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I was working as what they call a day player.  I was still at what they call a day player up until ninety--I think it was '95 [1995] when I did 'A Family Thing' 'cause I--
Speaker 2: Did you--well before we get to '95 [1995] you moved to Chicago [Illinois], but don't you write your own play, 'Gentle Fire' [Irma P. Hall]?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did a--yes, it was, that was while I was still, I was the executive director of the Dallas Minority Repertory Theater [Dallas, Texas] and yes, it was based on my poetry, it was called 'Gentle Fire' and it was very well received.  It surprised me it was just a play about the hopes, fears and aspirations of people in an urban setting.  It was multi-age group, multi-racial, in fact one of the most, one of the poems that made the, made--oh, I can't think of what I'm trying to say.  One of the poems that, that really interested people the most was a poem that was done by--it was done in Spanish and it was echoed in English by a Jewish mother and the child who acted it out was black so it was called 'The Streets Are Gonna Get Him Anyway' [ph.] and it was about you know things that happen in an urban setting, so.
Speaker 2: Now, and, and tell me about in 1987, 'Uncle Tom's Cabin'?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' I--I have forgotten I did 'Uncle Tom's Cabin.'  I did--
Speaker 2: That was with Samuel Jackson and Phylicia [HistoryMaker Phylicia Rashad] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Samuel, yes.
Speaker 2: --and Phylicia Rashad.
Speaker 1: And I didn't even see Samuel L. Jackson (laughter).  I did see Avery Brooks.  I wanted to be in that because Avery Brooks was in it and I had had read the book ['Uncle Tom's Cabin,' Harriet Beecher Stowe], and I said you know these people have not read this book, they don't know anything except Uncle Tom, they think that if you just go along with whatever old master say you know and that's Uncle Tom.  They don't know the true story.  They don't know and I said, wow.  Avery and I we use to talk about that when we were doing that.  We said we'll be glad when they really do the story of this real slave that this was written about.  So I said I'm gonna be in that, I'm gonna be in that if I have to be a tree, and I enjoyed it, I did that.
Speaker 2: And the director was, it was Stan Latham [sic.] is that right?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Stan Lathan, yes.
Speaker 2: So this is--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the first time--
Speaker 1: That was my first time.
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--
Speaker 1: No, that was my second time being direc- having a black director.  The--I can't remember his name now.  Young man [Eric Laneuville] who was still on 'St. Elsewhere' directed me in the Denzel Washington piece ['The George McKenna Story'].  The name just escapes me right now because I'm trying too hard to think of it.  It'll come back to me.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm at that point, I can remember--if it was a script, I'd remember it (laughter).
Story_ID: 483014
Speaker 1: You were also doing television, now the television, was that in Chicago [Illinois], like 'Missing Persons' and the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in Chicago. When I went to Chicago I didn't do anything.  I told my agent I couldn't do anything but take care of my mother [Josephine Thomas Player] and so from January until she died in May, I did nothing but take of my mother.  Then immediately after she died, I started--my father [Samuel Player V] and said that I should you know go to work (laughter).  He said, "'Cause you're, you're a link in my chain too," he said, you know.  I said, "I'm not any fun anymore."  So, I did, I transferred all of my union affiliation and everything to Chicago and I started halfheartedly looking for something to do, and I signed up with a few agents so I was doing, again, industrial and educational films.  And I--there--I--there was a man, a black agent there that I was where he no longer has his agency and he loaned me to another agent named Harrise Davidson, who, who was looking for someone at the time and I started working with her quite a bit.  She would call me for things so I worked with her quite a bit. And his name was Philip [ph.] and he--and then he gave up his agency, stopped, then she became my agent.  When they said I had to have one in Chicago.  Up until then I still had my agent here, in, in Texas, Peggy Taylor and she just died two or three years ago.  So, there were only three agents here in Texas, but I never changed my agent in Texas, so they said I had to have one in Chicago, so I went exclusively with Harrise.  I think that was about 1993.
Speaker 1: What is the name?
Speaker 2: Harrise, H-A-R-R-I-S-E, Harrise Davidson, yeah.  And then Harrise finally gave up her (laughter) agency oh, about three years ago and so she became my, she's my manager and I have no other agent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We just--we gonna make it together, and then I found out that she was a Gemini like I and she was also from Texas.  All this time I had been, I had not known that.
Speaker 1: Now, so tell me which did you prefer, or what do you like to work more, theater, television or film?
Speaker 2: I, I like to act.  I am so dumb about (laughter), oh, I guess the little, what, technical, or the terminologies and all of those sort of things.  Acting is acting to me, radio (laughter), television, stage, film.  I feel that I learn a lot on stage, and I take what I have learned on stage to the other places to--film.  So I think that to me stage is like the mother of the family, but the rest of them all have--I, I'd to me I'm always on to--acting is acting.  I don't know, I don't know that much about it to make--
Story_ID: 483015
Speaker 1: So in 1996, 'A Family Thing,' talk to me about that film?
Speaker 2: Well, before then, I had, I remember it was very interesting I, I just firmly believe that God guides everything I do because I had no intention of teaching (laughter) and God said, yeah, you gonna teach (laughter) then when he stopped me, when I started acting you know I had no, I had no thoughts of doing that.  I'm always doing these things I have no thought of doing.  So okay, so now I'm acting. Acting was never on my menu in the first place.  I didn't even buy movie magazines as a child, wasn't ac- interested.  So okay I'm doing that and I said okay I'm doing this.  Then when--teaching though, I'm still a teacher and I still feel that way, I'm a teacher.  I don't know why I'm doing this acting, it's something God wants me to do.  God decided that I should, I should do certain roles and certain things, so when I was asked because Raymond [Raymond St. Jacques] was my mentor and he said, "You need to decide what you're gonna do."  And I said, "I wanna be the voice of older women, and women who have been voiceless, the, the mothers and aunts and so forth and so on. I wanna do them and tell their truth so profoundly so people will not forget them." I don't care if they know who [HistoryMaker] Irma P. Hall is, I really don't even--that doesn't matter to me, you know.  It's surprising when people come up and they want my autograph, I'm still saying for what, when I was doing something important like teaching school, nobody came to ask for my autograph.  I'm playing now, having fun, but that's good, that's all good, so.
Speaker 1: So you took this role--
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: --because you felt that you needed to have a voice--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for older women?
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and I had, and the interesting thing--why, I, I really believe it was God, the last acting assignment I had had been on stage.  I was doing a play called 'Dry the Floor' [ph.] where I was a ninety-year old woman, which was two years older than I had to be in the film and I met this woman there, a woman, her last name Hoffman [ph.] and I would go to her house.  She had been born blind, and I would go to her house with her, I observed how she handled herself in her house and everything and, and it was amazing 'cause she was just born, no eye things, and here I come along and I'm playing an eighty-eight year old blind woman.  Then when I needed to know about the use of the stick, up until then I thought people carried it to let other people know they were blind (laughter), I really did.  I didn't know it had a specific function, and I said, oh, lord what, what do they use it for?  So I, I was on my way to get a newspaper in Memphis [Tennessee], where we're shooting and I said oh, I know how to be blind but I don't know how to use that stick and I saw a blind man, and I just followed him around.  See God sent him, so I said, oh, it's like an antennae, that's what he's using--and I learned how to do that so, yes.
Speaker 1: In that film, how close to the character did you, I mean I know she was a lot older than you, but as far as the character and what she portrayed?
Speaker 2: I think that she was a combination of--I was sixty years old the day I found out I had the part.  It was like my sixtieth birthday, and when you have been around for sixty years and you've been, you've been partial to older people you know, you just--you, you know these people.  She was a compilation of a lot of women I've known.  All of them really are compilations.  So she was a compilation.  I have known people. When I was a child, I didn't know what an orphan was, if somebody died or anything somebody took children in and raised them. So I knew about raising other people's children--it's just what you did.
Story_ID: 483016
Speaker 1: 'A Family Thing' like, after 'A Family Thing' and I got the Chicago Film Critics Award [Chicago Film Critics Association Award] and I said well I guess I am an actress dammit--'cause I had been calling myself a retired teacher who acts, but I said I am an actor.  I'm very proud of that, thank you Jesus.  Then I started to get more roles, I started--I got a role in 'Buddy' and 'Steel' with, worked with Shaquille O'Neal.  I got--which finally led to other acting roles 'Mo' Money' I started with, what's the young man's name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dwayne Wayans?
Speaker 1: Martin.
Speaker 2: Oh, Martin Lawrence.
Speaker 1: Martin Lawrence, yes, Martin Lawrence and then I--well 'Mo' Money,' no, Martin, 'Mo' Money' had had the Wayans brothers, yes, and 'Nothing to Lose' had Martin Lawrence, then finally I was also doing a lot of stage work in between so there'd be some years where I'd be doing stage and film.  I mean I did 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] for the eighth and ninth times, came back to Dallas [Texas] and did 'A Raisin in the Sun' and when--while I was doing 'A Raisin in the'--after I got through doing 'Raisin in the Sun,' I got the chance to do a, a series.  Now--went to Canada to work on 'All Souls' it was a short-lived series.  Then well I got an award, a Jeff Award [Joseph Jefferson Award] in Chicago [Illinois] for the Goodman Theatre presentation of 'A Raisin in the Sun' and then the opportunity to read for 'Ladykillers' ['The Ladykillers']. I was doing a play in North Carolina called 'A Lesson Before Dying,' and I was asked to come to read for 'Ladykillers' and I flew up, I was in North Car- I flew up to New York [New York] and read for it and came back, finished out the play, 'A Lesson Before Dying' because I had done the film 'A Lesson Before Dying,' it was a TV film.  I had worked with Cicely Tyson and Don Cheadle and Mekhi Phifer and we had gotten an Emmy [Emmy Award].  And when I got back I found that I had gotten the role.  I was so surprised 'cause I (laughter), they didn't--I really didn't read that much.  They talked and talked and talked to me you know and I got the role, got a chance I said I'm gonna work with Tom Hanks so, co-starred with Tom Hanks in 'The Ladykillers,' and after I did that I was in town and a young lady wanted to do a, a film, a short film that she had called 'A Gift of the Living' [ph.] you know I did that for her and 'Collateral' came up and the opportunity to work with a director from, from Chicago, Mann, so I'm--said, this is great (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who--that was Michael Mann, you said Michael Mann?
Speaker 1: Michael Mann, right, Michael Mann and, and to work with, I call him little half homeboy (laughter).
Speaker 2: Jamie Foxx?
Speaker 1: Jamie Foxx from right down the street here, so that was wonderful.
Story_ID: 483017
Speaker 1: Where does 'Soul Food' come in?
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year is 'Soul Food'?
Speaker 2: Now, when I was working in--'Soul Food' came right after I had done--
Speaker 1: 'Nothing to Lose'?
Speaker 2: --'Noth-' no, I--(makes sound) it was 'Buddy' I believe, and, and I got an opportunity to--I had worked with Oprah Winfrey before, I had worked on an episode 'Women of Brewster Place' ['The Women of Brewster Place'] in the first episode.  So, so I read for a part in 'Beloved' and got a chance to work in that.  I was doing--we, we went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then I did 'Beloved' and it was a wonderful, inspirational film to do.  I was surprised people didn't get it any better.
Speaker 1: What year was 'Beloved' do you remember?
Speaker 2: I, you know I had already done 'Soul Food.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And 'Soul Food' came out while I was shooting 'Beloved' I remember because I went to the--. When I was doing 'Buddy,' George [George Tillman, Jr.] and Bob [ph.] came to my room.  I was doing both 'Buddy' and 'Steel' at the same time.  They came to me, they had this script they wanted me to read, and I said, "Okay."  When I read it and I saw that the woman's name was Mama Joe.  My mother's name was Josephine [Josephine Thomas Player] and my children called her Mama Jo then it was about the woman who had three girls and she was a diabetic and an amputee and then died in the hospital.  My father's mother [Carrie Willis Player] died that way, my father's mother was a diabetic.  They didn't know much about diabetes, she had her leg amputated and she died in the hospital, and she had three daughters and one son.  So, I said, no I have to do this because it's sent, it's too close you know.  So I did--and, and I remember it came out while I was doing 'Beloved' because I wanted to, I wanted to--I remember going to the theater to see it and I saw it and I got outside the theater and somebody recognized me (laughter) and they said, "There she is," and I said, whoa, 'cause it was so many people, it was so crowded.  It was interesting, and I passed by and I stopped in a little shop and the, it was a camera shop and the guy said, "There she is, that's (unclear) in 'Soul Food.'  Somebody give me a camera, give me a camera."  The man said, "This is a camera store, just pick out" (laughter) "any camera you want."  It was very exciting, yes.  So I've been Big Mama, people stop me in Chicago [Illinois], I'm Big Mama.  They can, I can--down in the Loop and they'll see me across the street, "Hey, Big Mama, how you doing?  Can I have a hug?"  "Yeah, baby come on."   I get lots of hugs and things, yes.
Speaker 1: So were you nominated for any awards for 'Soul Food'?
Speaker 2: For 'Soul Food,' yes, I, I received a NAACP Image Award for that and yeah we, we got a lot of awards for that--the young man [Brandon Hammond] who played my grandson [Ahmad Chadway], and everybody.  It was just a beautiful experience so yeah, that and I think that me doing 'Soul Food' well having--that it, it just, it--I think that's what propelled them to consider me for 'Ladykillers' ['The Ladykillers'] later on.
Story_ID: 483018
Speaker 1: And you've got a number of awards for 'A Lesson Before Dying' you got an award as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well 'A Lesson Before Dying' yeah, that was, that was television, that was HBO, and we got, we got an Emmy [Emmy Award] for that for the 'A Lesson Before Dying.' Then for, but 'Ladykillers' ['The Ladykillers'] I know I got an award at Cannes Film Festival [Cannes, France], I got the jurist award [Jury Prize] for that, and Tarantino [Quentin Tarantino] called me a force of nature (laughter), I appreciate that, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember what year that was for Cannes?
Speaker 2: Yeah 19--I mean 2004, same year as my car wreck.  I had a car wreck immediately--I was waiting to go, waiting to go to work, or back to work on something in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. It was in, in January of 2004 and that's all I know about that accident. It was like I had this whatever happens to you they said protect you. I don't know about that, I don't even remember being in my car, so, and for, from until the next year in May I was in the hospital, then I came home and I was home two hours and I had to go back in the hospital again, had four more surgeries.  The internal injuries showed up and so while I was in the hospital they--and the Cannes Film Festival was going on and that's when I got that award for that.  And I got nominated for some other things. In 2005 was like a flurry of things from in honor of my parents [Josephine Thomas Player and Samuel Player V].  They named a street for me in Chicago [Illinois].  It's Irma P. Hall Way on 95th Street between Halsted [Street] and Normal [Avenue]. Then I got inducted into the Texas Film Hall of Fame in Austin [Texas] and also Spindletop hall of fame in Beaumont [Texas], my home there that was especially interesting. And I got, I was a history maker at the, the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and then what else?  I got a number of awards, got inducted into the, oh, what all--I can't remember.  I got several awards, I, yeah, I just think about all of them now.
Speaker 1: They made--
Speaker 2: I'd, I always--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --receive these things in honor of my parents because like I said I, I didn't teach myself these things.  These things were passed, things that I do they were nurtured by my parents as an honor to them because they did something right (laughter).
Story_ID: 483019
Speaker 1: 'Soul Food' also became a miniseries on--was it Showtime?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had been asked--they were talking about doing that and I had been asked to do, if I would do reprieve that role and I said sure.  So I was on there, and I was--a, a dream (laughter).
Speaker 1: What is your latest project?
Speaker 2: I've done several projects, independent films.  I'm in, I'm getting these emptying this vase out.  I'm trying to help young filmmakers if I can get their foot in the door and still about telling stories and teaching this huge class.  So, I, I did a film, got a chance to work with Calvin Lockhart just before he died in a film called 'Rain' which is still in, in post-production.  It was filmed in the Bahamas and so I don't know when it'll be coming out.  They're still working on it and then I got a chance to do a film called the 'Uncross the Stars' a Kenny Goldman [sic. Kenny Golde] film and so lots of--teamed up with a lot of senior citizens in that and it will be going to the Phoenix Film Festival this year and I did a film that will be opening on the 21st of March [March 21, 2008], a feature film called 'Meet the Browns' with Tyler Perry. I had been wanting to meet Tyler to tell him how I proud I was of him and his work, so now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How was that experience working with Tyler Perry?
Speaker 2: It was a beautiful experience, wonderful experience, and I keep having these little--I think god sends little messages.  I keep having these things to do, either something I'm supposed to tell someone or it's something in the f- in the story itself that I'm supposed. When I look back through all of 'em I can see 'em you know, like in 'Something to Sing About,' that's--it wasn't on main street, it, it was a TV film you know and I worked with Tia [sic. Tamera Mowry-Housley] of 'Sister, Sister.'
Speaker 1: Mowry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, so that was, that was very--the whole thing, well it was a Billy Graham film you know, then if you have little messages that you give, a little something, it has something to do.
Story_ID: 483020
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to talk about that we, that we missed, that we didn't cover?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No, except how (laughter) after so many years it's just, it's just so interesting because I made my three score and ten now you know, I'm still here, and it, it just took God so long, bless his heart, he was so patient with me to get me to figure out I wasn't running anything down here (laughter).  I've tried my best to run things.  When I look back and see how he has guided me and how he still does guide me and it, I see it in my children--in my child.  I lost my son in 2002, he worked for Dallas Independent School District too, a wonderful boy, but he had, had a blood clot in his knee that broke loose and went to his lungs, and I remember being very angry with God, very angry and it's like when and then God told me one day.  I kept telling him, why do you want to take my son, my son?  He wasn't yours; he was mine (laughter) I let you have 'em for a while. And you know that sunk in, yes, and I had him for thirty-nine years and it was wonderful.  I have so many wonderful things to remember.  Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell, tell me your children's names?
Speaker 2: Okay, my, my son's name was Shed William Hall, Jr., (laughter) and my daughter's name is Irma Delores (laughter), she's married.   Her last name is Crayton, so Irma Delores Crayton [Irma Hall Crayton], and who fought, did some of the same things I did.  She got a cosmetology license while she was in high school, then she went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and, and majored in, in special ed [special education], but she joined the [U.S.] Navy her senior year.  So as soon as she graduated she went into the Navy.  She was in the Navy twenty-one years, made a career out of it and did very well and received some awards in there. Doesn't like for me to talk too much about it or brag, but she's been teaching special ed now fourteen years at one school, that I don't see her ever, ever leaving.   She loves those kids, she's a very dedicated teacher.  Then my grandchildren, Toni Delores we, we dropped the Irma, but we kept the Delores (laughter).  Toni Delores Crayton, and she's at Texas College [Tyler, Texas], a sophomore, and she's--doesn't know if she wants to go into sports medicine or if she wants to be a P.E. [physical education] teacher, but she likes sports and she likes science, so she's trying to decide.  Then my, my grandson whose name is Sir, his first name is Sir and the name is Anthony [Sir Anthony Crayton] (laughter) and--after his father--and he wants to be a fireman, yeah he, and he's just wonderful.  I have just been so blessed.
Story_ID: 483021
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: That I would change?  No, there isn't anything that I would change because I--now, if you'd have asked me that maybe, maybe five years ago, it would've been different. But no, because now I see how everything that has happened has happened for a reason.  Every wro- what I call wrong move I've made even, I made it for a reason.  Everything--I had to learn certain things.  I'm still learning, I'm still doing that, I'm still going through the process.  No, I look back now and I say, yeah, and I remember once saying to myself in other years, oh man what I should've done was this--. No--because if I'd had done that I wouldn't of been doing blah, blah, blah.  You get to wherever you are and it's because of what you do.  I've forgiven myself for the wrong things you know.  I've learned from them and I've learned to, to trust more, just--you, you claim that you trust God, but then when it really comes down to it you wanna tell him how to do his business, you know (laughter).  So now, I, I'm learning more and more.  I still mess up, I still make mistakes you know.  I used to tell my students and my personal children [Irma Hall Crayton and Shed William Hall, Jr.], biological children, no, your mama, if it's a mistake out there your mama probably made it 'cause I'm the expert at messing up but you get up and you move on.
Story_ID: 483022
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) That I've emptied my vase (laughter), I finally got the vase emptied, you know.  No, you know we didn't talk about my new theater.
Speaker 1: Okay, what--tell me about your legacy first.
Speaker 2: Well, you see that's--
Speaker 1: That's part of it?
Speaker 2: --part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that I did get a chance to share all of the things that I have learned with other people coming up behind me, and to let them know that they are--somehow or another to let them know they are links in this chain, links in a chain, and show them where it came from.  It keeps on going down and I'm getting a chance to do it.  Now, the way of doing it is through theater and when the last thing came up, that was my final light.  God finally convinced me (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: It's called the African American Repertory Theater, and it's in DeSoto [Texas], and I said I can't get away from theater.  You see, I tried to, I tried to go on my own and I thought I was through acting.  I thought I was through writing, I'm still writing poetry and then you came along and gave me some inspiration even on that (laughter) and I thought I was through painting, but every now and then I do something.  All of these things so I, I just wait.  It's like a movie now, I just get my bag of popcorn and sit and eat and watch and see what the next scene is going to be.
Story_ID: 483023
Speaker 1: Well then tell me this, how do you want to be remembered?  How do you want people to remember you?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, you know, I, I really don't think about me being remembered.  I want for, I want, I want my family to be remembered.  I want--me, because I to me am, am nothing.  I'm a piece of something, I'm just a bit so I, I, no I haven't--everything that I've done is like, it's, it's 'cause a whole bunch of people got together and pushed, prodded, molded, did something and pushed this thing through and it's the family, it's my family.  I want my family to be remembered, that's what I'm trying to do.  Just fix it so that people will know and they'll take, get inspiration from that, from the strength of family.  So that they can see how somebody who came from washing clothes with rub boards and, and cauldrons out in the backyard and pulling water up from the well and, and having outhouses, no electricity and all of that can go through that, that was my beginnings, you know, and then go to--come through all of the various stages, you know, the whole--our little family, it was little but all in one room, where you have your--share the kitchen with many other people, you had to write your name on all your food, make sure nobody else didn't eat it you know, things like that.  Then coming along and then in my own having to deal with the you know your family, you're whatever you're supposed to do when you're--you have a college education but it doesn't matter that much in some places because of your race (laughter), so, so what?  So you know I've, I've worked in so many different instances.  Thank goodness I've learned a lot about people.  After I stopped teaching school, I made, I guess I, well I can't say it was a mistake even any more.  I got all my teacher retirement at once, paid off my bills, bought a car, and then I had to go to work.  (Laughter) So I started cleaning office buildings again.  You say well, now here, it's, it's--when people say here's this woman, I'm working in film and when people see you on television or in on the screen they think you're a movie star (laughter).  Okay, I'm cleaning office buildings and the cutest thing happened.  I was working at the Hartford Building [Dallas, Texas], they showed us a film, an instructional film on how to clean, and there I was, and they was saying, "Oh, that lady looks a lot like you." And I said, "Yeah, she does kind of favor me doesn't she?" (Laughter) But I'm glad I had the experience.  I've, I've cleaned office buildings, I know what it's like to do that.  I know what kind of conditions those people live under and (unclear) they want.  I understand people a lot more and what they want from teaching school.  I know a lot about, about young people.  Working with teenagers for twenty-seven years, I know, I love teenagers and I know them and I hope that something that I'm doing will be helpful, and if you've come from where I've come from and come--and I'm still there.  I have never made even an eighth of a million dollars, you know?  I'm a character actor, and now I'm old, and I, I just thank God it's never been about the money.  So here I am at seventy-three, I'm still working and my entire yearly income, which I don't mind saying, is about $50,000 a year because I get my retirement, that's it.  Now if--I tell people, rich and famous don't go together.  They don't even know each other in my case.  I am famous, a lot of people all over the world know who I am, but I have no money, and I have enough to do what I have to do.  I have enough to pay my tithes, I have enough to eat, I have insurance you know. I have, I'm working on fixing my little house, I--but that doesn't matter to me because that's not what I'm about anyway.  I have all the money I need for me to do what I'm doing.  I just want my health to hold out and I want, I wanna finish the job that I was sent here to do, you know.
Story_ID: 483024
Speaker 1: Because this is going to be an inspirational video--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for future generations, what would you say, what message do you want to send to send to the future generations?  What would you say to them, say fifty years from now?
Speaker 2: Oh, to never forget, never forget your beginnings.  Never forget your beginnings.  For the African American people, don't forget that we are a link in the strongest of strong chains.  We survived the walk from interior Africa to the coast line, first of all, where most of the people died.  Then after that, we survived the slave ship and came on over here, then we survived slavery (laughter), we survived Reconstruction, and we're still here, we're still strong, still surviving, you see.  So you, you--I don't care what it looks like or what people say.  With--you are, we are descendants of the strongest of the strongest so we can do things.  Never forget that and always, it's always about self-definition.  Don't let people define who you are. That's one thing I think the main thing that my parents [Josephine Thomas Player and Samuel Player V] got through to me, they said, you will be living in a global society when you get grown, and don't ever let other people tell you who you are and what you're supposed to do. You do what God put you here to do, and it's up to you to find out what that is, and you find that out by just doing things.  You keep, you keep falling and then you get up and you say okay, or you bump into a wall and you say, I wasn't supposed to go that way (laughter) and so you go this way until you finally get to where you're supposed to be going.  There's so many things and so many lessons to be learned and that's why I want to bring those lessons and leave those because I learned them first hand at a lot of older women's knee, just listening to them talk, and I figure they had no more than I did.  They were older than I was, right now I feel that way. I listen to people who are eighty, ninety years old; I'm just seventy-two. If you've been here eighty years you've got to know something a little better than I know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Ms. Hall [HistoryMaker Irma P. Hall], we wanna thank you for taking the time to share your story because it's going to be an inspiration for many generations.
Speaker 2: Well, I hope so, I hope so, oh, and one I one thing, I hope they learn to--if God gives you any talent, anything, it doesn't mean that you have to act or sing or dance, maybe you have a talent for reading well, or organizing material well like you all do.  Use, you're obligated to use whatever God gave you, whatever you do best is what I God gave you to do and you're obligated to develop that to its full potential.  So that's it.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Are we through with me? Oh.  Oh, you know I usually use to end my poetry things with a poem that's part of a poem I wrote where I say, "Let us do what we do best and God will handle all the rest."  Let us love one another, that's what I'm all about you know.  I think that's why I've never had a bad experience on film, people ask me why.  I get along fine with everybody 'cause I bring love.  It depends on what you bring to the table see?  I bring love, peace and that's what I, that's what I get.
