Story_ID: 8280
Speaker 1: State your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Vy Higginsen.  And it's spelled, V-Y  H-I-G-G-I-N-S-E-N.  Vy Higginsen.
Speaker 1: And your--Can you state your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is November 17.  I am 21 plus.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Okay.  And can we state today's date?  Which is--?
Speaker 2: May 16th.
Speaker 1: Wednesday, May 16th.
Speaker 2: Wednesday, May 16th, 2001.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: I----good question.  I like to consider myself a communicator.  And we run a communications company.  That includes radio, television, phonograph recordings and theatrical productions.
Story_ID: 8281
Speaker 1: I'd first like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Oh, favorite food.  I like all foods.  But favorite food.  Hmm. Hmm.  I like curry chicken.  I like breast of chicken with pecans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: New Orleans style .
Speaker 1: We haven't heard that one before.  That's good (laughs).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay, oh that sounds delicious. Breast of chicken with pecans.  New Orleans style.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like sun colors.  I like colors that are reflective of the sun. And melons and fruits and watermelons and lemons and limes and bananas.
Speaker 1: Similar to what you have on even.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.  My favorite time of year is springtime.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Most recent favorite destination is a wonderful spa in the hills of Mexico.  Where there are hot healing springs. I love it.
Speaker 1: I've heard of that spa.  I've heard of it.
Speaker 2: It's called Esteban (ph.).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And it's just a wonderful way to enjoy the sun.  The temperature is the same every day.  The healing springs, you know, soothe the body.  And there's wonderful shopping and massages and facials every day.  So it's a great vacation.  And a good investment in the body and mind and soul.
Speaker 1: I might be thinking about another spa. But that's where I met Mickey.
Speaker 2: I told Mickey about it.  You met Mickey there?
Speaker 1: That's where--That's how I met her.
Speaker 2: In--At Esteban?
Speaker 1: At Esta--Right. Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: That's exactly where I met her.
Speaker 2: I did not know.  I told Mickey about that place--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: And she loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, I loved it too.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've been back since three times.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then-- Okay last question.  What is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "You lose some of the time what you go after.  But you lose all the time what you don't go after."
Story_ID: 8282
Speaker 1: I wanna first ask about your father and what you know.  I know he was a minister.  But I just want to know what you know about, you know, that side of the family.  Your husband Ken [Wydro] was telling me you actually know a lot.  And have done a lot of genealogical research.  But if you could sort of just recap about him and his family.
Speaker 2: My father was Randolph Adolphus Higginson.  Reverend Randolph Adolphus Higginson and he was from Barbados.  And he came to America on one of the ships from Barbados to Ellis Island in the 1920s.  And when he came here, he became a minister at one of the churches where there was a woman who was the bishop.  Her name was Mother Horne.  And they still own property and have churches here in Harlem.  And he met my mom [Geraldine West Higginson], who came from Virginia.  And they married.  And they moved to 126th Street and Lenox Avenue in Harlem.  Where they purchased two brownstones.  One, which we lived in.  And one, which my grandmother lived in.
Speaker 1: You know, I'm curious.  We're on 126th Street, near Lenox.  Is this--?  Is this--? Is it very--?  Is it in this block or--?
Speaker 2: It's right next door.
Speaker 1: Isn't that nice? That's
Speaker 2: Isn't that unusual?
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: It's almost amazing, and totally unplanned.  So we feel that it's probably by divine order in some way.  We're five generations on this block.  And they came in the early '30s [1930s].  And the church was around the corner on 130th Street and Lenox Avenue.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So did he talk--your father at all about growing up?  His growing up in, you know Barbados?  Did he share any stories with you that you remember?
Speaker 2: What I knew was that--came from his sister, my Aunt Rita.  Who I absolutely adored.  Who was a grand and very stately woman.  She always told us that we had family and land and property in Barbados.  And what we would do every year was send a barrel of goods and soap and clothing.  And that--We would gather these items all year.  And kind of look forward to sending these things to Barbados every year.  All I really know--My father died when I was an infant.  So all I know is the stories of who he was.  And what he believed in.  And some of the sayings that my mother used to raise us, I believe were those that came directly from him.  As well as from her.
Speaker 1: Do you know why he chose to seek, you know, to, you know, become a minister?  Do you know how that even came about?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm not sure.  But I understand he was particularly gifted--a particularly gifted speaker.  And a man of great poise, grace and honor.  And that was lov--be very beloved by the congregation and the neighborhood.  I--My sister tells stories that even the hobos would stand tall when Reverend Higginson came by.  And he did good works.  Is what I understood.  And he took care of people.  And married them.  And helped them through whatever obstacles they may have encountered.
Speaker 1: Now you--Ken was telling me that your father--His family actually traces back to England.  Is that--?
Speaker 2: It was the most amazing journey I had ever encountered.  Ken and I went to Barbados.  And we got an opportunity to see some of the family members.  And stand on the land that I heard Aunt Rita talk about.  It's in St. John, Barbados.  But while we were shopping in town, we looked up and noticed a street that said Higginson Lane.  And then the curiosity was, you know, wild.  And so I went to the archives.  Which is really well equipped.  I mean it's old.  And the papers are old.  But there--it's all documented.  And I wanted to find out how this street got to be named Higginson Lane.  And we discovered that there was a John Higginsen who came from Liverpool [England].  Who were ship merchants and lawyers.  And they have a firm called Higginson, Botten and Islam.  And they traveled from Liverpool to Barbados to Mauritius.  And then back to Barbados.  This is what we discovered.  We found that John Higginson was one of the founding fathers of Bridgetown.  And that he was a great landowner.  And had, you know, sugar cane and crops and et cetera.  When we went further, we found the will of John Higginson.  He stayed and lived in Barbados.  And we found his wife and his children and et cetera.  And we were able to trace it all the way back to Liverpool.  I then hired a genealogist in England to go a little deeper.  And what he discovered was that the shipping business, which was somehow Higginson Shipping.  They must have been some kind of steam ships.  So as they went out of style, those ships were then sold off.  Then we went and got down a little further.  And I began to collect information.  It is not complete.  I'm not finished yet.  But we were able to contact Higginsons.  Who were able to take the name back to 666 B.C.  And a great detailed research had been done by a colonel in England.  That discovered that the two brothers came from Egypt to Ireland.  And--Cork County, Ireland to build a temple.  And the temple walls still stand.  And the burial grounds of the Higginson's are in Cork County, Ireland.  It was an amazing journey.  I'm hoping to spend more time uncovering the bits and pieces.  A lot of it has been done already. I've been in touch with people who sent us pictures of the burial grounds.  And to--So we have some sense of what the origin of the name is.  And when they left Egypt to build this temple, the name was originally spelled, H-Y-G-G.  Then it was changed over the years from Ireland to England to, H-I-G-G-I-N-S-E-N.  I--Excuse me.  I changed the O to an E.  It's really Higginson, S-O-N.  But for professional reasons, I changed it to, S-E-N.
Speaker 1: Well now why--?
Speaker 2: But my birth record is, S-O-N.
Story_ID: 8283
Speaker 1: It's really Higginson, S-O-N.  But for professional reasons, I changed it to, S-E-N.
Speaker 2: Well now why--?
Speaker 1: But my birth record is, S-O-N.
Speaker 2: Now why did you do that?
Speaker 1: Because I wanted to.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously laughing) I changed it because I wanted it to ring in a particular way.  And, S-O-N was not working.  So but, S-E-N did.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) That's a fascinating story really when you think about it now.
Speaker 1: Unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Fascinating.  And when did you do this research?
Speaker 1: Well I did it during the time I was working on 'Mama, I Wanna Sing'.  And so therefore I couldn't devote all of the time that I wanted to.  And I also did it as a result of having done my mother's side. Which is equally as fascinating.  And I'm saying, "Well how did this happen?  How did this woman, Geraldine [West] Higginson meet Reverend Randolph [Adolphus] Higginson?"  And look at what genealogy can be.  Because I really believe that genealogy is more than genes.  I think it's gene memory.  And gene--And when my daughter [Knoelle Higginsen- Wydro] was born, I became far more curious about just what the history of our family really is.  So I grabbed bits and pieces as I could.  I took as much as I could when we were in Barbados.  And I went back twice.  But I haven't had a chance to do more.  Unless you hire somebody.  I was in England with 'Mama, I Wanna Sing'.  That's when we had the chance to hire other people.  And they bringing in the pieces.  And then on the Internet there's a great bit of information.  And people who are doing lots of research.
Story_ID: 8284
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your mother.  She recently just past away (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes she did. Yes she did.
Speaker 1: My condolences for that.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: But--she--Tell us about her.  You know, what you know about her family.  I know you said from Virginia.
Speaker 2: My mother--my mother [Geraldine West Higginson] is a West, W-E-S-T.  So my interest was really charged by a gentleman from the Schomburg Library who was a genealogist.  And after the 'Roots' business, I asked him if he could determine what part of Africa that we were from.  And he said, "I'll be happy to look up for you."  And I gave him the information that I had gathered from my mother.  And I was anxious for him to come back and tell us what part of Africa we were coming from.  And when he came back, he said, "I'm sorry to disappoint you.  This side of your family does not go back to Africa.  But in fact goes back to England.  And from what I can understand, this West family, W- E-S-T, is from John West.  Who is sitting on a statue in West--West Point, Virginia.  And who was the governor of Virginia from 1618 to 1620.  And who came to America on a land grant with his brother, Lord Delaware whose ship sunk outside the shores of Delaware.  And how that name got to be.  And that all of the Wests, both black and white are related."  And this is what I was told by this genealogist.  And that they came and they married the queen of the Ponkanee (ph.) Indians.  That's some of the stories that I've been able to gather.  I'm not finished with that side either.  But--
Speaker 1: That--This is fascinating.
Speaker 2: Isn't it fascinating?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) It all goes back to England though.
Speaker 2: It all--well on that particular side it goes back to England.  And actually he said that it goes as far back as the royal family on the West side.  'Cause these land grants were given to these--and, and Pocahontas and that whole thing.  That's the West side, W-E-S-T.  And--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Anna West Payne.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother talk about growing up as a small child in Virginia?  Did she share any of those stories with you?
Speaker 2: Well she did. Because my grandmother grew up--My mom grew up in Virginia while my grandmother was here in New York, in Harlem.
Story_ID: 8285
Speaker 1: My mother [Geraldine West Higginson] was raised by my grandmother's [Anna West Payne] family in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Did she share any stories growing up, you know, about that (unclear) and--?
Speaker 1: I think what sh--my mother did was miss her mother.  I feel that she grew up in a family of other children.  I feel that she was probably a very bright young lady.  And she graduated from high school.  And when she did leave school, she returned to her mom, here in New York.  So they were joined together after high school.  And they lived and were very devoted to each other for the rest of their lives.
Story_ID: 8286
Speaker 1: You have two sisters right?
Speaker 2: I have--Yes.  There are three girls and a boy.
Speaker 1: Okay. So can you give their ages and in the order?
Speaker 2: No (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously laughing)
Speaker 2: I'll give you the order. (unclear) I will give--
Speaker 1: I mean their names--
Speaker 2: My oldest sister--Okay.
Speaker 1: and the order sorry.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously laughing)
Speaker 1: My oldest sister, her name is Doris Troy.  And I have a middle sister whose name is Joyce Davis.  And a brother named Randolph Higginson.  And myself, I'm the youngest of the four.  And my brother has passed away.
Story_ID: 8287
Speaker 1: So tell me about growing up.  Because you grew up really the--At that point, you grew up in a family that was headed by a single parent.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Right.  So talk about--Just share some anecdotal stories and, you know, fond memories that you have.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--You know, now there's been a lot of reflection since my mother [Geraldine West Higginson] has passed away.  And we have an opportunity to sort of revisit our lives.  And really appreciate who we are, where we came from.  And my mother's, you know, steadfastness and faith.  Because she was concerned.  My father [Rev. Randolph Adolphus Higginson] was twenty years older than she.  So she had four young children.  And we're talking about now in the '40s [1940s].  And her fear was that her children would be taken away from her.  And in a strict religious setting, the church was Pentecostal.  She thought that perhaps they would take her children away to raise them without her.  And since that happened to her, she was not gonna let that happen.  So she did everything she could to be sure that we were kept together.  And that we did not need other--any other financial assistance, you know, from anybody.  And I really appreciate the fact that she huddled us essentially with each other.  And what she did was involve herself in real estate.  And with these buildings she began to rent rooms.  And got her real estate license.  And she was able to take care of us.  And she could drive a car.  And, you know, back in that day I mean that's pretty much a superwoman.  You know, without day care or child--And I went everywhere with her.  I mean as a young child.  I imagine when she told me the story that my father was sick when I was born.  And they knew he had a weak heart.  So they had to sort of sneak out.  So that I could be born.  She and my Aunt Francis.  And, you know, bring me back.  And into the house that's directly next door.  And they had prepared a dresser drawer to place me in (chuckles) for my first early (laughs) infancies.  I remember.  And then my father was then very happy to have this, you know, new child.  But shortly thereafter he, you know, passed away.  So now she had this infant and these other children, you know, to raise.  And so we sort of teamed up with her to support her efforts.  I can remember wanting to help protect her.  Because she was protecting us.
Speaker 1: Hmm. That's--So she was pretty amazing in many ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then when she, you know, after the drugs were dropped in Harlem [New York, New York].  I always say that.  Because Harlem is such a beautiful and wonderful place.  And I felt that in the '50s [1950s] that Harlem was deliberately infested with heroine and other drugs, you know, from criminals.  And that destroyed a whole kind of style of life.  You know, that had extended families and friends on the block.  And where there was safety and you could walk.  It was safe.  Harlem was safe. And the neighbors looked out for each other.  And people talked to each other.  And--But then when the drugs came, it became unsafe.  So my mother took fifty dollars and her faith.  And bought a house in the Bronx [New York].  And that's when we moved to the Bronx, around second grade.  And then we moved into an all white neighborhood.  And we became the people who integrated that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So what was that experience like for you?  You know--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously).  Well I was young.  So I mean I had no sense of it.  And my mother was very clever.  She never put any hate inside of us.  She just wanted us to be--live in a safe and clean neighborhood.  That's really all she really wanted.  And for us to get, you know, a good solid basic education.  So when we moved to the Bronx, I mean I made friends easily.  And when I look back at it I think that there were, you know, maybe there was some un--discomfort.  But I didn't see it, 'cause I didn't know any better.  And nobody taught me to think any better.  Any different than that.  So I went to elementary school and junior high school.  And tried to stay on the honor roll.  And (chuckles) that's how I kind of lived it.  From what I can remember.
Story_ID: 8288
Speaker 1: Now what was the young Vy Higginsen like?  You know, I mean were you--?  You know, were you shy?  Were you, you know--I can't imagine shy.  But maybe.  I mean were you (chuckles)--?  What were you like as a child?
Speaker 2: What I can recall, I remember spending a lot of time with my imagination.  And playing with dolls, and talking to dolls.  And talking a lot.  And asking a lot of questions.  And wanting to please my mom.  And sort of not be in the way, you know.  And playing with my sisters and brothers who were older.  And who didn't want to be bothered with me.  But my mother was always very, very close.  She and I.  We--She would take me almost everywhere she went.  So I went with her.  And I watched her a lot.  She was a first lady of sorts in the churches.  And she raised money for churches.  And she was a mistress of ceremony at many of the gatherings.  And I would listen to her speak.  And laugh on the telephone.  And I liked--I liked her (laughs). I liked the quality.  And I liked that people liked her.  So I felt like I was a very playful child.  I enjoyed outside.  She put me in an after school program.  And I learned how to do acrobats and dance.  And I liked dancing.  And I'd do cartwheels in the street.  And show off what I had learned after school.  So I thought I was gonna go off and join the circus and be an acrobat (laughs).  That's what I recall.  Playing and school was a big part.  And also when I was about eleven years old, I decided to baby-sit for the neighborhood.  So there were working mothers who needed their children picked up from school.  And they would come home at 6:00.  So the time between 3:00 and 6:00, they needed somewhere for their youngsters to go.  So what I would do is go to school, and get out about 3:00.  Go and pick up the kids from nursery school.  Bring them home to my house, give them cookies and milk.  And read to them.  And for that I got $5 a child.  And I was very happy with that.  And everybody was very happy with me.  And I enjoyed that, and did that for a number of years.  And then I would baby-sit on Saturday mornings.  And I--so I started working when I was eleven years old.
Story_ID: 8289
Speaker 1: Give me your elementary and, you know, junior high schools then.
Speaker 2: I went to a school around the corner called [Public School] 68 before we moved to the Bronx [New York].  Then I went to an elementary school called 92, PS [Public School] 92.  Then I went to junior high school at 44--Junior High School 44.  And then I went to Theodore Roosevelt High School on Fordham Road in the Bronx.
Story_ID: 8290
Speaker 1: --Actually played the role of my sister Doris Troy, went back to Harlem [New York, New York] and started to build and rebuild.  And she started-- It was written in the script.  I mean (laughs).  It started with a school for gifted children and that's essentially why we, you know, what happened.  I can't really explain it.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: But it just-- Does art imitate life? Does life imitate art?  Whatever--But for eight years we said something like that.  And then almost if by magic, the house next to the house that we grew up in becomes available.  And the woman who owned the house pursued me.  Because I was not interested.  You know, and I was--We were living very comfortably in another location.  And then she said, "You simply have to have this house.  It's right next to the one you grew up with--pa-pa-pa-pa pa." So she just gave us an offer we couldn't refuse.  And we took the house.  And then, you know.  And when we took it you could stand on this floor and look straight to the sky.  There was no roof, no windows, no floors.  And I took it sight unseen.  And no stairs, nothing.  So we put, you know.  We put the whole thing together.  And I am so happy (laughs).  I'm so happy  that, that happened.
Speaker 2: Well plus this--it looks like there's--.
Speaker 1: It's the most amazing thing.
Speaker 2: It looked liked--,
Speaker 1: In two years.
Speaker 2: --the whole block is being built.  I mean it's just a--.
Speaker 1: It is girl.  You just can't--you know, like I said, "It was like almost by heavenly de--" Once--we renovated my grandmother's [Anna West Payne] house.  Because we were either gonna put a business in it or rent it.  We had no choice.  Either it was abandon it, fix it, or sell it.  So we decided to fix it.  They worked so hard to maintain and have these houses, that I felt it was necessary, you know, for our ancestors to support that.  So we fixed up that house.  And after we finished it.  We said, "Well we don't want nobody living here.  So well why don't we live in here?" (laughs) It was really weird.  So we did--we thought about that.  And that would offer some solutions.  My husband [Ken Wydro] wanted to do the country thing.  I'm sort of a city girl.  So we could have a city spot and a count, you know, sort of a combined situation lifestyle.  And so we liked that.  And then this house became available.  And we realized that we needed more space for our work and to create.  And we thought, "Well, you know, what better way to give something back to the community."  By having a space that had a mini theater, a rehearsal space, a gallery and an office space.  So that we could, you know, give something back to a community in a music that's given so much to us.  And that's how this whole process began with this house.  And here we are right back 360 degrees on the block that we grew up in with the house next door.  And in my grandmother's house.  You know, it's like wild.  And I'm loving every minute of it.
Speaker 2: Oh I think (unclear) I--.
Speaker 1: ) And then what happened is when we got here--Now that's two years ago.  When we came here there were seven--excuse me eight empty abandoned buildings and two abandoned lots.  Seven of the eight buildings are now in the final stages of renovations.  The two lots are filled with six new houses.  And the whole thing has just--[President Bill] Clinton is a block away in the building down the street.  We are in the heart of Harlem, central Harlem.  The Apollo [Theater] is a half a block this way.  Sylvia's famous restaurant is a half a block that way.  And three quarters of a block away is President Clinton's office on 125th Street.  So, so it's a--
Speaker 2: This is gonna be very fertile with (unclear)--.
Speaker 1: (Laughs).
Speaker 2: I think you're gonna start reaping some of the sowed--seeds that you sowed.
Speaker 1: Well I think it's all, you know, a good thing (laughs).
Story_ID: 8291
Speaker 1: So you were talking about babysitting and, you know, and that whole thing.  And I was asking about the schools you went to.  What were you--?  Were you attracted like as a student to anything?  Were you, you know, better in math or science?  Were there any teachers that you particularly liked who influenced you?
Speaker 2: --That's a good question.  I, you know, at one point I thought I was a really good student.  And then when I got to high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Bronx, New York], I guess other things  began--interests began  to kick in.  But I always seemed to like to bring people together.  And found that I could organize events and parties, and bring people together.  When I was in high school, we formed this group called, Tau Mu Sigma.  Because I felt we should have a sorority in high school.  So I went down to City College [of New York] and some of the other sororities and fraternities.  And I asked, "What would it take to have a high school sorority?"  And they gave us this name called, Tau Mu Sigma, which meant, "The meditators of society."  And we gathered some of the young girls together.  And we sat down.  And we discussed and we formed this group.  And we had, you know, events and parties and discussions.  And, you know, I thought--I mean I--It's a--It feels like a long time ago.  But I was thinking about that just the other day.  And I--so that I--That's what I recall.  I recall being active.  I recall being in school plays.  I recall being thrown out of the singing chorus.  They said I couldn't sing.  And our life was going to church, going to school, and playing on the outside.  Where we lived on this small block in the Bronx.  Not far from the Bronx Zoo.
Story_ID: 8292
Speaker 1: Now was church a major part of your life--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: In many ways? Okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about that.  It was--Was it more than just Sunday?
Speaker 2: Oh (chuckles). Oh yeah.  Oh it was much more than Sunday.  I went when my mother [Geraldine West Higginson] went.  And so that if my mother went to church on Sunday, very often there would be a Sunday afternoon program.  Or there would be a bus that we would take to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or Washington [D.C.] or some other location.  Where there would be another activity.  There would be a Wednesday night praying band.  There may be Thursday night rehearsal (laughs), choir rehearsal.  I--My memories of church were full of music and clapping and listening to the stories.  I always enjoyed listening to the testimonies of people who would say, you know, what God has done for them.  And just remember clapping so hard that my hands would turn red.  And, you know, reaching some state of really, you know, joy and release through the music.  That's what I recall as a child.  However our spiritual journey took a lot of twists and turns.  For today I'm very grateful.  My father [Rev. Randolph Adolphus Higginson] was Pentecostal.  But my mother left the Pentecostal church.  And joined a church right here on 126th Street, which was, AME, [African Methodist Episcopal].  And she became part of that church 'cause it was close.  It was right here on the same street.  And I met the founder of that church who's ninety-seven.  And he remembers my mother joining the church.  And they grew--outgrew the church right here on 126th Street, and moved up to Sugar Hill.  And there they purchased a wonderful church called St. Luke's AME Church, which is on 153rd Street and Amsterdam Avenue.  Which my family walked from 126th Street to 153rd Street to enter their new building.  And my sister [Joyce Davis] then married the son of the minister of that church, Reverend A. A. Davis.  And we spent a good amount of time in that church.  However we lived in the Bronx.  So we were coming from the Bronx to go downtown to church.  And that was becoming increasingly more difficult.  So my mother insisted that I go to church.  And the only church in our neighborhood was a Lutheran church.  So I went to Lutheran church, and got baptized Lutheran.  As long as you were going to church.  That was an--So I had that experience.  Then when I left the Lutheran church and we moved downtown Manhattan.  I joined the Unity Church. The Positive Thinker's Unity Church.  And became very much involved in that form of thinking.  So now I'm actually studying for the ministry in the New Seminary.  Which is a form of the New Thought Movement.  And we study the world's religions.  And what we have in common.  And so that we can better communicate with each other by what we have in common, as opposed to what our differences are.
Story_ID: 8293
Speaker 1: What I thought was cute, but you formed this sorority--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --Okay, and you really sort of got it going.  You didn't establish other chapters.  But it was--Right? It was there at the high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah. We didn't know what we were doing.  We just knew we needed to get organized (laughs) in some way.  And come together.  And to meet.  And to talk.  And to, you know, discuss how we felt about what was going on in the world or in our school and our other activities.  And so it was kind of like a little hot thing to be involved in.  And, you know, it sort of stood out.
Speaker 1: Now were there other people influencing you during that time?  Were there other, you know--? Definitely your mother [Geraldine West Higginson] was your almost--what sounds like your best friend.  You know, and a lot of times younger people--the youngest will have that bond with--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Their parent or their mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: But the other influence for me was my older sister [Doris Troy].  And this was big.  Because my sister, at a young age, wrote and recorded a song called, 'Just One Look'.  And that song got played on the radio.  Her influence and her success sort of spilled over to the rest of the family.  So we were little stars.  "You know, my sister's on the radio."  You know, and her song--and the success of that song, you know, took us into other places.  See when we lived here in Harlem [New York, New York], a part of what I remember is that on Saturday, at the Apollo Theater, you can go and see shows for kids on Saturday morning.  So we could get to see Jackie Wilson and, you know, James Brown.  And then that--my sister was a part of that.  So I could get to sit in the audience at the Apollo.  And actually watch my sister perform.  And that was totally an amazing thing for us.  And I can really right now still remember the excitement of what it was like to hear your sister singing a song on the radio when you're riding with a car full of people.
Speaker 1: Now how did that come about?  Do you--?  The her--Her whole career?  Was that--? You know, did--? She obviously was talented.  But how did that--? Do you know how--? 'Cause she's your oldest sister.  But--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she--When we moved to the Bronx, she decided to stay here with my grandmother [Anna West Payne].  So she stayed here in Harlem.  And she knew she wanted to sing.  There was no doubt in her mind.  She sang in the church choir.  But she also would sneak down to the Apollo. So that's what 'Mama, I Wanna Sing' is all about.  It's the how the music from the church got out into the secular world.  Well by her going back stage--the backstage door to the Apollo is just down the street.  So she would go back.  And she'd sneak in there.  And she would hear the music of Billie Holiday and Sarah Vaughan and Dinah Washington.  And so she was loving that.  And radio was becoming big now.  And you could hear the music on the radio.  And she knew she wanted to be a singer.  And she wanted to be like the people who were on the stage at the Apollo.  But because we were in the church, that was a difficult thing to do.  So she'd have to sneak down.  And she got a job at the Apollo as an usher so that she could be closer to the stars and take their mail and flowers back stage.  And she, you know, got to talk to them and they encouraged her.  And told her that she could do it.  So when you ask who influenced me.  I--My sister Doris was a tremendous influence.  Because she seemed bigger than life.  And that--she was on stage.  And she was always very kind and generous to her family and her mom.  And so she would take us with her.  Or my mother would send me with her to look after her.  So one of my biggest trips after I graduated from college was to go with her to England where she worked with the Beatles and the Rolling Stones.  And we got to go backstage and Apple Records.  And I watched her, as a black woman in a foreign country, actually gather bands together in groups.  And performed at large cathedrals and big arenas.  And we went on tour.  And we went to Ireland, England and Holland, and traveled all around while she was singing and performing.  And when I saw her in motion or in action.  A woman on her own without much management or direction.  Just her pure talent and guts and faith and hope, you know, become who she wanted to become.  It was very encouraging to me.  It was a--
Speaker 1: That's great.  And that must have been a wonderful experience.  How old were you at this time?
Speaker 2: I'd just gotten out of high--I'd just gotten out of college.  And actually, it was my first airplane trip.  And I remember we were flying on Pan Am [Airlines].  And I remember that she had on a suede cape and big blonde hair.  And when she got out of that airplane, there was a red carpet that was pulled right up to the stairway from the plane.  And she stood in the doorway and they took pictures.  And there was huge fan clubs.  And people yelling and screaming her name.  I was like, "Whoa!" (laughs) And we had just left, you know, the Bronx in Harlem.  And now we're in this foreign country with people going nuts.  And cameras rolling.  And how she just walked down that red carpet, and into the airport.  And off we were whisked into the limousine.  And life took on a whole 'nother thing. (laughs)
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: But prior to that, I went to school for fashion.  I went to the Fashion Institute of Technology which is where I thought I wanted to be.
Story_ID: 8294
Speaker 1: Why did you choose fashion?  You know, why did you choose that as a place to go?  And what were your thoughts about things at that time?
Speaker 2: Well I mean--my thoughts--I had always seen my mother [Geraldine West Higginson] be extremely fashionable.  And my sisters [Doris Troy and Joyce Davis] always were fashionable. And being, you know, children of a minister, we always went to church.  It was important to have your shoes shined, and your blouse ironed and et cetera.  I liked the idea of clothing and fashion and colors.  And there was a neighbor who lived on our block who was in the dress business.  The wholesale business.  And he would bring home garments out of the bag and show his family.  "These are the clothes that we are selling now."  And I thought to myself, "Wouldn't it be, you know, enjoyable or exciting to become a buyer--to buy the clothes that people wear?"  And then when I went to my guidance counselor.  She says, "Well, you know, you can study that in a school called the Fashion Institute of Technology."  I had no understanding of what it was.  But it sounded, you know, creative.  And it had an imagination.  And my mother didn't want me to go away to college.  So she wouldn't let me go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or any of the other schools.  So I had to stay home.  So this school was there.  And it made a lot of sense.  And also, I had jobs after school.  And I worked in a store.  Where I used to sell, you know, panty hose and brassieres and skirts and blouses.  And the manager of that store would talk to me about retailing and fashion.  And so I thought that would be something I would enjoy.
Speaker 1: Now how about--? You--So you graduate.  You go to England with your sister.  You have this sort of fabulous experience.  You know, and sort of with the traveling with a celebrity.  How long are you there?  And then what do you do when you come back?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  I'm working now in the retail business.  I'm on the executive training squad with Macy's.  On the executive training squad with Alexander's.  And then I'm on the squad with, you know, Gimbel's.  And there I realize that this might not be something that I really wanted to do, living in the back of a stock room with the dust and the dirt.  And also that there may not be any opportunities for me as a black woman to be anything more than where I was.  It did not look hopeful.  And really it was at that time that a friend of mine, just for fun, sent me to an astrologer.  And this astrologer said, "You belong on the radio.  You belong in--your best cho--Your best planets--," you know, I feel a little embarrassed to say this, but this is exactly what happened. "Your best planet is radio, television and phonograph recordings.  And that's where your best luck is.  And that's where you should be.  Your fifth best planet is fashion and merchandising.  So you really need to be in radio, television, and phonograph recordings."  I had no idea she--that, that would happen or how it would happen.  But it did.
Story_ID: 8295
Speaker 1: How did you get from there to WBLS [FM, New York]?  That's what I'm wondering.
Speaker 2: Well okay.  What happened was--.
Speaker 1: I mean we all, you know, I've been to astrologers (laughs) and things.  But it doesn't mean--You know what I'm saying--,
Speaker 2: Uh-hmm.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Okay?
Speaker 2: Well it was--the story kind of goes like this 'cause there were several trips to England with my sister [Doris Troy].  And so I went back again.  And this time it really gives you another view of the rest of the world.  And when I came back, I saw black people, and who we were.  And what it was like being in this country a little differently.  And I went to 'Ebony' magazine at that time.  And when I went to 'Ebony', I told them, I said, "Listen, you know, I wanna work and contribute in whatever way I could."
Story_ID: 8296
Speaker 1: You went to 'Ebony'--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they hired me.  And they said either I was the craziest person they ever met or the smartest.  And that's how I became the first advertising sales representative.  And I was still following through on the beauty and fashion line that I had an interest in, in college and after in the retail business.  And, you know, they gave me several of the female client categories.  And I really became an expert.  I really got my training at 'Ebony' magazine.  As it relates to buying patterns and habits of African Americans.  And what they like and, you know, how much money we spend.  And the power and the influence that we have economically with our buying power.  And I would have to tell this story to advertisers about our people collectively.  What we did, our demographics, our psychographics, our culture.  To many people who didn't have an interest or people who didn't have a clue, or didn't understand the economic benefits of doing business with black people.  And it was a very difficult job.  But it was also a very empowering job.  To understand our own power, economically.  And it was while working at 'Ebony' magazine that I heard about this astrologer who said that, you know, radio isn't--is where I am best suited for, luck.  And I took it a little weird.  But nonetheless, I enrolled in a broadcast school.  And I went for like, six months.  And at the end of that process, I had a professional tape of my voice.  And I had the name of the show called, 'Vibrations From New York'.  And 'Vy Higginsen with Vibrations From New York'.  And it was originally designed to be a show for women.  And it was a show that was going to tell us about beauty and fashion and home and that kind of thing.  And I went to a party one night.  I just kept this tape, and learned how to run the board.  And that just--and I went to a party.  And there was a woman talking about the fact that there was a new radio station in town, that had a young program director.  And I said, "Well I have a tape."  She said, "Well then you need to go talk to him."  And I went there.  And brought the--Just went there without an appointment.  And I sat in the lobby.  And they said, "What are you doing here?"  I says, "I'm here to show the program director my tape."  They said, "Well he's busy.  You can't just go in there like that."  So I said, "I'll wait."  And that happened to be right here on 126th Street and Lenox Avenue, upstairs on the second floor.  And I just stood there, and I waited.  He came out, "What are you crazy?  What are you doing here?"  I said, "I have a tape.  I'd like to do a women's show on your new radio station."  So he went in the room.  He played the tape.  He came out, and he said to me, "I want you to start work on Monday at 12:00.  We're gonna put you on the air as a disc jockey."  I said, "I don't wanna be no disc jockey.  I wanna--I don't know how to be a disc jockey.  I just wanna do this show about women."  He said, "You must be crazy.  I'm just given you a job as a disc jockey.  You never worked before in New York.  Never worked in radio.  And I'm gonna give you this job."  So I thought, "Well, gee this is weird."  I went home.  I told my sister [Doris Troy].  They called me back.  And the guy says, "My pro--" The general manager says, "My program director says that he wants to hire you.  And you're telling him you don't wanna be no disc jockey.  I--we don't understand that. We'd like you to start.  And we want you to work six days a week. (unclear)."  And I was really kind of perplexed.  I mean--and I'd remembered what the astrologer said, but I, you know.  I went back to my sister and I said, "These people trying to give me this job.  What do you think I ought to do?"  She said, "You need to take that job 'cause if you don't like it you can quit."  "Oooh! that's a good idea, you know," so I said, "Okay, I'll take this job."  And that's what happened.  And I went on the radio.  The first woman on prime time New York radio, daytime.  And the rest was just absolute history.  It became the number one station in all of New York, black or white.  And it was a--It was a time of almost magic in the broadcast industry.  It took the country by storm.  It opened up the opportunities for black radio ownership.  It made money.  People were excited.  The format was exciting.  And I felt like I was being part of history.
Speaker 1: Now tell me who was part of this team?  Was it Gary Craw--? Who--? Was there--?
Speaker 2: Frankie Crocker--,
Speaker 1: Frankie Crocker.
Speaker 2: --was the person who hired me.  The morning man was Ken Wydrow.  Myself, there was Lamar Rene and Al Roberts and G. Keith Alexander and David Lempel.  Those were the early days.  When it was still WLIB-FM, before we became WBLS [FM].  It was only after we moved downtown from Harlem downtown that we became WBLS.  And then it was then bought by the Inner City Broadcasting Group, Percy Sutton.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Oh it was bought after that.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now what in this whole--? What time period are we talking about Vy?
Speaker 2: We are talk--We're now in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: We're in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: December 1970.
Story_ID: 8297
Speaker 1: Out of this group, was this-- You said it--Crock--Kenny Crocker?
Speaker 2: Frankie Crocker.
Speaker 1: Frank--Frankie Crocker (unclear).  You said he was a young program manager right?
Speaker 2: A young program director [at WBLS-FM, New York].
Speaker 1: Program director.  What do you think was the magic that happened here?  You know, why--? How could you go from this little station to number one?  And that's why--? What do you think that--? What was happening there?
Speaker 2: Several things were happening.  The first--This was the advent of FM radio.  The very beginning.  This was WLIB-FM.  That's number one.  The format was a total black experience in sound.  And so therefore, we would play different shades of black.  Latin, another shade of black.  Jazz, another shade of black.  Blues, and so you had a full pallet of music.  And that it was different than AM.  We had grown up on AM, which was fast-talking, very, very energetic, rhyming kind of radio.  I didn't know how to do that.  And so our pacing was slower, more sophisticated, very adult.  And it drew an audience wide.  That was ready at that time to take the next musical leap.  Plus, he was willing to take--It was just the right combination of time and talent and culture and music.  That mixture, right at the end of the civil right's activity.  And now we're moving into the '70s [1970s].  And so it took on another cultural identity.  And it had a very unifying force through the music.  But good music.  And if there was a--you could sit through a song if it wasn't your favorite.  Because you knew your favorite was coming.  And it had a New York style.  It had a New York feeling.  And it helped that many of the jocks that were on the air were from New York.  We know our city.  We know our town.  And that we were able to draw people in.  My fear as a woman was that since there was no other women really, except one woman, who was on at midnight.  You know, how would women who had been so accustomed to listening to men really, you know, take to another woman?  But that fear was not realized and it was unifying.
Story_ID: 8298
Speaker 1: As great as was bad--made major contributions to radio, one of a kind, He [ref. to WBLS program director, Frankie Crocker] trained people and he hammered people and he was difficult and complex.  However, you came out of it feeling grateful nonetheless because none of--If he had not had the vision to include women in radio, then a lot of the changes we now have may not have existed at the time that it existed.  And so that I feel is a major contribution on his part. Now there would be some that would say that there was some genius involved in his musical choices and his line-up.  Having been there on a day-to-day basis from the beginning, I'd say that he had a great team and a lot of freedom.  And that can be the foundation for growing and developing something really special.  You know, it's real clear that you can't do things by yourself.  It takes more than one to bring about that kind of success.  So the early people and I mean the complete team really has to have some credit for persevering and putting up with the bumpy roads and when things and the poor salaries and you know.  And the long hours and the dedication standing side by side with him.  Because he said, "I wanna be the greatest program director in the--in America."  And the team bought that--into it and wanted to help him be that.  And did.
Speaker 2: That's an interest--(unclear) 'Cause a lot of times people don't have freedom.  You know, that's--to do things.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: Complete and total freedom in the early days.
Speaker 2: Who owned the station then?
Speaker 1: In the early days when I was first hired it was the Novak family.  Richard Novak and his father.  His father and he.  So that the father, for example ran the AM very successfully.  The father.  And the son was given the FM to develop.  And the son who was young and contemporary hired Frankie Crocker who had just left WWRL [AM, New York] and MCA [Inc., Music Corporation of America].  To help him bring, you know, programming on an FM station to African Americans in New York.
Speaker 2: Now this--So New York--Was there a New York sound before?  I mean you said that, "You know, the thing about us is that we were very New York."
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So was there up to that point, you know,
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  I mean the sound; the hottest disk jockeys in the country prior to [W]BLS [FM, New York] were all the disk jockeys that were on WWRL.  They were the highest paid, they were the best known.  They were the disc jockeys.  They were great!  I mean that was the team and they were the super six team, you know, as I recall, disk jockeys.  And they included people like Frankie Crocker, Jerry Bledsoe, Gary Bird, Bobby Jay.  Some of the early--Enoch Hawthorn, Gregory (laughs) in the morning.  You know, names like that.  And they were the celebrities, you know.  And the communities back in those days disk jockeys became celebrities.  And we're really part of the community, out and about in the community and doing things.
Story_ID: 8299
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first day on the air and how that felt?  'Cause you started at 12:00.  Right?  Twelve noon?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah I sure did.  Yeah I remember.  I , I don't remember being scared or anxious.  More curious.  I always had this fascination with how the radio station got into your living room (laughs).  How'd that happen?  You know, how can I be sitting here and then talking to somebody in their bathroom or living room or kitchen or whatever?  So I just remember being curious and fascinated and glad to be talking on this radio.  And it was something about hearing yourself back in your headphones.  You could hear what you were saying.  And playing the music.  Because in the early days, the disk jockey got to pick the music.  So the albums would be sitting in the studio.  And you could grab, "Oh I feel like listening to Nancy Wilson."  Bam! and it went on.  I mean so when I recall is being able to set a mood.  And then talk about how you felt about it.  And that!  That to me was the best kind of radio.  Back in the day.  And--so the first day was exciting and curious and wondering.  And I felt like I had nothing to lose.  Because if they didn't like me I could always do something else.  I always felt that.  I arranged to be able to do other things when something didn't work.  That was important to me.  And so he said, "Fine.  You did good.  I'm keeping you on tomorrow longer.  Stay on.  I want people to get to know you," he'd say.  And then he'd come in and he'd give me--he was very gentle in the early days.  Give you tips and clues and just keep on going, just keep on going.
Story_ID: 8300
Speaker 1: When did the recognition really hit you?  I mean you said, "The first day, you know, I wasn't--I can't say I was nervous.  Or whatever.  I was just fascinated about how things got into people's homes."  But when did you sort of get a sense that this was--you were really on the right track?
Speaker 2: --They asked me to emcee a show at the Apollo Theater.  And I was scared.  Because I knew the Apollo Theater if people don't like you, they gonna boo you.  And I had always been behind the microphone.  And I had not been seen really by anybody at that time.  And I didn't understand the real inner workings about ratings and how people are--how you know people are listening to your station.  But when I stepped out on that stage at the Apollo Theater and I heard the warm applauds and words yelling from the audience, I knew everything was alright.
Speaker 1: Was that your first year on the air?
Speaker 2: That was in the first six months.
Speaker 1: Wow!  Okay.  Wow! So the station was actually very--It was really doing co--I mean strongly (unclear) to the community.  That's--I'm just saying that seems early at a life cyc--
Speaker 2: Well see then that was one of the other things that kep--You know, he was able to produce or get artists to come to perform.  So--(unclear).  It was a dot on the dial.  It was nothing.  We--it was nothing.  I--we--I earned $125 a week.  I mean it was a--It was--The roo--the studio was no bigger than the area we're sitting in.  And that had--one side was this and one side--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go on.  You were talking about the room.  Okay go on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean this was a little baby station.  It was a small dot on the dial.  And the truth of the matter is while we were on the radio, we had to encourage people to by an FM radio.  "Put an FM radio in your car."  Or, "Turn your radio on, on your job.  Take us with you."  I mean we were selling FM at the same time that we were, you know, providing radio se--But it caught on like wildfire.  It just happened just as the astrologer said it would.  It just happened.  I can't--There is another thing. I really can't explain it.  It was a phenomena, and it was wonderful. And along with the success or the acceptance, you know, getting people--people were on the AM dial.  And they turned from AM to FM.  Also the sound was clearer and the reception was better.  And it was less static and it's stereo and all the other things that make listening easier.  So that all came into play simultaneously.  So--And then the sense that there was a sort of pride in the music.  And the total black experience in sound gave people a sense of belonging and wanting to be together.  So the radio station became that, "You know, let's find out what's happening."  People would come home turn on the light and turn on the radio.  It was a connection to some people and things that you like.  It wasn't an intrusion and it didn't get in the way of anything else you had to do.  And it helped you to feel that there were other people who were like yourself who wanted to enjoy life.  To get a good job, get an education, have clean, safe neighborhoods.  You know, and that energy was connected together.  There was nothing gangster about it.  It was almost family oriented and hip, contemporary, "This is what's happening now.  And when you're listening to this radio station, you're in touch with what's happening right now, right here."  And that was magic.
Speaker 1: You know, it's hard to think of a time when--you know, with FM when it wasn't--You kno--
Speaker 2: --Wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right!  So it's interesting, you know--
Speaker 2: -- To hear.
Speaker 1: Right.  To hear this whole thing.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: So here you have--So you're after the Apollo, you know you've got prominence in the community.  You know, you're--You have been in previous times where your sister was the celebrity and now you're becoming your own celebrity.
Speaker 2: That took a little longer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I felt more comfortable about it being accepted as a person--as a woman on the radio.  But jus--to be prominent or a celebrity wasn't nearly that much in the picture.  I mean which--I was still earning $125 a week and had to do other jobs, commentating fashion shows and other things (laughs) to, you know, to stay afloat.  So it kind of was almost automatic in a way.  My sense of it.  I felt--I felt good about being on the radio.  I felt good about being able to express myself using something that I already had.  I didn't have to go outside of myself to get what I was looking for.  I could just use my voice.  And somehow my voice made sense.  My sister [Doris Troy] said, "You know, you have an unusual voice."  I always had an unusual voice even as a child talking.  Not singing,  I cannot sing.  But--so they used to stand me up and tell me to talk.  And my brother was a big influence too.  My brother [Randolph Higginson] was also very well known.  My brother was an organizer of recreation and events and parties and trips and ski trips and Caribbean trips.  And so he had a whole following of people who loved him.  And he would go around saying, "My sister is on the radio."  And boom! And then so that's how it happened.
Story_ID: 8301
Speaker 1: Since you were learning on the job, what are some of the things you learned that were important to you?
Speaker 2: Timing.  And I learned about a culture of people.  And I learned about what people wanted and what they liked and--I took questions.  I always talked to the audience.  I loved to find out what they wanted to hear and what they wanted to know, and what they really needed.  And that was extremely helpful in how you would dialogue on the radio of what you would say.  Everything I know about radio, timing and speaking happened in that time period.  They would--They had something called 'Rip and Read'.  You know, there'd be a news story.  And they would "Bam!" Hand you--you would sit there and cold! Cold read.  Never saw the copy before and you'd be reading news.  And, you know, and they--and events and commercials and whatever.  So.
Speaker 1: What did you learn important about timing?
Speaker 2: How to put your thoughts words and feelings over the intro of a record (laughs).  You had ten seconds to get--give a picture to the audience.  And how are you gonna do it?  And what were you gonna say?  Or after a while, your instinct about, "I got twenty seconds."  You know how long twenty seconds really is.  Or, "I got fifty seconds."  Or, "I got a minute.  I have to accomplish this in a specific amount of time."  So timing became important.  Radio is all about time.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn about the community that you were interacting with?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I was watching it grow and change and develop.  And I was watching it become happy and sophisticated and their needs were getting met musically through what we were doing.  And that was very gratifying.  I--the questions that were asked inspired and motivated me to publish a magazine.  And that magazine is called 'Unique New York' magazine.  Because it was a unique people.  And my experience with 'Ebony' let me know as I watched this audience become a more affluent audience.  And as I watched this audience having wants and needs and desires, I could answer those.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anyway Unique--So this--What year did you publish the magazine?
Speaker 2: 1974.
Speaker 1: Okay 19--So that was early.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was--.
Speaker 1: You were a pioneer really.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In those types of magazines.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  Yeah that--yeah.  It was great to.  From to the four years of publishing we did.  And it was black people, places and lifestyles.  And we got to show people doing--being themselves.  And connecting each other.  So if there was a new restaurant or a new beauty parlor or what the latest dance, food, clothes, make-up.  Everything that had to do with black people on a local level.  And it was in a slick, easy to read format.  So it was an exciting times.  People still tell me they have those magazines today.
Speaker 1: So were you--who was selling the advertising and everything?
Speaker 2: Well I was trained as an advertising sales person.  So you see, radio wasn't--You know, radio is what the astrologer said, but I had already been trained.  And everything that I knew about advertising I trained two young people to do--two women.  We had a whole staff of women.  We were just totally revolutionary in that time period.  And I trained them and they became known as two of the best advertising sales representatives in the business.  And that's when we were about to expand.  And it is at that moment that 'Essence' magazine came and grabbed my two salesladies.  I tell this story.  They took those two sales representatives and hired them.  And they were good.  And they deserved to be hired and work for a more prestigious publication.  But we were about to expand.  And it really thwarted our efforts to expand into a larger (unclear).  We could not really recover from that loss.
Story_ID: 8302
Speaker 1: I have one other question about WLIB [AM] to WBF--LIB to [W] BLS [FM, New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What were--How--what precipitated the call letter change?
Speaker 2: (pauses)
Speaker 1: It was the same station right? Or wasn't it?
Speaker 2: The sell.
Speaker 1: Oh the--okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: See how that happened was the AM was sold to the Inner City Broadcasting Group.  And they had an option to buy the FM.  But when the (snaps fingers) split came, it was LIB and then the new station was WBLS.  But they exercised (unclear).  And by this time, the station was (unclear).  So they wanted very much to exercise their right to buy the FM and they got it.  And then we became part of the Inner City Broadcasting.
Speaker 1: Now you stayed with radio until how long (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I stayed until 1975.  Late 1975.
Speaker 1: So that's around the time-- You start the magazine ['Unique New York'] in 1974.
Speaker 2: In '74 [1974].  I was forced to make a change.  I was forced to choose.  It was a very tough decision.  You either do radio or you do the magazine.  And the magazine I owned it.  And I loved it.  And I chose the magazine.  It's so-- It's--Something like that.  And that's also the same year that I got to do television.  So that's how I ended up hosting a show called 'Positively Black' on NBC-TV.
Speaker 1: And how long did you host that show?  And how--How did that experience differ?  Because, you know, it's much different doing radio where you're behind the scenes.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, on TV.  So how was that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, here again I was doing what I loved.  And all of the experiences seemed to draw on the others.  So here doing things in the black community was part of what I wanted to be about.  To communicate effectively.  With black people in particular and all people in general.  So being part of 'Positively Black' was exciting and also something that the astrologer said would happen.  So (laughs) it was more difficult.  But also I was not as politically savvy into (unclear) major corporation.  So I had a lot to learn about the politics of a large corporation.
Speaker 1: Do you know--Well what were some of those things you learned?  Really you had come out of a place that had just sort of, you know, do it (unclear) --
Speaker 2: The incubator, (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Laughs).
Speaker 2: I (unclear).  It was the freedom, you know.
Speaker 1: The freedom (unclear) (laughs).
Speaker 2: And this--and what I learned is that you had to be able to have presentation skills in terms of how to get an idea into action without offending people who work with you.  And what level of aggressiveness works and when you can pull back and when not to pull back.  And where--how--what level people will accept from you.
Story_ID: 8303
Speaker 1: Now around this time you also meet your husband [Ken Wydro].  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  September 15, 1978.  Almost again by divine order.  I was talking about the magazine ['Unique New York'] on the television show ['Positively Black'] and he was the resident expert on living single, flying solo.
Speaker 1: And that was the name of his book.
Speaker 2: That's the name of his book 'Flying Solo: The New Art of Living Single'.  And I was talking about how much fun I was having being single and enjoying the publishing business. And, you know, and that no one man could satisfy the various component parts of my being.  That I'm--enjoy being single.
Speaker 1: And then--okay (laughs).  Well I have some of this story filled in.  So what happened is that--I mean this is the thing.  So when you started dating very actively afterwards.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We became friends.  I mean really.  I mean I wasn't considering it a date.  Because we were, you know.  I was very proactive in the black community.  So here was a person that had similar interests.  And (unclear) a lot of books and places and people in common.  And so we had a friendship.
Speaker 1: And then when you told him (laughs)  (unclear).  He said that, "You know, what happened is that you were supposed (unclear) to be expecting a major investor."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you tell me--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were (pauses).  We were about to expand.  And because we lost two of our key employees, we needed additional investments to replace what we had lost.  But we also needed our stock in order to replace--to give to the new investor.  And I couldn't receive the stock.  So therefore, in a very quick, short turn-around, we went from growing to the next level to not existing at all.  And it was a tremendous loss.  But I felt I had no choice.  And I had used every bit of my energy to get to that point.  And I had no more left.  At which time, he made an offer. "Why don't you just stop for a minute, regroup, think about what you wanna do.  You know, I'm going to Jamaica.  Why don't you just, you know, join me as a friend  and see what your plans are."  And I took him up on his offer.
Speaker 1: And you were there for like a month.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he was writing a book.  And, you know, there were discussions, you know.  Sort of like, kind of like 'get to know you', tell me--, like you're talking.  "Tell me about your father.  Tell me about your sister.  You know, what happened in radio?  What'd you think about radio?"  And those questions became, you know--and we realized or he suggested--He said, "Wow!  This is a great story.  You need to write this down.  You need to write this down, because it's not only a gr--It's not only your story, it's an American story in music."  And I thought, "Well I don't know how to do that."  And he said, "Well listen, I'll help you."  And that's--And we started doing it in our spare time, and in our fun time.  And then I remember the title coming.  And then the hand moving across the page.  And we ended up with a show called 'Mama I Want To Sing', which is the story of the family.
Speaker 1: And you--out of this though this period--was it a traumatic sort of period though?  Is that sort of when you go to Jamaica?  Because you had, you know.  You had, had a very, you know, meteoric rise with your radio career, leading to TV.  And, you know, sometimes things--some other things come out of the sort of gestation period.  That, you know, a periods that appear maybe somewhat dark.  Was that a dark period at all?
Speaker 2: I don't recall it being a dark period.  I felt like I left at the top of my career.  I was so hu--The astrologist said, "Don't leave," I did. No, but I left right at the peak of the career. And I thought that was also an important--that's part of the reason I made the choice, because, you know, I realize that everything has a beginning a middle and an end.  And what happens is if you can do other things, then you're not stuck.  And it was always at a point where I thought that all I could ever be in radio was a disc jockey, that I could never be the Program Director, or the General Manager, or any of the other things that might interest me in radio.  And there was a point at which being a disc jockey wasn't enough.  So--that was--that entered in part of the decision, so I was open for whatever was next and I just knew that something good would happen, I just knew it.  And it did.
Story_ID: 8304
Speaker 1: So let's talk about 'Mama I Want to Sing', you know, the, the whole process of--even the creative process that led to its development.  You said, you know--'cause a lot of times people don't co-do things, sometimes they do but, you know, there are many times as--you can't, you know, co-do anything, so how was this?  Was it a give and play between you and your husband, sort of, you know, that--you are husband and wife at that point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Right.  Was it a give and play, you know, that, you know, you would tell--he would.  What was that whole process and, you know, how--and were you happy with what came out of it, and--?
Speaker 2: Well it had various stages and phases.  You know, the first phase was, you know, the idea phase and the title and some of the songs came down.  And we didn't know what we had, neither one of us had done anything like this before.  I only knew one person that I could take this to, to find out if we really even had anything. 'Cause again, we both had other jobs and other things we were doing, so this was just a side thing that we were playing around with.  So who knew that we could write lyrics or write dialogue or any of that kind of stuff.  But it was Ken's [Wydro] encouragement, that "Oh, come on, let's do this." And we went--took a couple of intensive workshops in dialogue and [Ira] Progoff, and, you know.  And that was all in our dat--that's what we did while we were dating, doing seminars and classes and stuff like that and just for fun.  And we started coming up with the style of it and we were surprising ourselves and some of it was "I didn't write that," it was automatic writing and something came through on those pages and that was amazing to me.  I remember in the first setting, we talked about what it would take to make a show.  What would be the interesting points that people might be interested in and then we wrote those down--the beginning, the middle and the end.  And then started to fill in the middle part, or what would be the song that that person would sing.  And then we took, we took that to a woman by the name of Rosetta LeNoire, and she--because she was the only person I knew in the theater business.  And she had a company called Amas [Musical Theatre], which is a not-for-profit theatrical company, and she read it and she said, "You let anybody else do this, I'll break your legs." So I thought, "Oh, we must have something, this is exciting!"  You know, and that was the first phase of it and then she said, "Well, I'll walk you through this process, this is what you have to do. We need a director, we need a, you know, you need a composer, you know, and you are the writers, and so, et cetera."  And so, that's how that process began.
Story_ID: 8305
Speaker 1: And you miss that when you isolate outside your community.  You miss it, you know.  And that's the new, you know, come back to--and I'm hearing stars (unclear), "Wait, find me a spot!" you know.  Because it's like Soho or Tribeca [New York City neighborhoods] when you see something growing into it, you want to be a part of what that development of that really is.
Story_ID: 8306
Speaker 1: You lay down in there--you'd be jumping up with some words.  And you'd write a few words down.  And I remember taking thi--we were in Connecticut and this house was near the water.  And there were ducks outside.  And I remember writing it.  And my hand wouldn't stop writing across the page.  And I looked up--there was eight to ten handwritten yellow pages.  And I ran downstairs and I said, "Ken [Wydro], look at this!  Look at this!"  And he read it and he said, "Wow!  This is good!"  And then that's when it all kind of came together.  When you thought, "Wow!  Is this good enough to keep going?"  And then more words and more songs.  And then the research started.  And I called a man who worked with my father [Randolph Adolphus Higginson].  And I found out that what the sermon was that my father was preaching on, on the day that he died in the pulpit.  And it was then that I knew for sure I had to do this.  It was so clear.  There was no doubt after that.  That--What to do.  The sermon my father was preaching on the day that he died was Ephesians 4:1, which is "I therefore, a servant of the Lord beseech ye to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called."  Oh my God!  This is really something.  So it was after that, that we just went ahead.  And we gave the script [of 'Mama I Want to Sing'] to Rosetta LeNoire and we hired people to do the work.  But the collaboration was not clear and the amount of time that we had to do it.  So when we saw it, whoop, 'that's not what we meant.'  And we were not allowed as writers to be in the rehearsal process.  So we--And we were too new to object or know any different.  So they had added things and changed things and done things that weren't exactly what we had in mind.  And it was funny.  Because we got into a little legal situation.  Because they said, "Well, we've added all these things to your show.  So, therefore, we needs writers' credit."  And we got, "No!  But that's not what we want.  That's not what we mean."  So we had a little chaos in the initial days of it. Where the director and the writer and everyone was upset about the adding and wanting to change it and not, you know.  So we thought, "Oh well this didn't work out so good."  And it went into the Times that there was a dispute over the rights and who did what.  And I thought, "Aw man, isn't this a drag."  So we put it on the shelf. And said, "I guess it's not working. 'Cause it's not what our vision was."  And by that time we'd decided to get married.  And I was back at WBLS [FM, New York].  And I quit my job at 'BLS.  And I was pregnant and we were all excited.  And then I went to the doctor who told me I wasn't pregnant.  And it was at five months and I lost the baby.  And I was totally depressed, really in the dumper.  And I had this group called 'Jump Sister Jump', which is a sports group of adult women jumping Double Dutch.  And a young lady came to this--one of our practice sessions.  And she said, "Listen, I go to Fordham University [Bronx, New York] and the black students need a fundraiser.  And I know because you work on the radio that you have access.  Could you do something to raise some funds for the black theater company of at Fordham University?"  And Ken said, "We really need to do something 'cause you're just too depressed.  You need to get involved in something.  Why don't we pull out that old script that we did and work on it and do that?"  So we rewrote it, and almost entirely from beginning to end.  And then we directed it and we produced it and rewrote it and put it up at Fordham University.  And people started coming from everywhere.  And we hired Tisha Campbell.  Tisha Campbell who is from 'Martin' [television sitcom], and she was fourteen years old and she was the star of the show.  And then we had this choir.  And it was so exciting, and it was great.  And it was sold out. And we realized that we really did have something that was more closely to what we originally had the original vision.  So we went to look for a theater.  And we went to people on Broadway and Off-Broadway and said, "Look, we got this show and people like it and they're coming."  And they said, "Yeah right.  This is no good.  There's no drugs, there's no hate, there's no tension, there's no violence, there's no pimps or prostitutes.  How are you gonna have a show like this?  It'll never, ever, ever work.  You can't put a show like this on Broadway.  You can't put it anywhere.  Nobody's gonna invest any money in this show.  It's no good." And that's when we had to make a decision.
Story_ID: 8307
Speaker 1: That's when Ken [Wydro] and I decided that we would put--back our own show and put our money into something we believed in.  It was a turning point in our lives and in our careers.  And although we both had other jobs and things we could do, we decided that, okay.  So we gathered all our money together.  And we found this theater on Fifth Avenue at 104th Street, it had been empty for fifteen years.  And they pulled the chains off it.  I could so remember.  The chains were this thick on the door, a huge padlock on it.  And I said, "I wanna see."  We had looked at everything else.  And everybody else had told us "No."  So this was sort of like the last possible place maybe.  And they pulled the chain off the door.  I could hear the clink right now today.  And the lock came off.  And they opened the door and it's like this huge puff of smoke.  The door opened and this huge puff of smoke came out.  The place had been so locked up.  And we walked inside.  And I went up on the stage and I looked around.  And I again instinctually "This is it.  This is where we belong.  This is where we're gonna put the show on."  And here it was on Fifth Avenue and 104th Street way out of the way.  Not near train stations, not near bus stations nothing and we decided that this--So we made a deal, an arrangement and got, you know, a lease with the building manager.  And we started to put on our show.  We started to clean up the space.  And family members came and people came to help us and support us.  And then we put it on and then we got it up.  And we looked around and there was not enough people sitting in the audience.  And we started to do the promotion and then we started to pray (laughs), 'cause we had put everything we had into the show.  And we were hoping that it would work.  And I just had almost like a--a voice that just said simply, "Just keep on.  It's going--this is going to work."  And we kept working on fine-tuning it.  You know, changing things.  Adding lyrics, finding new costumes.  Everything that we could invest back in to make it better.  And I remember we opened in March.  And I remember that it began to turn around.  And all--Soon the buses were lined up outside and people were coming from everywhere.  And we didn't have enough performances.  We were getting sold out on Saturday afternoon.  And we started adding shows on Saturday.  We were doing a 2:00 [P.M.] and an 8:00 [P.M.].  Then we added a 5:00 [P.M.].  We did 2, 5, and 8.  And that got sold out.  Then we added an 11:00 [A.M.].  Then we did 11, 2, 5, and 8 four shows on Saturday.  Then we added two shows on Sunday.  Then we added a show on Thursday.  Then we added a show on (laughs) Friday.  The place was packed out.  You couldn't get a ticket for six months.  And it was just magic.  It was unbelievable.  And the day that we opened the show I found out I was pregnant.  So the show and the new pregnancy happened simultaneously.  The first nine months of the show I was on stage pregnant.  So when you asked me about my daughter [Knoelle Higginsen-Wydro] and she came to me and said, "Mama, I want to sing."  What could I--else could I have expected?  I don't (laughs) know.  She grew up singing.  She was backstage the whole time.  She grew up in the theater.  And we stayed in that theater for eight years until they threw us out.  I mean literally threw us out.  And we'd sti--probably still be there today.
Story_ID: 8308
Speaker 1: Tell also the story about your sister.  You know, coming to the--.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Doris [Troy]--and this is really--and there were many coincidences like this.  Like the coincidence of us even being here today.  Things that were--seemed outside of our control.  My sister came to visit because I had the baby.  She wanted to see the baby.  She lived in Las Vegas [Nevada].  She was a singer and she was traveling on.  And she was in other shows and doing other things.  But she came to see the baby.  And she came and she saw the show.  And then she kind of--you know, she enjoyed the show.  And the lady who was playing the role of the show, which was Esther Marrow--.
Speaker 1: For the mother right?  (unclear)
Speaker 2: The mother.  The role of my mother [Geraldine West Higginson] in the show was a woman by the name of Queen Esther Marrow.  Queen Esther.  And something happened during that exchange.  And she had to go.  And then my sister started filling in for her.  And then she never left.  She came and she stayed.  So my sister was playing my mother.  Then one day, we had Wyatt T. Walker who was a very prominent minister in Harlem [New York, New York] and an activist, he was playing the role of the father [Randolph Adolphus Higginson].  And his plane did not get--arrive in time to do the show.  And the only person that was possibly available--we had a whole audience full of people, who could play the role was my brother [Randolph Higginson].  He was outside handing fliers telling people to come in.  I said, "You gotta go on the stage and put on--so my brother started playing the role of my father.  And my sister and brother were playing my mother and father.  And it was fabulous (laughs).  And they stayed.  And we also--so it became a complete family business.  And my nephew who was an attorney was working in a Park Avenue firm.  We didn't have--we called him every five minutes.  So he decided to leave his firm and come to work in the family business.  And my sister retired from the telephone company and she said, "She was gonna go off and be retired."  And I said, "No.  You're coming over here."  My middle sister [Joyce Davis] came and started working and--as general manager--company manager.  So it became this complete little family business that continued to operate and traveled all over the world.
Speaker 1: And tell some about the successes.  I mean it--you've literally performed all around the world.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's been the longest running.
Speaker 2: It's the longest running black Off-Broadway theater musical in the history of American theater.  There was a time when we was the largest employer--we became the largest employer of black entertainment talent, fifty-two weeks a year, than any other company in America.  We had a company in New York, a comp--and a road company traveling.  We traveled for two and a half years all over the United States and every major and every secondary city in America.  And many have credit us with ushering in this phase of African American theater.
Story_ID: 8309
Speaker 1: There's someone who like takes over our [Arie Crown Theater at] McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois].  And I know he--you know who I'm talking--I just don't know his name.
Speaker 2: No.  There are several people out that, that have shows that run all over the United States.  But once that audience was identified--See once again we go back to 'Ebony' magazine.  Because we knew that this audience was all over in at least the top ten or twenty cities in America.  So we were able to identify that audience.  And once we tapped that audience, and they came out to see the success of 'Mama I Want To Sing' (claps) there were other people who piggybacked it.  And so some did imitations and some did other things.  And some people got creative.  But the whole industry was now opened up.  And then that's, that's what was really important, in a sense.  So there are a number of David Talbert and other writers and producers who have theatrical productions that they travel with.  And it changed the course of theater.  Because it was--In the past you'd have to start on Broadway  before you could move in or throughout the country.  But now all of that has been bypassed.  And we do--it's another track for African American theater.  And we were able to draw people from their television sets into the theater.  And 'Mama I Want To Sing' had give--gave a lot of people their first African American theater experience.  And that really was important to us.  And we have a tradition where we have a show every Thursday morning for tee--for young people and senior citizens.  Where the ticket prices are ten dollars.  So that you can, you know, have an--a theatrical experience.  And we kept that tradition from the beginning when we started, right up to today.
Speaker 1: Now what are some of the--It's clear that you hit upon a formula.  And I'm wondering, you know, if you can be a little retrospective.  You know, that you hit upon a formula that worked.  And do you think that you had--Do you have any comment about that formula?  You know, that the--Because really you're telling in many ways, you know, in Mama I wann--We haven't talked about this.  But you're telling the African American--you're even telling an R&B story.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolutely.  We're telling a story about people in song.  We're telling what happened to music in the church and how it came out into the radio station and how it went globally.  Essentially.  Because we have 'Mama 1', '[Sing!] Mama 2' and '[Born to Sing] Mama 3'.  It's a trilogy.  We decided to package.  And that complete package tells the complete story actually.  And we think that that's a very valuable and important story.  We think that gospel is an African American art form and it needs to be understood for the power and the impact that it has.  The formula for us was really very simple.  We do family theater.  Period, end of story.  I grew up in a situation that did not include some of the temptations that are out here in America.  And I know from my experience that there are many more families like myself who have a need to see us. In our beauty, in our weaknesses, but not necessarily in a body bag or in any criminal way.  And it became a mission.  That--You know, our mission and to communicate effectively with other cultures.  So that that they would have a better menu of what the African American experience really was like in America.  Because when you're looking at television in other countries, you don't always see who we really are.  So you never get the chance to know us.  And our culture, what we think, what we feel, what we believe.  The decisions and choices that we make everyday.  Some of them simple and some of them not so simple.  So really our formula is just to tell a story.  And this one happened to be a true story.  You know, about our family and our American experience.  And it turned out to be not only our story, but many other entertainers who grew up in the church and then, you know, made a living in the record business.
Story_ID: 8310
Speaker 1: What did the audience tell you in this instance?
Speaker 2: The audience was saying, "Thank you."  The audience was saying--you see, 'cause here music was changing on the radio.  That's another reason why I wanted to go into the theater.  And it was important to me to use whatever means of communications available to me to communicate effectively.  Our audiences-- And the positive, you know, parts of our (unclear) and our existences.  It's extremely important.  So radio was doing something else now.  And we had moved past the party, party, you know, style, the disco generation.  And music had become more synthesized and, you know, more mechanical sounding.  And I really was longing for the sound of the human voice.  As I remembered it from my early church experiences, where the voice had the power to move and inspire people.  That the voice was an instrument of healing.  And I wasn't hearing that in radio anymore.  And so I didn't wanna be there.  I didn't wanna hear that.  What I was playing was like robot stuff, tinka-tinka-tink, and I didn't like that.  So I searched out for the most unusual voices I could find.  That when you--when you heard it, it either made your hair rise on your skin or you just--(inhales) take your breath away.  And we put all of them together.  And what would happen was people were (with emphasis) blown away musically, "Oh, my God!"  And my--the whole idea was I wanted the audience to take off their shoe and say, "Sing girl!  Sing!"  Now that's really what I was going for.  While we were telling this, you know, very human story.  And I still believe in the sound of the human voice.  And singing with the whole body and using yourself as an instrument.  You know, to communicate with your audience.  A feeling, a mood, a story, a sound. That's vital I feel.  And I felt that we were in danger of losing that, as an art form.  Of the bridge that brought us over really.  And that's when I reestablished the Mama Foundation for the Arts.  So that we can continue to pass that history, that heritage, that sound, that music on for generations to come.  That's what was important.  And that's why we have this space.  So we have master classes--the other day we had Isaac Hayes in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The other day we had Isaac Hayes in as an American legend in music.  And he sat there and told us he used to pick cotton in the cotton fields.  Now here's one--a man who spanned all these decades from cotton fields to superstardom to being on the radio.  He's a radio personality here in New York.  And you just have to sit back and say, "We must remember who we are, where we came from. And especially remember us in music and what that's about."  So that's why we formulated--part of the reason why we formulated the Mama Foundation.  So that we can provide continuous employment in the arts, while also training people and passing the music on.  And establishing the Gospel Gallery and Museum, which we feel is extremely important.  To give something back to the music that gave so much to us.
Story_ID: 8311
Speaker 1: Can you just comment on what you think the brilliance of gospel music is?
Speaker 2: --The brilliance of gospel music is the power of the words and the message and the news and how it is sung.  So that it has the power to heal.  It--you know, gospel music when its done effectively, will cause you to move something.  I mean you gonna move something.  Something gonna happen when you hear good gospel music.  And that's important.  As we study other cultures and I see that the people chant sometimes.  The Buddhist use their chants--and "Ohm" and "Nam-Myoho-Renge-Kyo".  I'm not saying that properly.  But those are sounds.  The universe has sounds.  And there are universal sounds that affect our mind, our body and our spirit.  Well gospel music is the African American contribution to the sound that heals.  Now whether your chanting or ohm-ing or meditating or levitating, you know, it can happen in an atmosphere or a sound that affects the brainwaves.  And so that causes a release of bad feelings or emotions.  So it has a very powerful emotional impact.  And it has the power to change and to shift our thinking in our souls.  That's what I think gospel music has.
Speaker 1: --Now what do you think--There's--Well there's--I'm gonna move into more--just a, you know, few philosophical questions.  But you have--you know, this all really evolves a lot around music.  You know, music in the church.  The two things that were predominant in your life and a lot of African American, you know, lives.  Sometimes people have said if we did less praying, maybe we would get, you know, further.  And I would ask you, you know, what your thoughts about that--you know, do you--on going to church.  I mean there has been that belief system out there, and I'm wondering what your thoughts about that are.
Speaker 2: Well you know, I feel that prayer has power.  And I believe in balance.  A balance of mind and emotions, intelligence and love.  And I feel that you have to watch while you pray.  And you have to move while you pray.  So--and that--God is intended us to live well and do well.  And that your father is rich.  And when you tap into that power of richness and wisdom and knowledge and understanding, that all things are really possible.  But we cannot say that prayer is no good.  But prayer without action or prayer without moving or prayer without understanding, you know, may not give you all of the results that you may be looking for.  And I understand that some people may feel that the church has held black people back.  But for all that it didn't do, there's a whole bunch that it did do.  And so then we have to look at which part of our African American church experience has really held us together as a family, as a group, as a people, as a place to go and a place to be.
Story_ID: 8312
Speaker 1: 'Mama I Want to Sing' has been really--It's just something that has showered blessings on you.  It's been very much a family affair in many ways.  It's been a community affair.  I mean even in the world sense.  But what--So what is--I know the Mama Foundation [for the Arts].  What is next?  Where is Vy Higginsen today and what does she wanna see for the next phase of her life?
Speaker 2: We're in transition.  And the wonderful--you know, I've been here a couple of different times.  You know, in shifts.  Like when we made the shift from fashion to radio and then radio to publishing and then from publishing to television and from television to theater.  And, you know, these shifts are happening.  It's part of the dedication to communicate effectively in all mediums.  Now what happens next is very interesting.  I really feel that we will probably move somewhere on the large screen into theater.  I mean into movies and into more television. I feel that the foundation will continue to help support the community with its talent as an economic engine.  And to help to restore Harlem [New York, New York] as an entertainment capital in the world.  And it may take different phases as we're setting it up now.  'Mama I Want to Sing' was a chunk and a body of work.  I'll probably do more writing as I settle in a little bit more comfortably.  But I do feel extremely important, that we set up this Gospel Gallery.  So that we maintain and write and acknowledge our history.  So that's very, very important to me, step by step.  And we're looking to do that with people who will support us in our efforts to gather the information and place it here in a gallery right here at the foundation.  So that it becomes a tourist destination and a learning experience when you come in.
Story_ID: 8313
Speaker 1: Your mother [Geraldine West Higginson] just recently passed away--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and she was--You know, you were 'Mama's little girl' in lots of ways. And there are two questions I have. One, she got to see a lot of your success.  And she got to see even her story told up there--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you know, on stage. And I was wondering, you know, what her role was? Or what did she articulate to you about this, you know, this whole phenomena--?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was our biggest critic. She was able to really help to guide and nurture and encourage the project along. I mean she would let us know if there's too much lipstick, or the nails were too long, or it wasn't sanctified enough. Whatever, you know. And it was very helpful. Because I really wrote this show for my mother really. And for other people's mothers and their mothers.  Because there's so little for our mothers to enjoy that really reflect who they are and where they come from.  I thought.  My mother lived a very, you know, tax-paying, clean, organized life, you know, in that sense of the word.  And she tried not to hurt anything and do anybody. She's not interested in the kind of violence that now is on television. She didn't go to the movies.  That was not her thing. The Broadway has nothing for her. So where do you get some satisfaction? I don't know how many times my mother saw that show. But she kept coming back.  And it gave her a lot of joy and a lot of, you know, hope and a lot of life. And she got a chance to take her bow in her lifetime. And receive her flowers in her lifetime. And to travel to foreign places. And I can see her face, you know, in stepping in the boat in Venice [Italy] for example.  And yet, I had no idea how old my mother was until these last two years. We had no idea. If I knew my mother was that old I probably wouldn't have (with emphasis) taken her so many places. We just--we wouldn't even thinking about--She would never tell us how old she was. So we took her to a lot of places. And she loves her oldest daughter, Doris Troy, of course, her first born. And so, therefore, she got to see all of us working together as a unit. So then her efforts did not go unrecognized. Or she could see the fruits of her labor in trying to keep us all together, 'cause we stayed together, you know, in the end. And we helped each other. My sister [Joyce Davis] said to me the other day what she missed the most about Mom, and I think that's really true.  Is that she had this encouraging spirit. She'd let you know that you could do it.  And that you would run an idea past her and she'd say, "Ok, baby. If you think you can, you can." You know. "If you think you can't, you can't."  So those are the kinds of things that she laid for us. And she let us know early on. She let us--She let us know early on the power of the mind, and the power of words and how to, you know, manifest, you know, good into your life. And I was always amazed, you know, how she knew as much as she did. And how much she was able to pass along to us.
Story_ID: 8314
Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I'm real, real concerned. I am concerned about the young generation, the teenage generation. I'm concerned about what I see in my daughter's [Knoelle Higginsen-Wydro] friends. I'm concerned when I talk to them about their hopes and their dreams. And what they feel they can contribute in this lifetime. I am concerned that our young people are not being encouraged to dream and to hope that good things can happen to them. There is a kind of lethargic sense of timing and hope. I'm noticing surrounding--I know being a teenager is very difficult. And I think it's even more difficult. And I'm not talking about bad kids coming from bad families, whatever bad is. I'm not even sure what that is. But, you know, not having access the possibility, opportunity, or capital, or understanding how to get from point A to point B. I'm concerned about what has happened on television and in the movies and in our music. I'm concerned that the foundation and the experience of survival that was put into us and our generations are, are different. I'm concerned about parenting. I'm concerned about what we're saying to our kids. What we're calling them--the names, the language. I'm real concerned.  And I asked a group of young people most recently. I said, "Look I've got the power of giving you three of your wishes. All you have to do is tell me what they are. And I have the power to make them come true."  We were playing a game.  I couldn't get them. I didn't hear them. I heard weird answers, who--really concerned me. And I know that doesn't represent all kids but it was a sampling. You know. And that concerns me. What's gonna happen to our kids? And what we are saying to our children? What messages are they receiving? And how will they survive in this economy in this America?
Speaker 1: And do you have any thoughts about what should be done?
Speaker 2: Yes. I kind of do. And I hope that--You know, I think each one of us needs to decide what piece of the pie they're gonna take. And say, "I am committed to do this. I am willing to do this piece of the pie." And as each person stands up in their own category to say, "I am willing." And I am here to say that, "I am willing to have the Mama Foundation for the Arts which is here to train, teach and employ talented people in this industry. I am here to have the Harlem Institute of Higher Learning. This is the piece I'm gonna take." So that I can sit people down, young people, have writing classes. And to have motivational talks and to have dreaming classes. I am committed to doing that piece of work. That's what I intend to give back." And I need each person to say--each minister, each church, "I am willing to do this," and state it. "I am willing to give this back." And I feel collectively when we start thinking and moving in that direction, I think people will begin to realize that we do care. That we do love and that our love is not always in criticism.  That our love can come in other ways that help to support people to realize their full potential or their dream.
Story_ID: 8315
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life and you still have life left, a lot of life left.  But when you look--How would you sum what you've seen?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I understand the question.
Speaker 1: But see when you look back how would you summed up your life to be sort of when you sort of look back at it?
Speaker 2: --That I had an opportunity to do some of the things that I thought I could. That I had an opportunity to work in some of the fields that I thought would make a difference in my life, my family life but the community at large. I feel that communications, that the success or failure of any person, people, service or idea depends upon the ability to communicate effectively. And so all of my efforts to date has been an effort to communicate effectively with black people in particular and all people in general. So when I look back over my life and I think of the beautiful radio days or the wonderful audiences who came to see 'Mama I Want to Sing', or the books for Random House for Children, 'Mama I Want to Sing' and 'This Is My Song'. They were all--and 'Unique New York'--all involved in the area of communications.
Speaker 1: So of--that--you may have answered the last question that I ask of everyone. And that is what do you want your legacy to be? But you may have answered that. But what would you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That's it. I would think that what I would like to leave behind is--what I'd like to--Let me see what words I can use here. That many doors were opened that had not been open before for women and in fields where the opportunity for women were not available. And I see the changes that have occurred in radio, in television and other places as a result of those doors being opened. I feel excited and tantalized by opening other opportunities for expression. I feel that it is important to have self-expression.  To be able to document our history, to express our talents and God-given gifts. So providing a platform for that to happen on is important for me. And that if there's a legacy that's left behind, the legacy is communicating effectively, having the right of self-expression and documenting our history.
