Story_ID: 632724
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe; I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Wendell Foster Holland [HistoryMaker Wendell Holland], W-E-N-D-E-L-L, F-O-S-T-E-R, H-O-L-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: All right. And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: February 10th, 1952. Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: May 24th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, at the law offices of Saul Ewing [Saul Ewing Arnstein and Lehr LLP].
Story_ID: 632725
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, 4th of July.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Cape Town [South Africa].
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 632726
Speaker 1: Well, we're going to get into your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] side, and then we'll bring them together, you know, to keep from getting them confused. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Jane Louise Foster and of course Holland [Jane Foster Holland], J-A-N-E, Louise, L-O-U-I-S-E, Foster, F-O-S-T-E-R and Holland.
Speaker 1: All right and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is July 22nd, 1915, Martinsville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back can you go and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: I can't go back too far; I think I can go back to about 1821 with--1821 with them. They were, I suppose, typical of people in southwestern Virginia. She was mixed race by a grandfather who was African American and her great-grandmother was I suppose some kind of Indian [Native American], many say Cherokee. But for years they were--they lived on a tobacco plantation in southern Virginia. My grandfather [John Foster] was a laborer on the railroad and had about fifteen kids. My mother was his second set of twins. I suppose their birth ranges aged from about nin- excuse me, 1989--1899 through 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now what were they doing in 1821?
Speaker 2: They were tobacco slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know where they were--where they served as slaves?
Speaker 2: I think it is Chesterfield County where Martinsville, Virginia is.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down through the family about that period of time or about emancipation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not on her side.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your mother grew up in Martinsville?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And did--what did she say about growing up and what the climate was like and what she was doing?
Speaker 2: Nothing terribly remarkable. She went to a small school there, Piedmont Christian Institute [Martinsville, Virginia], and my image was always that it was a segregated school that prepared young African American kids for college. She never went to college, but I suppose in her mid-twenties she joined that mass migration of African Americans from the South to northern cities. Her oldest sister moved to greater Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to the Main Line and about eight of them subsequently followed.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they moved up to the Main Line. Explain what the Main Line is in this area, that's an important phrase up here.
Speaker 2: In suburban Philadelphia there's a, gosh about a ten mile area as the crow flies largely west on [U.S.] Route 30, Lancaster Avenue. It's an area traditionally where the upper middle class families lived and there were pockets of low income communities, not any African Americans, but the poor Italians and poor Irish and poor ethnics where they served rich Main Line families. The Main Line stretches largely from city line to I'd say about Paoli [Pennsylvania] or Chester County [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay. These Main Line families were important, very important rich people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, typically chief executive officers, lawyers, doctors, the gambit and of course the wealthy industrialists, much like Westchester County is in New York, or gosh I want to say Grosse Pointe [Michigan] is to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's largely what the Main Line was and still is.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did your mother have a particular aspiration that she shared with you when she was growing up that she wanted to fulfill?
Speaker 2: No, I've got to tell you my mother died when I was young, so I don't have a lot of memories about my mother.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Well about thirteen and--
Speaker 1: Okay. So a lot of the questions you might have asked at some point you didn't get a chance to.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, any other stories about--from your mother's side of the family or?
Speaker 2: No, I just think it's remarkable for any family to have fifteen in their household, and that's about the most remarkable thing that I can remember. I never--as a result of that I never longed to--for friendship. My friends were always my first cousins who lived around the neighborhood and were very supportive always.
Story_ID: 632727
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jeremiah William Holland [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.]: J-E-R-E-M-I-A-H, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, H-O-L-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 29th, 1904, Sussex County, Delaware.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about your father's side and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: I know a lot about my father's side. As the story goes in about 1774 a young Englishman from Salisbury, Maryland went fox hunting one day and he stumbled upon the tobacco--eight hundred acre tobacco plantation of John Stevenson [sic. William Stevenson]. Too tired to go back to Salisbury, he asked Mr. Stevenson if he could spend the night and he did. One night became two nights, two nights became a week, and a week became a month because young John Holland took a liking to Mr. Stevenson's daughter, Mary Polly Stevenson. They married in 1775 and in about 1776, Mr. Stevenson died and left his nine acre [sic.] tobacco plantation to his daughter, Mary Polly Stevenson Holland, and that plantation consisted of about twenty-one slaves. We think that the first slave to that plantation was in 1755. Those slaves were my ancestors, and in about 1791 the most pivotal ancestor in my family was born a slave by the name of Cyrus. According to property records from Sussex County in 1797, Cyrus was worth about fifteen dollars as a young kid and there were valuations on other members of his family. John Hol- excuse me, Mary Stevenson Holland died in 1787 and John Holland remarried Mary Black [sic. Elizabeth Black] and together they continued to operate the eight hundred acre tobacco plantation. John Holland died in 1821 and he left his inventory, which included his land, his oxen and his slaves to his wife, and in his will he specifically noted that Cyrus Holland was to stay with Mary, his widow. So Cyrus did and on February 9, 1827 Cyrus was freed by Mary Holland. He went on to marry Cotta Burton [Cotta Holland] in 1832 and they had five children of which there was a young man by the name of Jeremiah [Jeremiah M. Holland]. November 1841, Cyrus and Cotta purchased their first farm from Mary Holland. They bought that farm, it was forty acres for a $151 in Sussex County that was part of the tobacco plantation, and that farm still exists in our family today. In 1863, my grandfather, Jeremiah, was born--Jeremiah William [sic.] and in about 1890 he married Mary White Holland from Rehoboth Beach, Delaware. Mary was born October 22nd, 1868. They had five children of which the last one was Jeremiah William Holland [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.], my father. My grandfather, Reverend Jeremiah was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, and like various A.M.E. ministers, travelled the A.M.E. circuit in southern Delaware for years and according to legend he was one of the most prominent ministers in southern Delaware. He died in 1939, and his son, Jeremiah, married Jane Louise Foster [Jane Foster Holland] of Martinsville, Virginia and then resided in Ardmore, Pennsylvania in 1944. They gave birth to three children, Bernice [Bernice Holland Green], Jeremiah [Jeremiah Holland, Jr.] and Wendell [HistoryMaker Wendell Holland], and that kind of brings us up to two thousand- 2012.
Story_ID: 632728
Speaker 1: You were saying that your--I think your, your father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] was associating with the A.M.E. church [African Methodist Episcopal] and I think before he started you said he had a strong association with Wilberforce (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my grandfather [Jeremiah M. Holland], my grandfather was an A.M.E. minister and according to family lore, had a very strong association with the creation, or at least the maintenance, retention, of Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. The tradition in the family was so deep that my father insisted that my sister [Bernice Holland Green] go to Wilberforce and she did and graduated with honors and is very proud of Wilberforce and Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any--there must be some stories from this side of the family documenting continuous account of history especially in the church. Are there any stories that were passed down about activities of your ancestors?
Speaker 2: In what sense?
Speaker 1: Well stories about what they may have done or supportive or movements they were in or business ventures?
Speaker 2: Sure, my grandfather built three churches in southern Delaware. His oldest--his second oldest son, Theodore Winchester [Theodore Holland], established one of the first and only black businesses in Sussex County, Delaware in about 1945 and continued with that until he died in 1974. I'll just have to think for a minute about others. There's a, I suppose, a tremendous story about, again the migration of rural African Americans moving up from the South and they of course moved to suburban Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. My family came to suburban Philadelphia in about 1911, so we've been on the Main Line for over a hundred years. I speak of us as the indigenous people on the Main Line.
Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a--now your father went to school at--did he go to school at Wilberforce?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: Interesting story, my father wanted to go to Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] to be a doctor and my grandfather wanted him to go to Wilberforce and be a minister, and my father chose not to do that and as a result he didn't go anywhere.
Speaker 1: Now did your father go to school at Wilberforce--I mean your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, my grandfather was an oyster farmer. We have a farm that was passed down from Cyrus [Holland's paternal great-grandfather, Cyrus Holland], it's called Oyster Rocks [ph.]. It's about a sixty-five acre farm and there for years, my grandfather in addition to being a minister was an oyster farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did--there is a strong association with Wilberforce; did anybody go there (laughter) other than your sister?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), no you know how kids are, they go wherever they want to go.
Speaker 1: But your sister actually went to Wilberforce?
Speaker 2: Proudly, yes. She was an exchange student in her junior year and that had a tremendous impact on me and helped me to shape my international travels as a kid.
Speaker 1: We'll get to that but just for the record where did she go as an exchange student?
Speaker 2: Oh, she went to London [England], the University of Hull [University College Hull; University of Hull, Hull, England] and stayed--I think the years were sixty- '65 [1965] to '66 [1966] and then of course travelled to Europe extensively while she was there.
Speaker 1: Did your father share any stories of growing up with you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I lived those stories--oh did he share any stories?
Speaker 1: Any stories of growing up with you--your father?
Speaker 2: None in particular. He talked about--always talked about my grandfather like many being called to preach and often told the story of that. But beyond that I don't think there were any remarkable stories.
Speaker 1: Okay now did your father have any aspirations that were unfulfilled or things that he wanted to do that he was actually able to do, that he conceived as a youth?
Speaker 2: Well again, he wanted to be a doctor and I suppose did not have that dream fulfilled.
Story_ID: 632729
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure there is, but I can't recall it.
Speaker 1: So your father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] being born in--you said 1906, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen o-four [1904].
Speaker 1: O-four [1904], okay he would have been probably too young to serve in World War I [WWI], right?
Speaker 2: Too young to serve in World War I, his brother did, Cyrus [Cyrus Holland], and too old to serve in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay. So when did your parents get together?
Speaker 2: Well, they married in 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay. What did your dad do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a number of things but by the time, by the time I was a young boy, he was a shipping clerk at a gift store and then he was a doorman at one of the Main Line kind of exclusive condos. The story goes that my father opened doors and my mother [Jane Foster Holland] scrubbed floors to get me through college.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you think about your parents' personalities, their mannerisms, their tendencies or talents, their looks who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly in terms of looks my mother, and I suppose in terms of demeanor both of them. They were both kind of smooth, quick to smile but very assertive parents.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. How many brothers and sisters do you have and where do you fit in? Can you name them and where you fit in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. I'm the youngest of three. My sister is the oldest, Bernice, and Holland Green [Bernice Holland Green] born June 29, 1945 on my father's birthday, and my brother, Jeremiah William Holland [Jeremiah Holland, Jr.]; he's three years older than me born May 31, 1949. It's interesting the one thing about family history is how the name Jeremiah is literally generational. Can kind of trace that back about 150 years.
Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah it's true that does like ring true in all the things you said (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 632730
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, earliest childhood memory was again growing up, I call it backstairs at, on the Main Line. As a young kid my mother [Jane Foster Holland] used to do domestic work, and my earliest childhood memory is standing in the kitchen with her about three or four years old and watching her iron clothes for Main Line businessmen who used to want their clothes laundered and prepared. My other kind of searing memory of my youth was that when I was about four years old my mother had a radical mastectomy and it was remarkable to me in so many ways and I always remember this scar that was about from mid bicep through the bottom rib and I never really understood what it was like. Fast forward forty years after that, I was part of an effort to improve breast health for many women around the world, largely based on my boyhood experience with my mother.
Story_ID: 632731
Speaker 1: Can you describe where you lived and what the neighborhood was like, and if it had a name or?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I lived in Ardmore, Pennsylvania. Traditionally it was a low income neighborhood. Twin houses, almost like the row houses that you see in many working class neighborhoods in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. It was--it's in Lower Merion Township [Pennsylvania] and I suppose growing up it might have had a population of about five thousand, and I'd say about 90 percent of those were African Americans. It represented to me one of the many black hubs--black communities kind of scattered through the Main Line, but like Harlem [New York, New York] is to the United States, it was the centerpiece, if you will, of--it was the black community on the Main Line for a number of reasons. Many African Americans from other Main Line communities would kind of migrate, if you will, to Ardmore for various reasons. So it was a very positive experience and it was a very positive community and nowadays it's like many communities--low income communities, it's starting to change complexion. So the memories that I have are very fond and very vivid.
Speaker 1: Is this the community that would be the center for black entertainment and black professionals and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: With a very small E and a very small P. Keep in mind that there are small towns perhaps not unlike small communities in the South. The difference is that they weren't terribly isolated in terms of geography. There are things and people around, but yes a clear answer to your question many African Americans from other parts of the Main Line would come to Ardmore for entertainment and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So if they needed a lawyer or doctor or wanted to go see a black show or something (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they needed a lawyer or a doctor, yes. Shows were, again we're not talking about large productions, but Ardmore would certainly be the place with the predominant churches, and schools with the predominant schools and athletics with the predominant athletes, and in terms of size with more people of color there than you would find in other Main Line communities in Devon [Pennsylvania], Berwyn [Pennsylvania] or Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, now people all around the country today know the name Lower Merion Township because of Kobe Bryant (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: So that's a--and they even know how to spell it, you know, or even I know how to spell it, M-E-R-I-O-N (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes, Kobe and I went into the Lower Merion [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] basketball hall of fame together about five years ago, and his father [Joe Bryant] and I played basketball against each other as kids. What he did for Lower Merion and Lower Merion sports was truly great and perhaps at another time we could talk about it. But there were many athletes at least as great as Kobe Bryant and we're just as proud of them as we are of him. And there are a few athletes from other communities on the Main Line that were just great athletes and I suppose we're very symbolic of how African Americans post Jackie Robinson had just started to improve their quality of life through athletics, and I guess I'm exhibit A of that.
Story_ID: 632732
Speaker 1: In Ardmore [Pennsylvania], can you describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, absolutely, I lived behind a beer garden, a bar if you will. Friday and Saturday nights you could hear, you could hear the Four Tops, you could hear The Temptations, you could hear people laughing and joking. You could smell the cigarettes; you could smell the fried chicken and the fried foods on a summer evening with the window opened. Cars, kids were into hot cars at that time. There would be a drag race on Spring Avenue on any given night or any given Saturday night or weekday night. Church was always Sunday; I lived directly across the street from the church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Ardmore, Pennsylvania]. So the sounds, it's interesting that you say that, the sounds that you would hear on a Sunday morning wouldn't be loud sounds but they'd be more of the sights. You'd see kids going to Sunday school and of course at 9:00 or 8:30 and then later on you'd see families literally walking to church. So the sounds weren't as imposing as the record sounds the night before, but rather the footsteps or the quiet conversation that a mother would have with her daughter to say, "Make sure your dress is straight," or, "Fix your collar young man." Those were the kind of sound. And at eleven o'clock traditionally you'd hear the organ from the church just playing classic church music, the introductory Decalogue kind of music, and those would be kind of the classic sounds. The other sounds that of course were remarkable to me as a young athlete growing up are the sounds that you would hear on the basketball court at night anywhere from six to nine p.m. We had our share of talent from the (laughter), from the grunts of a great athlete trying to do a great play, to arguments over loose balls or out of bound calls and that kind of stuff. To the classic in your face, for lack of a better word, trash talking that you'd see or that you would hear after one athlete did an incredibly good move or play on another one. Those were the sights and sounds of summer nights in Ardmore playground.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you grew up in your household, it was you and your brothers [sic. brother, Jeremiah Holland, Jr.] and your sister [Bernice Holland Green], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did anybody else who lived there (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but my bro- my mother [Jane Foster Holland] left early, she was hospitalized early when I was about maybe eight. So it was largely me and my brother and my sister, and my sister was seven years older. When I was about ten, she literally left the house, so I was raised largely in a single parent male family. Nobody else was there, but I had so many relatives literally next door or around the corner that, that I could dwell on.
Story_ID: 632733
Speaker 1: So, what were you interested in growing up? What were your interests as a kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The--growing up in a black community I suppose in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] was, in my opinion, an experience where you tried to be like those great athletes who broke the color line. Jackie Robinson, my father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] always used to talk about that Joe Louis and Max Schmeling fight, Wilt Chamberlain was a Philadelphian so any basketball player had that right, so we had an almost natural inclination to want to be that good. What made athletics even more important was that we had some true All-Americans at Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] who literally grew up with us and trained and practiced in our presence. So almost by, by birth you aspired to be a great and outstanding athlete and I was fortunate to be the youngest and I had a chance to see a lot of my older cousins literally just be outstanding athletes and it kind of gave me something to aspire to and I mean that's, that was it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of them? Can you name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Emlen Tunnell went to Radnor High School [Radnor, Pennsylvania], but he was in Ardmore [Pennsylvania] so much that it wasn't even funny. He was probably Radnor High School's most outstanding football player. He went on to play with the Philadelphia Eagles [sic.] and they've named a park [Emlen Tunnell Park, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] with him.
Speaker 1: You said Emlen Tunnell?
Speaker 2: Emlen Tunnell.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of him.
Speaker 2: Yeah. The nation's fastest schoolboy athlete in the high hurdles. George Hearn and his brother went to Lower Merion and ironically they won the Championship of America at the Penn Relays [Penn Relay Carnival], which I'm not sure if you're familiar with that, but that gave gold watches (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about the importance of the Penn Relays.
Speaker 2: Penn Relays is an annual event at the University of Pennsylvania, which brings the nation's best track athletes to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the last week in April. What it means in the black community--African American community for years, we said it was an opportunity to watch outstanding young black athletes excel particularly in the races. They call it the 4x1 now, we called it the quarter mile relay, the 4x4, the mile relay and the 880, which is the 800 meters. There are two classes, actually three classes. There are high school athletes, college athletes and I suppose professionals. The team that won an event was usually--the team that won the ultimate event in high school is called the Championship of America races. In 1956, '57 [1957] Lower Merion High School won, I think, three Championship of America races in the Penn Relays, and as a result it created this enormous tradition at Lower Merion to excel in track. In the African American communities what the Penn Relays meant was that black college students and black high school students, I suppose from the Mid-Atlantic and even from faraway places would come for a weekend of parties and entertainment. It was largely headed at that time--spearheaded at that time by many of the traditional African American sororities and fraternities. So it meant an awful lot to me as a young kid to go to the Penn Relays and see Lower Merion win the Championships of America. The interesting business part that I kind of figured out later on in life was that the coach--the track coach at Lower Merion High School invented those hurdles that knocked down and sprung back up. And it was those hurdles that the nation's fastest hurdler used. So it was almost as though it was a great confluence of events. The coach invented the hurdles and he had the fastest guy on the track. Well needless to say, the business just flourished enormously.
Story_ID: 632734
Speaker 1: But track was just one of many sports at Lower Merion [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], I suppose basketball was, was the sport and as young kids we all wanted to be Wilt Chamberlain of course who was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson was absolutely one of my favorites. He played for the Cincinnati Royals [Sacramento Kings], and basketball at Lower Merion flourished for years and years and years to come. My family was a significant part of that. We have, I think, four of us in the Lower Merion basketball hall of fame as a result of what we did as kids.
Speaker 2: You can name them.
Speaker 1: Well my cousin, Billy Holland [William Holland], and I and Kobe [Kobe Bryant] entered the basketball hall of fame together, I think it was 2008. My cousin, Michael Holland, entered it just, just last year. But as kids we lived in the kind of rich Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania] tradition of having the largest number of state basketball championships in Pennsylvania than any other school up until recently, now Chester [Pennsylvania] of course has succeeded us.
Speaker 2: Now, when did you start playing--did you start playing basketball earlier or did you start in some other sport?
Speaker 1: Well you know, growing up in a poor black community you play everything. And I played football, basketball, and track, but I started playing basketball in earnest when I was about fifth grade, but I stayed with all three of them. I was captain of three sports in high school and best athlete in junior high school [Ardmore Junior High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] and high school.
Speaker 2: Did--were you part of youth basketball league, I guess at age ten?
Speaker 1: You know youth basketball wasn't as organized in 1950s, 1960s as it was today, but I played in a number of basketball leagues. I played in the Sonny Hill League here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Years passed there was something called the Narberth League [Narberth Boys Basketball League] where all the greats played, I played in that and was an all-star in that. But I played just about anybody I could at any time in order to improve my game. In Ardmore [Pennsylvania], as I told you it was the center of the Main Line universe, in Ardmore we had the benefit of Villanova University [Villanova, Pennsylvania] being just two miles away from us. Villanova recruited some outstanding basketball players in the late '70s [1970s]. Howard Porter, Johnny Jones, Sammy Sims, who went on to lose to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in the '71 [1971] finals. Well those guys came to Ardmore for a number of reasons. They came to get their hair cuts there, they came to go to church, they came to party and they came to play basketball. So as a young junior high school, high school kid, I was playing against probably some of the greatest basketball players ever in Villanova history, which raised the level of my game as it did virtually anybody around. There were other guys who came from neighboring communities from West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Overbrook High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], from Norristown High School [Norristown Area High School, Norristown, Pennsylvania] and from Chester High School [Chester, Pennsylvania], and it just made summer nights in Ardmore probably the center of at least basketball, on the Main Line.
Story_ID: 632735
Speaker 1: So were you all playing indoors or outdoors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Outdoors.
Speaker 1: Outdoors.
Speaker 2: Outdoors, outdoors. In the summer it's the only time to play, only place to play and the best time of course is when it's about eighty, eighty-five degrees and about 88 percent humidity and the sun starts to go down and the lights are there and everybody's crowding around the court. Crowding around the court because you'd have maybe four or five teams waiting and if you lost, you sat for a half an hour or longer. So you played hard and it was just perhaps the greatest athletic experience I've had in my life.
Speaker 1: Now this is full court, right?
Speaker 2: Full court game after game after game.
Speaker 1: No referees, right?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), no refs hence the sights and the sounds that I alluded to earlier, guys would call their own fouls, guys would call their own score or the score and anyone of those talking points could result in arguments that could go on forever. Hence, my opinion one of the best recruiting grounds for Future Lawyers of America would be on the basketball courts.
Speaker 1: It does make you--it causes you to think about how decisions are made and how people win arguments.
Speaker 2: It does and you find that getting to the truth or getting to a victory is more than the words, it's certainly the words, but it's also the demeanor and the inflection that you get, and, and that's the experience that I had as a young kid. In direct contrast, in direct contrast to the discussions that I have at my exclusive Main Line country club where I play tennis and you don't hear those kind of arguments about out of bounds calls or anything like that, that I did as a kid growing up. That cultural contrast is just so great that I'm glad that I've been able to live in both worlds and have both experiences.
Speaker 1: Street basketball, a lot of times, we see the authority of the figure who is making the argument that makes the difference.
Speaker 2: Exactly, but that authority is viewed and picked up by many young kids like me so that one day I'll be that authority (laughter) and the tradition continues.
Speaker 1: Okay. So do you have a good story about any of that?
Speaker 2: Oh no (laughter), I could go on, I could go on forever. There were just so many but no I'll leave it generic.
Speaker 1: Well, here's just one question, was there ever a time when the game held up for an inordinate amount of time?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were many times that the game was held up for inordinate amount of time, you expected that. So the wise person would get some rest. Gosh if you just played three games and you're a little bit tired, of course you're not really tired as a nineteen year old kid, but you'd get a little rest. But the arguments would hold the game up and you'd get used to those. What was really fascinating was when some of those arguments actually turned into fist fights and that was not an uncommon experience, but that's a risky run when you start arguing a call because the (laughter), the discussion goes from basketball to some description of one's family, mother or father (laughter) or sister or brothers so it could get a little bit intense and out of control.
Speaker 1: So this is--did you find that the observers would try to control that kind of thing, the fights and that sort of thing to make sure that people didn't get hurt (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the rule of thumb is if you're on the sidelines, you're not in the game, stay out of the game. Every once in a while those who would actually be one of the ten guys on the court might step in. One, because things are getting out of control, but even more so they just want to play and arguing gets you nowhere. But normally it's mono e mono, one on one and you just kind of go until you, until you stop.
Story_ID: 632736
Speaker 1: What about school, now where did you--what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) School was very important to me, I suppose as a result of--neither of my parents not going to college, they both early imparted on me the importance of education. My mother [Jane Foster Holland], as I told you, was a twin and she was the smarter one of the twin and she was denied an opportunity to go to college and her sister did who wasn't as smart as my mother. My father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] realized the failure of his life in not listening to my grandfather [Jeremiah M. Holland] not going to any college. So the two of them, and even more so my father as my mother left early, were insistent that we go to school. But we all went to a segregated school in Lower Merion Township [Pennsylvania] called Ardmore Avenue elementary school [Ardmore Avenue School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania]. It was one of the first schools in Lower Merion Township and in about the seven- excuse me, in about late 1880s, 1890s even served as the site of Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] before it moved. Around the turn of the century it was, I'd say, basically all-white and then over time, by the time I got there in the 1950s it was segregated. The quality of education at Ardmore Avenue elementary school was indeed inferior. The school district used that school as the dumping grounds for many of the uninspired teachers and for the less academic learners. In about, in about 1960s, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] started a movement to close the school and in the summer of, in fact August 25th, 1963 the NAACP argued that the quality of education at Ardmore Avenue elementary school was indeed separate and unequal and the school board on that night closed the school. So about a week or so after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] gave his I Have a Dream speech and a couple of weeks before the little girls were bombed at the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama], I was part of an integration effort where all of us were bused to the various schools in Lower Merion Township. It was a tremendously challenging experience, but that marked the end of segregated schools in one of the richest school districts in America.
Story_ID: 632737
Speaker 1: Do you have any sense--I know you were a child at the time but you've, you seemed to have studied this on some level giving such a clear description of what happened. Did you have any sense that the school was really that bad? I mean--'cause it seemed like it would probably be a lot of black schools were that bad--oh I guess the question is why did the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] focus on Ardmore [Pennsylvania]? Did they think that was a case they could really win?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things, the NAACP focused on Ardmore because it was symbolic of what was going on around the country, it was symbolic of Little Rock [Arkansas], it was symbolic of the lunch counter sit-ins, it was symbolic of James Meredith and as I said Ardmore was literally the center of the universe--of the Main Line universe. So an argument went that if we could change things in Ardmore, we could continue to improve race relations literally along the Main Line. Second, that experience is important to me because I was in sixth grade and I was the--I was amongst the older kids who went. Well as the story goes six years later, I was literally the first student to graduate from Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] as a result of that busing experiment. Not the first black student, but the first student because that busing experiment affected African American students who were leaving Ardmore Avenue elementary school as well as white students in the receiving schools. It wasn't a one way trip; it was an integration affect that--that affected both students. I genuinely feel that I'm part of civil rights history not only because I lived that first week of September 1963, but also again because I was the first one to graduate and there were a number of other things that occurred. With respect to the quality of education, it was beyond a given that the quality of education at Ardmore Avenue was inferior. What do I mean? It's clear to all of us who went there that the teachers on a whole didn't have much motivation to teach us as we should have been taught. Second, I'll use the term corporal punishment, but punishment, physical touching, beatings were not uncommon. I mean a ruler on the knuckles, a smack on the bum or things like that was not uncommon. One of the kinds of traditional stories we have is also of the teacher who used to punish us for being bad students by putting us under her desk. Third, the facilities were awful. We had a little bit of grass in front of the school but behind the school we had a parking lot. Well that's where we had our recess, that's where we played touch tag football, tackle, hopscotch and jumping jacks. When I went to the integrated school [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], I saw more green grass than I had ever seen in my life and it made me say to myself, gee why didn't they let us play on the grass at Ardmore Avenue School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] instead of making recess at the end. And fourth, at that time there were many disadvantaged students who were housed, taught educated at Ardmore Avenue. They didn't bring in the brighter kids from around the school district; they brought in the academically challenged kids. So you kind of put all of these things together and you say to yourself, boy this isn't Lower Merion Township [Pennsylvania], this is Selma [Alabama] and it should be that way. So you say to yourself, but for the NAACP moving forward with that and making local the national Civil Rights Movement, Ardmore Avenue School would have continued.
Speaker 1: Do you know who the lead attorney was for the NAACP?
Speaker 2: No, I don't but I could find that out.
Speaker 1: I was wondering if he was a local.
Speaker 2: It was and I have the clippings, I have all of that stuff, I could find that out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Which raises a question did you know any lawyers growing up, any black lawyers growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah there were two. Herb Nelson [Herbert C. Nelson] and I just forgot the name of the other guy, maybe it was one lawyer and two doctors.
Speaker 1: Herb Nelson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had two doctors that you knew?
Speaker 2: Yes, Nolan Atkinson, Sr. [Nolan C. Atkinson, Sr.] and Daniel C. Jones [ph.].
Story_ID: 632738
Speaker 1: Well, when you were in school, I know you were interested in sports but did you have a favorite academic subject?
Speaker 2: Math, math and I don't know why. (Clears throat) Maybe it was because my father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.], some of the things he did around the house just kind of made me interested in math. I suppose later on I found out that's why I loved the practice of energy as I do, but math was my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any favorite teachers despite the problems of Ardmore, did you have any favorite teachers there?
Speaker 2: Not at Ardmore Avenue elementary (laughter), not at Ardmore Avenue elementary school [Ardmore Avenue School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] I didn't, and not at the integrated school [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] either. Again, keep in mind that as early kids or young kids, while the school was black, the teachers were white, and I don't think many of us had pleasant experiences with teachers. When we went to the integrated school again we didn't see any black faces at the integrated school. I'm nine years old or eleven years old I guess at that point and my impression is, oh these are going to be bad white teachers since we had bad white teacher before or they're not going to be terribly accepting, I suppose just because they are white. So I never had any favorite teachers at all. And again put yourself in the frame of mind of third quarter, fourth quarter, 1963. Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech [I Have a Dream], the Birmingham [Alabama] schools were bombed, November 1963, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] gets shot, that was the era that we were bused in. The country was an entirely different place and we were the guinea pigs of the Main Line. We were the indigenous people who lived this and that in my opinion left a true indelible mark in my mind and in my career. It kind of inspired me or helped me understand why we did other things proactive in a civil rights sense.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember watching the March on Washington on TV?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, I don't actually remember watching the march because one might argue that was a presumptuous statement that we had televisions in our house. We had a television and it didn't work all the time. So I would never--you wouldn't sit down at a television and watch something historic as his speech or a march, but I don't remember watching that as a kid, but I'm glad that the civil rights leaders on the Main Line watched those and other events to help change the course of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your--did your family get any black dailies that had national distribution like the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier] or?
Speaker 2: The Trib.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Philadelphia Tribune, and there used to be another one that I just can't think of. I think in greater Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] that we used to get.
Story_ID: 632739
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was the name of the school you were bused to?
Speaker 2: Wynnewood Road elementary school [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] and--
Speaker 1: Wynne-?
Speaker 2: Wynnewood Road, W-Y-N-N-E, wood. Wynnewood Road. It's one word.
Speaker 1: Okay,
Speaker 2: And we were bused to four, Wynnewood Road, Penn Wynne [Penn Wynne Elementary School, Wynnewood, Pennsylvania], P-E-N-N, W-Y-N-N-E, Penn Valley [Penn Valley Elementary School, Narberth, Pennsylvania] and Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr Elementary School, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, but you went to Wynnewood?
Speaker 2: Yeah Wynnewood Road.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a Hebrew academy now, it's called Torah Academy [Morris and Rose Caskey Torah Academy of Greater Philadelphia], it's right there on--yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic population of the whites who were living there, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yes I do, there were two black students in the whole school. They were the daughters of a maid, a maid who worked literally down the street. The ethnic population so therefore was about 95 percent white but it was--if I were to cut that away, I'd say maybe 40 percent of those were Anglos [Anglo-Saxon], let's say 20 percent were Irish, and the remaining--Irish and Italian, and the remaining 20 percent were Jewish. The Jewish population at that time was also going through kind of an interesting transition from West Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] into the suburbs.
Speaker 1: So they were just kind of coming into--
Speaker 2: They were just kind of coming into Lower Merion as well, yes in large numbers.
Speaker 1: You're eleven years old, this is 19--
Speaker 2: This is 1963, September 5, 1963.
Speaker 1: So how did you do in Wynnewood Road?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) First impressions I'm sorry, I'll answer your question. The very first day we get there, I'll never forget, it was like we were walking up these steps to the United States Supreme Court. They might have twenty steps but they looked grand and the school kind of set up. So here we were, I'll never forget, I went up with two of my friends, we walked up the steps and we got there and they showed us this classroom and I had never seen as many white students in my life at one period. So we were kind of silent, the teachers were warm and accepting and that kind of thing. But the first day, I've got to tell you, kind of being the athlete I thought I was, the first day at recess we went outside and we saw these grass fields so we started to play tackle football (laughter). Tackle football on grass at Wynnewood was a lot easier than playing tackle football on the parking lot at Ardmore Avenue elementary school [Ardmore Avenue School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania]. Well after about fifteen minutes playing tackle football they shift us to the principal's office. The principal said, "We don't do that here, no tackle football, when in Rome [Italy], do as the Romans do," and that's the first time I heard that expression and it followed me all my life. But I found that there were two other impressions, first, for the first time I actually felt poor. You know in Ardmore Avenue, your mother or father was a maid or a butler or worked for the sanitation at Lower Merion Township [Pennsylvania]. So we were all kind of low to moderately low income. At Wynnewood Road, I felt immediately poor. The kids looked like they had of course better clothes, they had spending money in their pocket and they seemed more proper. The second impression was that where can I take comfort in this? I found that I could take comfort in athletics and athleticism because we were by far better athletes than any of them and I learned at an early stage that you can get acceptance in life through athletics. So because of my skill, many people started to befriend me because they wanted the best kid on their soccer team, on their football team, on their basketball team.
Story_ID: 632740
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about how you realized that athletics could open doors and create friendships, too.
Speaker 2: So, so I realized that athletics could open doors and create friendships. Now I'm just a poor kid at a little school in Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania], but in hindsight, I see how great an achievement what Jackie Robinson did. Imagine the doors that he opened and imagine the friendships that he created. But what that also gave me was an opportunity to think about politics. As corny as it sounds, home room elections came up for class president in sixth grade, and I wanted to say it was in November, and guess who they named as home room--who they put up as president for home room, [HistoryMaker] Wendell Holland. I didn't become president (laughter), but I became vice president. But again in a very small way it showed the strength of athletics and what athletics could do and I kind of continued to use that prototype, if you will throughout the rest of my life and my career.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so--but you were saying there were no teachers there that served as a--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, and I'm not saying that they were bad teachers at all, but you know there's some teachers--some kids in their respective communities knew the teachers from church or from the supermarket or from going to school with their mother and fathers. We didn't have that so there was no immediate connection. Then there was this issue with respect to race. We were there because we were kind of shoved on people and I'm not saying that they were resentful for that but there was something of an issue. Nor am I saying that the teachers were mean to us whatsoever, but in my one year there, I can't recall any teacher who literally kind of went out of their way for me or any other new kids to make us feel like Wynnewood Road [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] was, was a real home.
Story_ID: 632741
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went on to middle school I guess, or junior high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah and the good times started to roll. Ardmore Junior High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] was again part of that great Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania] school tradition and I fell into the pattern of, I suppose at least initially, many great athletes in my own respective family and great athletes from the small Ardmore [Pennsylvania] community.
Speaker 1: You went back to the community you started out in?
Speaker 2: No, the progression, elementary school and then junior high school. The junior high school was called Ardmore Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Now this is in--is this an all-white school?
Speaker 2: No, it was integrated.
Speaker 1: Integrated, all right.
Speaker 2: And the athletics started to kick in. I was, I think, class president in seventh grade, played three sports, pretty much of a smooth transition and everything was fine through junior high school and again used my sports background or I found it. My sports achievements helped me not only making friends but also running for political office.
Speaker 1: Now you played basketball, football and?
Speaker 2: Basketball, football and track.
Speaker 1: Track.
Speaker 2: I was the best athlete in the school when I graduated--recognized as the best athlete.
Speaker 1: What position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: I was halfback, in my own mind I was Jim Brown (laughter), and on good days I was [HistoryMaker] Gale Sayers and I would always hold the ball out with one hand. In basketball, I was in junior high school, I was one of the taller guys so I was usually a three or four forward and at track I ran high and low hurdles and high jumped.
Speaker 1: So you had hops as they say, you could--
Speaker 2: Well yes, but I had desire; I wanted to be one of the best athletes or like the best athletes that were in my community. A few of them dated my sister [Bernice Holland Green] and I had a chance to befriend them. As little kids we used to go watch them play. I believed in America, I believed in apple pie and I believed in being a great athlete. That's what really helped to drive me in addition to this kind of new found feeling that gee if people recognize me as a great athlete, then they won't see me as the poor black kid from Ardmore that I really am--all I really was I should say.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, I'm just trying to get--Ardmore Junior High School was an integrated school, but had it been all-white just in recent history before you started?
Speaker 2: Let's just backup, in Lower Merion School District there's largely one school but really two but largely one high school. That high school had three schools to feed into it--three junior high schools. Those junior high schools had five elementary schools to feed into them. The elementary school that I went to was Ardmore Avenue elementary school [Ardmore Avenue School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], it was all-black. They collapsed that in '63 [1963] into the other elementary feeder schools one of which was mine, Wynnewood Road [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania]. Once I graduated from sixth grade in 1964, I went up to Ardmore Junior High School, which was already integrated, and one of the schools that fe- ultimately fed Ardmore--Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 632742
Speaker 1: Now were there any, any teachers or any mentors at Ardmore Junior High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, things had changed in terms of teachers significantly. Gosh, who were some of my favorite teachers? It's all kind of escaping me now but the sports teachers--the teachers who were football, basketball or track--oh Ken Trotter was one of my favorite teachers, he was a track man. He was the one that helped maintain the traditions and the legends of the track All-Americans that went before me. He was an outstanding coach, mentor and friend (cough), and a great personality as well and a math teacher too. So I think that again helped my interest in math.
Speaker 1: Okay is there anybody else, Ken Trotter and--
Speaker 2: Oh none in junior high that really comes to mind. There was, I suppose, the principal who while he wasn't a friend really helped me understand patriotism and apple pie and a real cheerleader for the high school. I drank all that Kool-Aid, I really believed in it and that's what I inspired. I say all of this to say that soon in 1967, my attitude started to change significantly. But I was such a flag waver and really believed in institutions and tradition as a result of people like my junior high school coach--junior high school principal, Harry Donald.
Speaker 1: Now were you--were there people in the community that had an influence on you like say a Boy Scout master or somebody at a Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] or the minister or deacon at church or anything?
Speaker 2: Yeah sure, at the playground there was a guy who was--in the summer the playground opens basically from Memorial Day to Labor Day and there was a guy who was a supervisor of things. He'd give us the balls and tennis racquets or whatever, his name was Vernon Young [Vernon V. Young]. He himself won the state basketball championship for Lower Merion [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] in like 1941. He sank the free throws with no seconds left (laughter), and he too was a three sport man. As an adult he was a teacher and track coach at Overbrook High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the high school of Wilt Chamberlain, and during the summers he was the one who was at the playground all the time. He had this incredible way of challenging you and getting you to do your best in a very, I'll say, black way. If there was ever a master of jive it was Vernon Young who on the one hand insulted you and with the very same words in the very same sentence inspired you. It was everybody's goal to be better than Vernon Young or to disprove the put downs of you that he did a--I'm hope I'm speaking English now--so if he said you can't in a joking way 'cause he knew you could, you'd say, "Yeah?" For example, "Oh Wendell [HistoryMaker Wendell Holland], you can't dunk that ball, I know you can't dunk that ball." So what do I do? I not only go up with one hand, I go up with two hands and do one of these and do it. Then I'd come back and say, "Yeah Vernon, see I told you I could do it." But he made men--he made a number of great athletes with incredible character in my community or tried to do it. So that every summer in addition to playing basketball all the time or whatever, I knew that there was always an older black male in the community who was there with us and literally sacrificed everything to try to improve people. Ironically, he died young (cough) and we had that park named after him right there in Ardmore [Pennsylvania], (cough) excuse me, Vernon, Vernon V. Young Park [Vernon V. Young Memorial Park].
Story_ID: 632743
Speaker 1: Now what about church, was that a big influence?
Speaker 2: Church was a huge influence. I was a--my father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] was the son of a minister. Absolute huge influence, and (laughter) we literally lived across the street from church, so.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Bethel A.M.E. Church, 163 Sheldon Lane, Ardmore, Pennsylvania. We literally lived across the street from church. So between my father being the son of an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister, my mother [Jane Foster Holland] being an A.M.E., and the church being right across the street there was no reason for us to be late for church or Sunday school. You can imagine what it was like Sunday mornings getting any kid out of the sack and into church in Sunday school, but it was a tremendous influence. I joined Bethel Church, I think it was March, March 6th, 1961 as we all had in our family. It was something of remembering the great tradition of Reverend Jeremiah [Jeremiah M. Holland]. We had to go to church every single Sunday. I thought that was a huge chore to ask but I talked to some of my friends who grew up in the South who not only had to go to church every single Sunday but Wednesday nights (laughter) and a couple of other nights. So I guess every single Sunday wasn't bad. In the church we had, when I was a young kid, we had the joy of having one of the kind of classic African American ministers. He was remarkable, he could preach very well. Quite inspiring and he preached about civil rights and politics from the pulpit. He was one of the three African American preachers in town who was part of the movement in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] to change the conditions of African Americans on the Main Line and specifically in Ardmore. He was just absolutely outstanding. What made that experience even more rewarding was that his kids were my best friends. So the families were together, it was natural to go to church and you had this very fair skinned African American preacher who was extremely articulate doing everything. My mother sang in the choir, my father was a steward, or a trustee, I guess he was a trustee and my extended family was there so it was very much a part of my life.
Speaker 1: What was the reverend's name?
Speaker 2: Reverend Theodore Sterling Clements [Theodore S. Clements], he left us August 1965 and moved to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Assigned by the A.M.E. bishops.
Speaker 2: Yes, you know well.
Speaker 1: Did they have like well defined roles for the youth in church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know it's funny I just got put on the board of the Cradle of Liberty chapter [Cradle of Liberty Council] of the Boy Scouts of America and one of the things that we had at the church was cub and scout troop--a clear cub and scout troop. Now as an adult, I can see why that was such a positive thing for the community. The other things, of course, we had were the classic Easter and Christmas ceremonies, poems--I mean that was a tradition and Sunday school. Sunday school was a real and genuine institution and another way that you can express yourself or enjoy yourself or be yourself, good or bad. Church was clearly thriving.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to go to scout camp?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Leonard Tokas [ph.] was the scout master, he lived two doors from me and he had a place in Allentown [Pennsylvania], and again I guess I didn't appreciate it then but it was the stuff that little boys liked to do. Get out in the woods with your penknife or your hatchet and chop down some trees, build a campfire, do marshmallows, go down the river in canoes or rowboats. That was all that kind of good and positive stuff, again that kind of sense of patriotism. "On my honor, I'll do my best" (mumbling), the scout code and that's the kind of thing that was kind of deeply engrained in me up until about 1967.
Story_ID: 632744
Speaker 1: Now you were in eighth and ninth grade at middle school--at the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--okay. And were there any significant events that took place during the eighth and ninth grades that you want to mention (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, (pause) needless to say I always get a little choked up on this. One of my role models was a guy by the name of Paul T. Short [Paul T. Short, Jr.], and Paul was maybe about seven or eight years older than me, kind of tall, slender, good looking athletic guy. His sisters and I were very good friends. Paul went to college and was drafted as a first lieutenant, and kind of to make a long story short, February 5th, 1965 [sic.], Paul was killed in Vietnam, and he was one of two graduates of Lower Merion [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] that were killed in Vietnam, but it was kind of incredible 'cause I guess I never understood this thing about war or death or any of that other stuff. But I remember how it touched his sisters, there were two of them, one in my class and one right beneath me. We had our classic Ardmore Junior High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] patriotic Memorial Day ceremony and I remember how and it was almost probably this day, I remember how they had to walk across the stage with two roses in their hand in honor of their brother. They were crushed needless to say, and it was something that kind of followed me all along in my life because you kind of say to yourself, boy that could have been me. There was nothing different about his DNA, about his achievements, about his abilities than I but he lost his life, and it was just something that stuck with me as a professional. There are those times when I talk about heroes and had a chance in my executive capacity to celebrate heroes; Paul Short would always be the one that I think about.
Speaker 1: So you were in the eighth grade--is that when your mother [Jane Foster Holland] passed away?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother, my mother was hospitalized December 7th, 1965 and she passed away March 20th, 1969. She never came home after she went to the hospital.
Speaker 1: So you said it was you and your brother [Jeremiah Holland, Jr.] and your father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] left there at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister [Bernice Holland Green] had left, September 1963 to go to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], so it was just the fellows in the house and it was a--we split our responsibility. My father worked, my brother cooked and I cleaned. And to this day, I can do laundry better than anybody, male or female (laughter). To this day I can clean a house as good as anybody (laughter) and I'm proud of it, but don't ask me to cook you a meal.
Story_ID: 632745
Speaker 1: You're on a track at junior high school [Ardmore Junior High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] to go to Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's no doubt about it--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear).  And, anything happen in eighth grade or ninth before you go?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Boy, did somebody tell you about this story? So we were kind of classic athletes and bad boys at the same time--teenage boys just doing their things. After track practice in ninth grade we always used to go to the teachers' lounge and steal sodas, and it was me and about three or four of my African American friends and Fred Dittmann [Frederic N. Dittmann]. Fred Dittmann was an English guy--Anglo [Anglo-Saxon], but he was good. So we did it kind of over and over and over again. So one day we went in after track practice about 5:30 or 5:45, we get in there and go to the teachers' lounge, and we're on our way out with our arms full of soda (laughter), and Mr. Gray [ph.] comes in, a tall white teacher, and says, "What are you guys doing?" (Laughter) We of course said we were just a little bit thirsty, we were getting some sodas. And he said, "You know you're not supposed to do that." So we put the sodas back and we easily had--and when I say arms full of soda, we had an arm full of sodas. The next day we get called down to the principal's office. Well that night, the intervening night, we had all made up our stories and we get called down to the principal's office and the first guy went in, he broke down and started crying, so then they called the rest of us and the principal said, "Look, Mobley [ph.] has already told us the truth, don't even make up a lie." So they suspend all four of us except for Fred Dittmann. Fred Dittmann was standing right beside me, right beside me, and we couldn't understand why Fred Dittmann didn't get suspended because he had just as many sodas in his hand as we did. Well needless to say, Fred's parents called up and kind of said, "I am Mr. Dittmann," so on and so forth, and you can attribute that to class or you can attribute that to race but that was one story I'll never forget. Fred Dittmann ultimately got pulled out of school and his parents sent him to one of the private schools in the area and we had to go and continue on at Lower Merion High School the next year.
Speaker 1: So you all were suspended?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we were suspended.
Speaker 1: But you came back and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: I was good, I learned in Wynnewood Road [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] when I was bused that I could, in fact, learn and I was a pretty good student. So I was probably a solid B plus student--A minus, B plus student from sixth grade all the way through twelfth grade at Lower Merion, when in fact at Ardmore elementary school [Ardmore Avenue School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], if you could flunk out of elementary school, I was about to do it, literally my grades were that bad.
Speaker 1: So what do you attribute to the change?
Speaker 2: The pressure of integration to me was embarrassing and I wanted in my own mind, I wanted to show the world that--I was ashamed of being poor, almost ashamed of being a Negro, we had those issues back then, but I was just as smart or just as good as anybody and usually the better athlete, and that's the kind of inner drive that kept me going. I realized that, again, acceptance came through and from athletics and once I understood what everybody else was doing, I could very easily do it. Once I understood that you're supposed to go home and do your homework and try to be good enough, I kind of got on that track. Then I started to take really kind of challenging courses, Latin, algebra I and algebra II, trig [trigonometry], geometry stuff like that I excelled in.
Speaker 1: Okay you mentioned that the principal [Harry Donald] with a patriotic speech (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, he was--in retrospect I, I saw him as responsible for maybe a good 60 percent of my, my patriotism.
Story_ID: 632746
Speaker 1: Now Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania], now this is nine- this is your--
Speaker 2: September 1963 is when we started Lower Merion.
Speaker 1: In nineteen sixty--?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].  Okay.  Now, what happened in 1967? You made reference to it about four times now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what happened?
Speaker 2: I guess I started really listening to what was going on in the country. The Black Power movement was kind of starting in earnest. There had been a couple of riots, Paul Short [Paul T. Short, Jr.] had died, I started listening to protest of the Vietnam War and two of my closest friends started to become--started to accept black radical ideology. They manifested it physically by growing Afros, and when you talk about who were the first kids in the neighborhood to grow Afros, Wesley Lloyd and Frank Mosley were, and they were two athletes. Wesley and I played football together, he was the David "Deacon" Jones and I was a Ron Lee. Frank and I worked together as well and I started to listen to what they were saying about how America treated the African American community and then I slowly started to accept some of the things that they said as true or as believable. And It started to knock away all of the patriotism that my principal [Harry Donald] had built up in me, and then I started to see as an athlete what other athletes did around the world. [HistoryMaker] John Carlos and Tommie Smith of Mexico City [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico], Kareem Abdul-Jabbar--Lew Alcindor, Jim Brown and you say to yourself, what kind of person, what kind of athlete am I going to be? And that's when things started to change. So much so that by the time April 1969 came along, or March 1969 came along, we had a sit-in at Lower Merion. One of the teachers basically got into a fight with my cousin, Billy [William Holland], who was essentially an All-American basketball player and an outstanding gentleman as well. We believe that much of that confrontation was based on race. This teacher didn't particularly--it was known that this teacher--it was thought that this teacher didn't particularly care for African American students. As a result of them suspending Billy and doing nothing to the teacher, we had a sit-in at Lower Merion and it was covered by the national news. I was one of the leaders of that sit-in, and it really started to make me think even more so about race and my place in the movement. Again, it gave us at Lower Merion an opportunity to experience what the rest of the nation was looking--was undergoing. So I started to question myself and my own personal ideologies on race and on sports, and that's the kind of big transformation that I went through. Basketball at that time was really my sport. I ran track and I played football but basketball really was my sport and at the time we had a starting five at Lower Merion that was all African American. I think the first time ever in its 100 year history. So that when we played basketball games against other teams, playing the sport was one thing but making a statement to and about white America was something else and I really started to absorb that and we did all those great cultural things. Before games, we'd listen to James Brown, Earth, Wind and Fire, Marvin Gaye and all of that music that uplifted you and uplifted your spirits, so that by the time you got to the court, your feet didn't touch the ground. We played together as young black men making a statement to the world that Lower Merion is better, but at the same time that we as black athletes are extraordinary and that was the thinking kind of in the late '60s [1960s]. And then after the games, we'd kind of do the classic things that black athletes would do--
Story_ID: 632747
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you about 1968, April 4th, the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Do you remember what you were doing, what happened?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can remember we had just come inside to my house and we went down to the basement, there were about three or four of us, and we watched that on television and we just can't believe it, we were stunned. What we saw on the news is how others around the country reacted to it, some sorrowfully and some violently. So the next day that we went to Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania] the black students got together and decided to march. I'd say all but two students left--all but two African American students left and we had our own march, if you will in protest down Montgomery Avenue and through Ardmore [Pennsylvania]. We stayed out that day and I think the next day, but what it was again was us as young kids trying to experience in Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania] what the nation was literally going through. It helped to--the way it affected me was it again shed doubts on my patriotism and in my belief in America. Not only as a student, not only as an African American person, but again as an athlete. The late '60s [1960s] were a time when many of us were questioning where we should stand in this new movement, and there were little manifestations of those questions such as hairstyle. When are you going to wear an Afro if at all? Why don't you have an Afro, when are you going to start talking about that whole concept of black being beautiful? It was events like Dr. King's, Dr. King's assassination that kind of helped you--that kind of pushed the envelope or pushed the needle more toward the side of, I'll say, radicalism or wholly accepting your blackness, if you will, for lack of a better term.
Speaker 1: Why was hair so important in terms of expression of yourself?
Speaker 2: Well two things. First it was the most natural physical manifestation of your black ideology 'cause you could see it. Yeah you could wear a dashiki or yeah you could wear other kinds of jewelry, but the hair was the one thing that was natural, it would stay with you forever. Second, in the African American communities, there has always been that debate about good hair and some argue that Afros would affect your good hair or your hair was so good that you couldn't wear an Afro. The mere fact of you going, the mere fact of you trying to wear an Afro was a clear affirmation that you started to accept some of those teachings, some of those principles of the kinds of things that we were told in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear), all right.
Speaker 2: It was a state- it was a statement of silence, you didn't have to open your mouth, you didn't have to wear anything. Your hair meant something at first more than just a fashion.
Story_ID: 632748
Speaker 1: Did the way black people treated each other change any in the result of these--I mean--
Speaker 2: Well truly there was, at least on the athletic field, there was really a sense of kinship and brotherhood and that manifested itself in so many different ways. In the streets there was really--well, in the streets it was really a sense of pride. When we were first bused to the new schools, we were almost and invariably always ashamed of when the word Negro or colored came up. I remember how we used to joke about how we used to slide down into our seats in the integrated school [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] when that word came up in whatever context. By 1968, 1969 the word Negro and colored started to leave our vocabularies, but your head was no longer held in shame but rather held high in pride and that was a clear change in behavior.
Speaker 1: So the use of the term black instead of Negro or colored was signaling a change in attitude?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, one of many.
Speaker 1: You were saying before we had the last break that athletes would--the way you carried yourself on the court, the things you did before the games, after the games were all more symbolic now than they were then.
Speaker 2: Much more symbolic. You don't want to lose to anybody, but as awful as it sounds, because we were trying to pull ourselves up by the bootstraps and because we were trying to use sports as a way of changing our lives, you just didn't want to lose to anybody, anybody whatsoever. It could be and I suppose in some respects because of the thinking at that time, you didn't want to lose to white athletes. So when you were dead tired in the fourth quarter, the score was tied, you couldn't go anymore, you'd look around in the huddle and say, "I'm going to do it for you guys," and you guys, of course, were African Americans when we played teams who virtually didn't have any much like the Adolph [Adolph Rupp]--Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky] and Texas Western [Texas Western College of the University of Texas; University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas], 1965 [sic. 1966] collegiate final. It was a statement about sports but it was also a statement about race pride and improvement.
Speaker 1: Yeah that incident is important, I guess, because the Texas Western team was a team of guys that weren't necessarily considered the best athletes at the time but they were an all-black team.
Speaker 2: All-black team as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were in a championship against a Kentucky squad of handpicked best white athletes of all around the country but white.
Speaker 2: Yes, and a team that wouldn't typically play black schools or teams that had black members on it. Different times, different psyche, but to me it showed how I started to question America and I guess as I'll explain later it was only twenty-five, thirty years later that I start to put everything in perspective and move more back into patriotism.
Story_ID: 632749
Speaker 1: Now, at Lower Merion [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania] you say your grades were still good?
Speaker 2: Oh, solid B plus student.
Speaker 1: Did you get--were you threatened by the administration for you know leading the walk out in the school and the sit-ins or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I wasn't, I suppose I was still a shy kid and my cousin Billy [William Holland] was much more radical--excuse me my cousin Billy was a stronger, more principled person than I. I always played and followed in his footsteps. And on the other hand, the administration didn't want to make it any worse than they could--than the situation was. Race was a tinderbox and they didn't want to make it any worse, so that more students that they expelled or disciplined more of a problem than it was, and probably the most central teacher in my life was the athletic director as well as the school disciplinarian. I think he was actually assistant principal and he wanted to control damage as much as possible to his athletes especially the one that he was quite proud of.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't want to be mad at you in other words.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: They didn't want to be mad with you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, they tried to look at the situation as true professionals as, as anybody would.
Story_ID: 632750
Speaker 1: All right, so as you're a senior [at Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], are you, are you getting offers from schools I mean to play ball?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had about fifty basketball scholarship offers to go to college and I did pretty well. And my last two choices were Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York] and Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] for different reasons.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now these are--who else recruited you? Did any of the big name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska], Canisius [Canisius College, Buffalo, New York], 'Cuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York], Fairfield [Fairfield University, Fairfield, Connecticut], rider- Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] just to name a few.
Speaker 1: Okay. Swarthmore had just integrated their campus with males I guess?
Speaker 2: With ma- no, Swarthmore was always had males, but Swarthmore was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What am I thinking about? I'm not thinking about the right one, I guess. I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I think Haverford [Haverford College, Haverford, Pennsylvania] had just integrated or went coed, but they always had males on campus for years.
Speaker 1: All right so what made--why these two and why did you choose Fordham?
Speaker 2: Swarthmore was a place where my football coach--my best friend got me into. A poor Irish guy who had some childhood friend, a poor Italian guy who happened to be athletic director at Swarthmore and they saw themselves in me. Basically a good kid, no matter what color, no matter what ethnic group, a good kid who has a promising future and they really wanted me to be somebody and I appreciated that from the bottom of my heart. My football coach did a number of father like things to me. Fordham came because Digger [Digger Phelps] had just got an offer from Fordham, and he was at Penn and he and his assistant saw me play locally. In fact, one of the other Penn assistant coaches was one of my archrivals and I dunked something like thirty, thirty-five on him and kind of held him to less than twenty points, he was an All-American then. So just had a great game, had a great time. So Digger came to the house and sat down and said, "Well Mr. Holland [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.]," talking to my father, "I want your son to go to Fordham because one, it's New York City [New York, New York], second the Knicks [New York Knicks] recruit from Fordham every year because of the regional draft at that time and third, because when he's a junior we play in the Rainbow Classic in Hawaii [Outrigger Resorts Rainbow Classic]." Well those were three reasons that were by far good enough for me, but my father said he'll talk about it. So a day or two later he called my older cousin who was like an uncle to me and said, "Bobby [ph.], would you talk some sense into this boy? He doesn't want to go to Swarthmore." Bobby looked at me and said, "Boy let me tell you, I can remember the day when black students couldn't even walk across the campus at Swarthmore and here you are snubbing your nose to a scholarship." Well let's just say things were a little bit delicate around the house because I wanted to go to New York City and become a professional basketball player. That's why I chose Fordham.
Speaker 1: Is there anything particularly notable about graduation? Did you have any--were there any honors bestowed upon you or?
Speaker 2: I was class president. The class was so large, 529, that I was the only person to receive a diploma that night at the ceremony because they didn't want to go through the long protracted process of giving a diploma out to everybody and hence, hence my claim, and factual claim that I was the first student to graduate as a result of the desegregation experiment in Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so this is 1969 or '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970].
Story_ID: 632751
Speaker 1: All right, Fordham University [New York, New York], we're talking about 1974, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]. It was an incredible cultural experience for me in so many different ways. It represented the little suburban boy with white socks and a letter jacket going to the big city. It represented a kid going from a largely Jewish neighborhood into a Catholic, and not just Catholic, but a Jesuit community. It represented me being tested athletically against a group of guys who literally grew up in what the world recognizes as the mecca of basketball. As a young, I'll say entrepreneur, it gave me the opportunity to play professional basketball that I longed for as a kid and it put all that in the context of where you're playing your games. Well, many of our home games we played in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] at a time when the New York Knicks had just won a world championship and New York [New York] was recognized literally as king in the basketball arena. So, where my talents were stretched when I played against Howard Porter, Johnny Jones and the other Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] All-Americans, it was tested day to day when I played against these all-city guys. Intellectually though I was prepared from my experience at Lower Merion High School [Ardmore, Pennsylvania]. In time I became recognized as one of the brighter guys on the basketball team, maintained a B plus, three- 3.1, 3.2 average [grade point average] throughout. And it gave me a chance to experience different cultures for the first, for the first time. I ran into African Americans who weren't African Americans but West Indian Americans and that in and of itself was a cultural experience because their life stories were a lot different than those of many African Americans. But most significantly as it relates to my challenge of patriotism, I was in New York when the Black Power movement was literally at its height and peaking. In 1970, 1974, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, Bobby Seale, Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], Kareem Abdul-Jabbar had just changed his name, Jim Brown, the '68 [1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico] and '72 Olympics [1972 Summer Olympics, Munich, Germany]. Those were events that really gave me a chance to philosophically, intellectually and practically go through a change in life that, that I experienced like with many Americans--African Americans or, or European Americans.
Story_ID: 632752
Speaker 1: Now you majored in urban studies and psychology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Totally without direction. I--there is some history of mental illness in my extended family so I thought gee why don't I try that, and urban studies though there was a little bit more thought process. The late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] was a time when cities were in riots and that major, studying the cities, the sociology of cities, was a pretty hot major throughout many colleges and universities particularly those in big cities. So I was kind of fascinated because it involved one, politics. Second, another intellectual view and academic view of why people riot, why there was so much unrest and it helped me to start to explain or understand the changing color of our cities. Many white Americans fled the cities as a result of the riots. So urban studies was that kind of thing. What I realized fifteen, twenty years later is that had I had any guidance I would have majored in something that had more math involved or finance or something because that was such a natural tendency for me. I did very well, I'll never forget I got an A in trig [trigonometry] and A in statistics, which again proved to me that my propensity in math was quite good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is good. Were there any--in urban studies or psychology or really any other field were there special professors there or teachers that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Absolutely, there were so many. One was an English teacher; I think his name was John Cunningham [sic. Frank R. Cunningham]. A young Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] graduate who was an English teacher and helped me an awful lot improve my reading and writing skills, reading in particular. The largest group, if you will, of teachers though who I embraced and who embraced me were the Jesuits themselves, and I have absolutely no real reason why they embraced me but they did. Many of them and I say this proudly and happily, many of them were athletes or some of them were athletes. So many of the Jesuits would come and try to play basketball with the basketball players and we'd kind of have a laughing good time. The dean of Fordham College, a subsidiary of Fordham University [New York, New York], dean of Fordham College and the assistant dean were both faux basketball players. But just like my Irish American coach from high school [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], they literally took me under their wing and made sure that I succeeded to the extent that I could. Then for the, perhaps for the first time I had a cadre, if you will, of black academics from the black studies department, all of whom kind of gave me that Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman University [sic. Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] feeling of welcomeness and warmth and support. As a result, I suppose of all of those things, I really felt like there was almost no bounds to my, I'll say, intellect and my desire to learn. One of my most fascinating courses was philosophy. You have to take philosophy when you go to many Jesuit schools. So I took three courses of that. It's a course that I had never heard of before and absolutely loved it and then I went on to continue to try to challenge myself as much as I could. I realize now in hindsight I just wish I had more guidance 'cause I think I could have done a more challenging job in college. But I graduated with honors, was Who's Who in American Universities and Colleges [Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges] and made me part of the For- Fordham honor club, so I, I did, I did very well.
Story_ID: 632753
Speaker 1: Now your basketball coach was Digger Phelps.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did the team do?
Speaker 2: We were number eight in the nation my freshman year, and I'll try and send you a clip. Number eight in the nation, we lost eastern region semifinals [East Regional Semifinals] to Vill- Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] and they went on to lose to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in the Final Four [NCAA Final Four] in the championship. It was a year filled with absolute excitement as a result of a Cinderella team and I learned again so much from that experience. The real life experience was that when you have an opportunity run with it and run hard with it. Phelps who might have been one of the most charismatic men that I've met in my life showed me how, when you're successful, as he was after just one year, you can literally exploit that. I remember the day in May of 1971 at the end of the season that he called all of us from the basketball team in to his office and said, "You know what? Ara Parseghian, the athletic director at Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] is about to offer me a job of head coaching at Notre Dame, and I want all of you guys to be here because I'm going to accept it." And literally minutes later Ara Parseghian called Phelps, offered him the job and the rest for him is literally history. Well, I thought Ara Parseghian was some guy from somewhere because of his stature and I just couldn't believe, one that I was kind of in his presence, if you will, and second, I realized just how you could use one thing as a stepping stone to a more exciting position. But it was absolutely an electric and positive experience that year and the years afterwards that I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Did you play as a freshman?
Speaker 2: Yes, I played as a freshman, played and then later on played a very heavy schedule. Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York] basketball nowadays is not that good, but those years we played gosh so many teams and all I ever wanted to do as a kid was to play basketball in the Palestra here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. When I got to New York [New York] the boys from Brooklyn [New York] and Harlem [New York, New York] always used to say, and to use their expression, "You have to turn out in the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York]. You have to do well in the Garden in one game," and that game for me came when we played the number two team in the nation before a sellout crowd in the Holiday Festival. We beat Providence with Ernie DiGregorio and Marvin Barnes and Kevin Stacom and then we went on to lose to Louisville [University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky], a number one team, I think at that point in the finals. But I had my taste of true fame in the Garden, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your best game as a forward?
Speaker 2: It was that, it was absolutely that and it was less from an offensive perspective, but Providence College [Providence, Rhode Island] had an All-American young Italian guy by the name of Ernie DiGregorio who was probably one of the best guards in America. Well I held him to six points and we beat Providence in overtime and New York was electric and exciting, and to be in the heart of New York City, to stay in a hotel literally across the street from the Garden, for a suburban kid at nineteen years old, gee that's just about all you want in life. Of course the next night we played before another sellout crowd and we had a press conference and whatever so those are some fond memories
Speaker 1: So the NCAA [NCAA University Division Basketball Tournament], that tournament that Villanova won was that the one with Western-Kentucky [Texas Western College of the University of Texas and University of Kentucky]?
Speaker 2: No, Villanova we didn't win. Villanova lost to UCLA in the finals but they made it all the way to the finals. That's with Howard Porter and Johnny Jones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Howard Porter signed a contract beforehand and had to forfeit the season for Villanova.
Story_ID: 632754
Speaker 1: You graduated '74 [1974]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  You go on to--
Speaker 2: Rutgers Law School [Rutgers School of Law - Newark; Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I was class president. And I had no idea what law school was truly like. I didn't realize that--I should have realized that like--I should have realized that law school was comprised largely of the top 10 percent, if you will, of the academics from me graduating college. While I was a smart guy, I certainly wasn't a 3.5, 3.8 [grade point average] Phi Beta [Phi Beta Kappa Society] kind of guy and I ran into a lot of those in law school. So it was a real intellectual challenge. But I did reasonably well. The first year I was selected class president by a landslide, and I got another chance to experience black students in a white environment. Even at Rutgers we were trying to do things that were symbolic and typical of what was going on in the nation. We formed the Black Law Students Association. We sat-in protesting what we believed were unfair practices by the administration to African American students. We formed study groups and support groups to help ourselves and some of us even excelled. But for me a basketball player, it was a tremendous academic challenge for me, a tremendous academic challenge. But I'm certainly glad that I did it and it helped me again see that hard work is something that can pay big dividends.
Speaker 1: When you say you formed BALSA, that was the Rutgers' chapter of BALSA?
Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't personally form it but collectively it was formed at Rutgers, Black American Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association] that's what the acronym stands for.
Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any teachers--outstanding teachers (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there was one guy in particular, Hunter Taylor [E. Hunter Taylor], who was a contracts teacher who was from the South, and was awfully encouraging to me at a time when school became challenging, you just want to quit, you just want to give up. But he often counseled me and said, "Look Wendell [HistoryMaker Wendell Holland], put things into perspective, hang in there, your parents [Jane Foster Holland and Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] would be proud of you," that kind of thing and I'm glad he did.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you focus on any particular kind of law at Rutgers?
Speaker 2: Just like I didn't know what to major in in college [Fordham University, New York, New York], I didn't know what to major in in law school but I knew that I wasn't going to major in what most black lawyers specialized in, criminal law, family law, divorce, personal injury. I certainly didn't want to do that because I wanted to be different. I thought that I could focus on tax because I told you I was good at numbers and tax was at least one area of law where numbers were involved. I found out that wasn't it, I found out that corporate finance wasn't it as well. So I just, just took whatever course was available to me in law school.
Story_ID: 632755
Speaker 1: Now you ended up working for the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission [sic. Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission] right out of law school, right?
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, I started with Legal Services of Greater Miami [Legal Services of Greater Miami, Inc., Miami, Florida]. I literally wanted to leave the Northeast and to practice before a racist judge, again race and color were very much in the news and lively in the nation in 1974, 1977, and I wanted to get out of the Northeast and Miami [Florida] was still southern Georgia, if you will. Not as much as Jacksonville [Florida], but it was still southern Georgia and I did. I enjoyed myself; I had just gotten married that year--October of that year after law school, and my wife [Anita Persaud Holland] and I moved to Florida to see if we could survive as husband and wife. Get away from the in laws, get away from the relatives and just kind of battle it out ourselves.
Speaker 1: Now did you meet at Rutgers [Rutgers School of Law - Newark; Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know how you forgot to ask that question. I met my wife October 2nd, 1972 at eight o'clock at 16 Cambridge Place in Brooklyn, New York, and from the moment I met her I knew I was going to marry her. She might have been one of the most beautiful women that I've seen in my life. She's Guyanese mixed race and extraordinarily attractive. I can remember the night that I met her. One of my friends--a Haitian guy knew my wife and basically said, "Hey, I know this young lady who just broke up with her boyfriend," and I had just broken up with my girlfriend, and he said, "Oh, you two need to get together." So we took the D train from the Bronx [New York] to the, I guess, the A train in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant], Brooklyn and we walked--dinner was at eight o'clock, so that's why I know it was eight o'clock. We walked down Cambridge Place where she was, went into the little gate there, rang the bell, and again all I am is a suburban boy that believed in patriotism, white socks and a letter athletic jacket. She came to the door and I had never in my life believed that I'd seen anybody as beautiful as her, and I found out within minutes she was just as classy and proper as she was beautiful. So I had a West Indian meal, peas and rice, some curry and some couscous, and it was hard for me to taste anything that night because I was nervous from saying to myself how am I going to pursue my dream. As soon as me and Franz [ph.] left the house that night, I said just as soon as we closed the door, I said, "I'm going to marry that woman." So five years to the day, October 1, 1977 we got married in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay. There's not a more focused story than that that I've heard (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the truth (laughter), it's the absolute truth, and I tell my kids [Lauren Holland, Wendell Holland II and Gillian Holland] that story at least once a year so they can pass it along, along with the rest of the family history that I talked to you about.
Speaker 1: What did your wife do--what was she pursuing?
Speaker 2: She--when we started getting married, she worked at a law firm as a proofreader paralegal type, and then she stayed in retail as we moved back, and then we started having babies and she stayed out of the workplace--outside of the house. She was a full time mother for about twenty years in our marriage.
Story_ID: 632756
Speaker 1: So you're working in Miami [Florida] for Legal Services of Miami [Legal Services of Greater Miami, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and I literally tried to save the world. Some of my clients were ACORN [Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now]. I brought a class action against the State of Florida in another matter--health related matter. But I was charged--one of the things I did was to organize the communities in Miami, and one of the women who was one of my chief clients, low income poverty clients, was a woman by the name of Gladys Taylor, who was the woman who started the riots in Miami, I think in 19--whenever the riots were in Miami, '68 [1968] or something like that and I'll never forget her. Little things like her expressions. One was and it still rings in my mind, "God gave me a mind and I intend to use it," and other little kinds of sayings like that. While she might have lived on public assistance, her drive, her intelligence and her courage were virtually unmatched.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there came a time when I wanted to come back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and continue my legal career. So I asked a friend who was in politics to help me find a litigation position right here in Philadelphia. A couple of weeks later he came back and he said, "Wendell [HistoryMaker Wendell Holland] I have a job for you." I said, "Great, great." He said, "It's a reading and writing position in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania," which is about 100 miles from here. On September 15, 1980, I started at the public utility commission [Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission], and that was the start of a career change that literally changed the rest of my life.
Speaker 1: So you were headquartered in Harrisburg?
Speaker 2: I commuted from Philadelphia--from Ardmore [Pennsylvania] actually to Harrisburg for four years and three days to develop an expertise in an area that started to combine all of the skills that I had, in particular law school training with, with numbers or, or economics, if you will.
Story_ID: 632757
Speaker 1: This is 1980 that you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah 1980, and the reason--well why was the, why was the public utility commission [Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission] relevant at that time? And I didn't know it because I had never heard of the public utility commission. It was relevant because energy was in the news at that time. You might recall in the mid to late '80s [1980s]--mid to late '70s [1970s], we had the Arab oil embargo, but on March 28, 1979, we had the largest nuclear accident in America right here in Pennsylvania, right here in Harrisburg--right in Harrisburg and Harrisburg was about twenty miles literally from Three Mile Island [Dauphin County, Pennsylvania]. The person--the regulator who was in charge of fixing that mess, if you will, was a guy by the name of [HistoryMaker] W. Wilson Goode, who was the--who went on to be the first African American mayor of the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. So the public utility commission was still in the news even a year--two years later because the backlash from that accident--that nuclear accident continued to put focus on nuclear power and energy. I realized that in my own quiet way, I had been blessed because I found an area of law that was law, had the kind of hard and technical numbers that I wanted. It had a little bit of economics, accounting, engineering, auditing and all the things that we didn't do in college. Most importantly it put me in a situation where I was doing an area of law that was untraditional from what most black lawyers did. In fact, when I started there were three black lawyers in the whole agency. The whole agency was a group of about maybe 625 people with a total legal compliment, gosh close to 100 and I was one of three black lawyers in the whole State of Pennsylvania and there are twenty-nine thousand lawyers in Pennsylvania to practice that kind of law. I realized that I loved it almost from day one, almost from day one.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: Why did I love it?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sure. I loved it because first, it was exciting, it was energy, it was something that people were talking about on an everyday basis. Second, energy and utilities; electric, natural gas, telephone and water, they are traditionally utilities are used and consumed by every single American, every single minute of the day. So I was involved in an area of law that everybody touched every day. Right now, for example, we're using electricity because of the light. I'm sure we're about to get a drink of water in a little while, we'll go to a water fountain. Those are the kind of things that utilities are involved in. Second, I found that it was something that I could help not only my community but many communities around the state in. When you litigate a utility case--an energy case, it doesn't affect just one person but it affects all the customers of a particular utility. So in the case of Philadelphia Electric [Philadelphia Electric Company] or PECO [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] the kind of cases that I would handle would affect and change the course of lives for 1.5 million Philadelphians. That was kind of neat--that was kind of interesting, that was the kind of thing that was more impactful to somebody who generally thought he was here to change the world. That was more impactful than me going out and try a slip and fall case or me going out and trying a murder case. Third, what I learned in time was that this is the kind of thing that I could literally use around the world, literally use around the world because people needed energy and utility services in Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia], in southern Africa, in China and in Asia. Once I came to that realization, I literally tried to take my skills to other parts of the world and, and help those nations, in particular those developing nations.
Story_ID: 632758
Speaker 1: So after I was kind of a regular lawyer, in about 1988--January 15th, 1988, I was appointed judge and I became a judge and stayed as a judge for about three years. Then, I think it was November 25, 1990, I was appointed as a commissioner of the public utility commission [Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission], and that's the agency that regulates utilities. It's about a--at that time it was about a $17 billion industry. It was--
Speaker 2: Hold on, now just hold on one second. What kind of judge were you appointed as?
Speaker 1: I heard utility cases statewide in Pennsylvania, and again I kind of continued in this utility energy field and it's a very specialized practice and one that I enjoyed totally. I guess one that I said to myself, boy I never knew how neat it was to be a judge, but that title confers tremendous respect, tremendous respect but I was a young man. I might have been thirty, thirty-five years old.
Story_ID: 632759
Speaker 1: So you were acting as a judge, you were appointed by the--are you appointed by the State of Pennsylvania (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and, and after becoming a judge I became a commissioner of public utilities, and I really realized that was a significant position. One, because it was a statewide position, I wasn't an elected house member that just had a little district in some county, but rather the decisions that I made literally affected people statewide. My responsibility--my turf again wasn't just a district or a county but it was all sixty-seven counties in Pennsylvania, and because energy and utilities are the kind of things that are regional, I was able to set public policy not only just here but also throughout the region.
Speaker 1: Okay, now 1990 it says here that you joined the Allegheny Energy [Allegheny Energy, Inc.; FirstEnergy Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the board of directors. I think I was--I'm sure I was the first African American to do that. But beyond being the first, more importantly it really gave me an overview of Corporate America. Allegheny Energy is a utility electric company that operated in five states, and its headquarters was about 49th [Street] and Park [Avenue]. So on a about every other month basis I'd catch a train to New York City [New York, New York] and meet with board members. I was by far the youngest board member and the talent that was on the board were old hardened businessmen and women, and it gave me such an education on governance, finance and management of a major Fortune 500 company, and it was the kind of experience that I would wish on virtually anybody. But it made me introspective of two things: first, I thought about how, had I had direction in college [Fordham University, New York, New York], I would have known--I saw from my board experience what directions I would have gone on. And second, I guess I was part of a growing number of African Americans who were appointed to corporate boards. It was an absolutely wonderful experience and I've been on public company boards now for the last twenty years
Speaker 1: Now you were on that board until 1993?
Speaker 2: Yes, until I went back into government.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in 19--so you went back into government in '93 [1993]?
Speaker 2: I went back--Democrats were back in office so I went back to the public utility commission here in Pennsylvania [Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission] not as a commissioner but as chairman. I was the lone Democrat when I first got there and I had to work with four Republicans, and it was an absolutely wonderful experience because it gave me a chance once again to hone the skills that I learned gosh almost fifteen years earlier in a similar role. Some local stuff here, I regulated rates and service and whatever here in Pennsylvania. I did it regionally, I did it nationally and we had partnerships with about seven countries around the world.
Speaker 1: Did you have to travel much?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah. I'd be on a plane about maybe three times a month to somewhere either flying domestically or internationally whatever. Or even on the train between New York and Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Was this the first period in your life where you had to do a lot of travelling?
Speaker 2: No, I guess I really started to travel in '93 [1993], largely when I was first assigned to help form a--they call it a power pool in southern Africa [Southern African Power Pool] and then after that I was hired to write an energy treaty for the Southern African Development Community. So I commuted to southern Africa to fourteen different nations about three times every two months for about an eighteen month period.
Story_ID: 632760
Speaker 1: Now this is right after the release of Nelson Mandela and he's the president of South Africa, all that was fresh in '93 [1993], right?
Speaker 2: The thing about my life that I am most grateful for is, in my opinion, that I had a chance to experience, I had the chance to experience the liberation of a country. To me it was America 1776. My first trip to southern Africa came, I think I went to Tanzania, and met there with energy ministers from around the region to talk about formation of this power pool [Southern African Power Pool] as well as the energy treaty. But then my assignments took me to South Africa, and it was fascinating because we often as kids heard of that expression, "Power to the people," but Mr. Mandela literally tried to address energy in one of his basic tenants of his reconstruction and development program. By that I mean, he wanted to build three thousand homes a month from the time he was inaugurated and electrify 90 percent of the nation. Ninety percent of the nation represented the low income people of color that didn't have access to energy and power under apartheid. So it was kind of fascinating for me to be part of that movement. I suppose one of my most fascinating times was to actually go to the inauguration, May 10, 1994 right there at Union square [Union Buildings] in Pretoria [South Africa], because I always wanted to witness a world event. That was about as much of a world event, the falling of the Berlin Wall, the Hindenburg disaster. You can just kind of go down the list. I think that Nelson Mandela getting inaugurated was about as much of a world event as you can get. But I went there. I was able to connect with the American delegation and it was absolutely a fascinating experience, but it really showed me just how much the skill that I had developed over the last fifteen years could literally be applied anywhere.
Story_ID: 632761
Speaker 1: Correct me if I'm wrong here, but in '94 [1994] it says here that you were a recipient of the annual award of excellence for the National Association of Water Companies.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes. Part of the utilities that I mentioned are water companies and here in Pennsylvania I helped to put in some major policies that helped to advance the service and the delivery of water to customers around the state. The Pennsylvania chapter was quite proud and honored me as such. Prior honorees, I think were two governors and a senator, U.S. senator.
Speaker 1: Now we have here a note that in '95 [1995] you were counsel for Reed, Shaw and McClay [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--Reed Smith was a major Pennsylvania law firm, and I was special counsel there for about two years after I left being a partner at LeBoeuf Lamb [LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene and MacRae LLP], a New York City [New York, New York] law firm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Reed Smith not Reed--
Speaker 2: Reed, Smith, Shaw McClay [Reed, Smith, Shaw and McClay LLP], today (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh Reed, Smith, Shaw McClay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, today it's just called Reed Smith [Reed Smith LLP].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just told it has about fifteen hundred lawyers in it nowadays. It's headquartered in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. I think--I'm sure they have an Ohio office and I'd even say in Columbus [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So did you handle energy cases there too?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, that's where I did a lot of the energy treaty stuff in southern Africa. I'd still cut down on the commute but still did the business.
Story_ID: 632762
Speaker 1: It says here that in 1996, you were--you served as vice president of American Water Works Company [American Water Works Service Company, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes, the largest na- water company in America is American Water Works, and I was vice president of governmental affairs--regulatory and governmental affairs, and then I became vice president in their--basically in their M and A section [mergers and acquisitions], their deal making section, where I tried to buy water systems here and I suppose in Central America. We went after the Panama--the Country of Panama water system.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm trying to understand this, so the company is buying water systems that are public systems and buying them so they'd basically be privatized?
Speaker 2: Yes, and in the mid-'90s [1990s] there was a real growth of that movement. The French were doing it, the Germans were doing it, the English were doing it and the American companies thought that they'd try it. So American Water Works certainly tried to do it throughout the nation here. I was involved in the privatization of the City of Birmingham [Alabama] and a couple of other cities here as well as the Country of Panama.
Speaker 1: What's the advantage of a city having a privatized water system?
Speaker 2: Typically the advantages are efficiency, second repairs are made to systems--to water systems that are typically fifty to a hundred years old that leak, lose about maybe 30 to 40 percent of its product, third typically it's better management and fourth, the city system that's acquired is part of a larger system where costs can be spread out over a larger base of customers and keep rates lower.
Speaker 1: Do cities typically--'cause I know in Detroit [Michigan] a few years ago there was controversy over Detroit losing control of its water to someone in the suburbs, I don't know if they are public or private. Would a city like Detroit stand to lose revenue by losing its water (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, quite the contrary, quite the contrary, typically what private companies are doing, and I'm going to assume that the city's water system was trying to be acquired by a municipal system that was resited. I don't know the real--but the way cities make money is by selling their systems. They get a large infusion of cash so for example if the City of Detroit sold its water system, it could get just for round numbers a billion dollars. It could take that billion dollars and build better schools, better library, increase police protection and other kind of things in the city operations that would--in order to the benefit of its residents. With their water system the city is cash poor and can't afford to say build those new things particularly in these hard economic times. What the city gets from the water company is that they are free from the headache of main breaks, trying to dig up the mains, trying to collect from the customers. That's all taken out of the equation and the added bonus is they get to tax that new company in town and get corporate income taxes as a result.
Speaker 1: Okay, so by selling it, the revenue, they get will be from taxing them.
Speaker 2: By selling, it's just like selling your car. By selling your car you get a thousand dollars immediately and you can do whatever you want, go to Florida, go to Detroit, go buy a new pair of shoes.
Speaker 1: I get that part but the ongoing water is a service that everybody is going to need it.
Speaker 2: And everybody will continue to get it and that water system will probably be--continue to be regulated by the state regulators which is a plus and the continuing benefit to the city is it, is that they have a new corporation that they can tax and get, what, a million, five million [dollars] a year in taxes depending on the company's income.
Story_ID: 632763
Speaker 1: In 1999 you're working for Obermayer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ober- um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and Rebmann [Obermayer Rebmann Maxwell and Hippel LLP].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Oh, still practicing law, in fact I continued to do the same thing trying to privatize water companies as I did at American Water [American Water Works Service Company, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories from these activities that you--you know?
Speaker 2: None that I think are news worthy, it's a tough business (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So is it tough to talk municipalities into departing with their water?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's extremely tough because often there are many people who work for the cities who are relatives of city council members or friends of the mayors and they are also outside contractors; law firms, accounting firms, engineering firms, who do business with the city and have those relationships and will fight aggressively to keep from losing that business, and third unions always fear that jobs will be lost as a result of privatization. So these kind of activities are extremely difficult to pull off--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but make economic sense.
Story_ID: 632764
Speaker 1: Tell us about the GBDI.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Global Diversity--Global Bio- Bio Diversity Initiative [sic. Global Bioscience Development Institute] is a company started by a Ugandan American that essentially tried to get American companies to invest in east and western Africa in order to find new and innovative products for pharmaceutical companies. That was a client of mine and we did a number of things. One thing I clearly remember was a ten nation conference that we did in--I guess we were in Dar Salaam [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania] and the nations that were represented were nations in East Africa, from as far north as Ethiopia, as far west as the Congo and as far south as South Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, was it successful in getting investments?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was just a client of mine so I helped the client. And I, I think Dr. Kilama's [John Kilama] retired back in Uganda living happily ever after as a result of his successes.
Story_ID: 632765
Speaker 1: You were appointed in 2002 to coordinate the Philadelphia trade mission--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with People's Republic of China.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was some experience. I learned in the early '90s [1990s] the joy of selling America to the world. My first venture was a telephone privatization in Hungary that I took a Pennsylvania company to, and then it progressed to the Southern Africa experience that I talked about. While at Obermayer [Obermayer Rebmann Maxwell and Hippel LLP], the city had a very aggressive--was in a very aggressive posture to do business literally around the world. So I formed a trade mission and we took about twenty--well we took twenty-five Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] businessmen to China and we hit seven cities in nine days and came back with three deals. One involved auto parts, the other was a restaurant and I forgot what the third one was. But again it was my and Philadelphia's attempt to literally join the rest of the world and see to what extent we can strengthen and expand economic ties. Our sister city's a little place called Tianjin [China], which is about forty miles [sic.] outside of Beijing [China] and it was an incredible experience. Not my first trip to China but an incredible experience. The mayor was grateful and we came back with a couple of deals.
Speaker 1: Any observations about China?
Speaker 2: Yep, I've never been in a country with a billion people before, I guess China is a billion three [1.3 billion] and it was funny if we hit seven cities in nine days, five of those cities were larger than New York City [New York, New York]. In fact, New York City with only 8 million people would be smallish compared to Shanghai [China] and Beijing who had 17 and 26 million. Second, I realized that if you have, yet again, a good business product that transcends race and nationality and the business of business is business and that impression was reinforced yet again by that trip.
Speaker 1: Do you get a sense when you are in China that it's so much bigger than New York by being there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh by far, by far. And it's literally not even close. Not only was it the sense that it was bigger than New York, but you often hear about the Chinese economy growing by leaps and bounds. One of our favorite early morning activities at breakfast was to come down and talk about how many cranes that we had seen in the cities that we were in that represented new developments, new office building or whatever going up. It's the kind of thing that you don't see in Philadelphia often. I don't even know if you see it in Detroit [Michigan] anymore but--and I don't know what Dayton [Ohio] is like but that's real growth, that's real development and that's exactly the kind of thing that everyone was talking about. The second thing that just kind of smacks you in the face is the sense of bilingualism. While every--while many Chinese people speak their own respective dialects, there's a great effort to learn and speak English and it's clear that they are ready to do business with the world.
Speaker 1: Now I don't know if this comes next or not 'cause I think you already mentioned being chair of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission so that doesn't come in this scenario, I mean after the trips to China, right?
Speaker 2: Yes it did, I think I did China in '02 [2002] or '03 [2003] and then I became chair and then as I said, we literally shopped Pennsylvania to Serbia, to--we had partnerships with Serbia; Zambia; India, two states, Uttar Pradesh [India] and Delhi [India]; Hungary and there was one other one and again it gave me a chance to see that the world is more--as an African American, the the world is more than just Africa. That we can do business virtually anywhere and, you know selling Pennsylvania was proof of that.
Story_ID: 632766
Speaker 1: Now tell us about the Mid-Atlantic Conference of Regulatory Utilities Commissioners, I guess that's in 2004?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was president of that in 2004. I think every industry has its own association and every association has its newspaper. Mid-Atlantic Regulatory Utilities Commissioners, or MACRUC, is a regional group comprised of about seven states from New York to, I think, North Carolina and as far west as Ohio, that as an association look at the regulation of utilities in that area. It's a subset of the national organization called the National Organization of Regulatory Utility Commissioners [sic. National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners] that looks at regulatory policy, energy policy, telecommunication policy, water policy, and natural gas policy literally around the country. I was treasurer of that organization or stated differently, the fourth highest ranking regulator in America. We looked at such regulatory issues as renewable energy, nuclear power, 911 telecommunications, universal service and telecommunications, clean water act, the impact of energy crisis to shut in by Rita [Hurricane Rita] and Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] in 2005, 2006 and how that drove energy prices through the ceiling, starting looking at the effect of Marcellus Shale [Marcellus Formation] that new natural gas find, those kind of energy/utility issues that Americans are involved in literally every minute.
Story_ID: 632767
Speaker 1: So you were treasurer of the NARUC [National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners] in 2007.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And also in 2007 you were honored with the Whitney M. Young, Jr. Service Award by the Cradle of Liberty Council of the Boys Scouts of America.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Speaker 1: So this is like a flashback to when you were a scout I guess on some level you (unclear).
Speaker 2: And it was truly an honor and I suppose I can say that award came about because I did something that was--that took little effort by me but meant so much to many inner city kids. Every year the cradle used to go to a place called Treasure Island right here in Delaware--at the Delaware River where scouts would go and join other scouts to have Boy Scout camp for two, three weeks or something. Well as it turns out one of the transformers on the island burnt out and as a result they had no electricity there. The executive director of the Cradle of Liberty came to me one day and said, "Gee Wendell [HistoryMaker Wendell Holland], we've been calling the electric company for months now trying to get a new transformer put in and we've gotten no response. Camp starts literally in two weeks and we don't want to have to cancel it because we're trying to give inner city kids as much as a positive scouting experience as possible." I made one call and I think that transformer was helicoptered over within three days. So camp went on, all was good and the kids had an absolutely wonderful time. No extraordinary effort on my part, but it was extraordinary that the kids were able to do what any scout should do and as a result they were quite thankful for it and I believe honored me.
Story_ID: 632768
Speaker 1: Now, in 2011 you were, you join the board of directors of Aqua America, Incorporated [Aqua America, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What is that?
Speaker 2: Aqua America is the second largest utility--second largest water utility in America. It's headquartered in Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania], in suburban Pennsylvania [sic.], and it's the second public company board that I sit on now. All boards--all public company boards look to staff their boards with board members who are qualified and have special skills. Water companies are a regulated business, and Aqua knew that I was familiar with water regulation and the regulation of their companies; they are in about thirteen states. So I was asked by, I was asked by the chairman of the board to join it and I did and it's been again an absolutely wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 632769
Speaker 1: When did you join Saul Ewing [Saul Ewing Arnstein and Lehr LLP]? Is that, is that about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About October 1, 2008 and I came in as a partner.
Speaker 1: Okay. You were doing basically the same work for Saul Ewing.
Speaker 2: Yes, energy and utilities. I've had a wonderful career here, I'll tell you. Last year this time we were very engaged--I was an engagement partner and we were very engaged in one of the largest utility mergers in America when Exelon company [Exelon Corporation, Chicago, Illinois] bought Constellation company [Constellation Energy Group] that serves Baltimore [Maryland]. They had tried three different mergers in the last five years and they all failed. But we represented them in the State of Maryland and the merger was approved the first quarter of 2012. So it's now the largest company and I'm certainly proud to be a part of that effort.
Speaker 1: Do you have any future plans in terms of--have you ever thought of running for office or anything?
Speaker 2: I thought about it, but I never will. I'm a public servant at heart but I'm not a politician and I think that I can serve the public as an appointed official and not have to worry about the things that elected officials have to worry about: raising money, constant constituent calls, things like that.
Story_ID: 632770
Speaker 1: I was just crying off cam- camera about the privatization of public utilities. It just sounds scary to me for some reason, but you know, I know years ago in Chicago [Illinois] sold its parking ticket collecting business to a New York firm. That now--it seems like the public is--well I mean they're getting cars off the streets all right, but I don't know if the public is happier, you know. Is this a--it seems like more of a trend, do you have any thoughts about this?
Speaker 2: Trend is a very touchy word. I think that there have been privatizations in different sectors of the economy over the last few years. On balance, I can tell you that the criticisms and the benefits are very real. I--there's--I don't think there's been a privatization that was absolutely perfect. Nor has there been a privatization where the critics were absolutely right. It's a lot of work, it's a lot of effort but usually what is promised is followed through on, and I think there are more stories of successful privatizations than there are unsuccessful ones.
Speaker 1: Okay. It would seem to me and correct me if I'm wrong, state regulations or municipal regulations and the, and the businessperson that's where the--there has to be some sort of oversight to make it work right. I mean the right balance of oversight seems to be what's key, I don't know. Is that what--
Speaker 2: Well, as it relates to regulation, one can certainly argue that regulation of a municipal--of a local company by local officials may be more difficult and challenging because of the closeness of those two. That regulation one step removed, i.e. by state regulators, might be more objective and just as effective, if not more. That's the, that's the--that's where the debate often falls. The argument goes, not only are local officials affected by local relations but oftentimes local officials are mindful of the success or failures of their next election. So they might vote their--what's in their best political interest versus the appointed state regulator who is not running for anything and could perhaps make an objective decision without the fear of losing an election.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a vision for--an ideal vision of America with more privatization of utilities?
Speaker 2: Well, the privatization effort would largely be in the water utility industry. Why? Because of all the water served in the United States only about 15 percent of it is served by private investor owned utilities, 85 percent is supplied by municipalities or wells. So you have a larger market in that arena versus in all other utilities, electric companies, natural gas companies and telephone companies where as much as 90 percent of the service provided by those companies are supplied by private companies. So if there were any vision or any market for privatization, it would be in the water industry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so leave the rest of the utilities alone right now. They're already privatized.
Speaker 2: You could say that.
Story_ID: 632771
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll first start selfishly by talking about the value of energy since that's my life goal, my life ambition and where I'd like to leave my mark. I hope African Americans can be more conscious of energy use and consumption, and believe that they too can in fact affect how energy is consumed in this country. Be part of the debate and be part of the solution. That's very important for me, because unlike in education and sports or even in religion, I'll bet you you can't name one central figure who is the African American in energy. The African American in energy. And as I told you energy and utilities are the things that touch virtually every single person in America every single day. So the education of the use of energy and utilities in my opinion has to be increased. You know I think the only African American that we could readily name in energy was the guy from the BP [BP P.L.C.] commercials, "Hi, my name is Lester [ph.]," or whatever his name was, "I work for BP." It's important that we get involved in that debate. Why? Well, the very simple economic equation is the more you are mindful of your energy or utility use, chances are, like a diet, the less you consume and the less consume, the more disposable income that you have. That's absolutely critical, and that's absolutely key. In a greater societal perspective, the more you are mindful of the energy that you use and consume, the less use of those harmful products there are that are used in producing energy. So you contribute to that greater societal goal, and just as African Americans thought that every vote in the 2008 election was important and that their individual votes could make a difference, the same theory applies to the wise and efficient use of energy. Now having said that, I think that the African American community continues to face enormous challenges from education, from crime, from low income, and I guess that's about four of them I could think, think of off the top of my head. I'm not a sociologist; I don't profess to know the answers to the questions in any of those fields. I do know that what we've tried here to date hasn't been terribly successful, but I'm not an expert in those fields and couldn't offer anything outside the debate. In the energy space, I think I could and that's why I think I'm--I think that's why I'm different than perhaps many people that you know or have met. We need to be conscious about energy more than we are.
Story_ID: 632772
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would change if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, well certainly my mother [Jane Foster Holland] dying at a young age would be the thing that comes off the top of my head. In a very light sense, I wish I could change the subjects that I majored in in college [Fordham University, New York, New York]. And, and third, I wish that I could have continued to stay in government in my position so I could continue to educate the world about the importance of energy and utilities.
Story_ID: 632773
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back over the same ground, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope the mark that I've set in the energy field. I, I don't take that lightly. The same discussion that I had with you, I have virtually about everyone and I think I'm kind of unique in that sense. Again, if you talk about great black lawyers you think--great criminal lawyers, you think of Johnnie Cochran. You talk about great public injury lawyers, you think of--I forgot what his name was in Jupiter, Florida. But you can't talk about black great energy lawyers, you can't because you don't know them because we're just not there. And, and that's what I think I have done right; spreading the word about the significance and importance of energy, like healthcare, I think it's something that's important in my life, and something I did right.
Story_ID: 632774
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family.
Speaker 2: I've got almost the perfect family. As I told you I married somebody who I thought was the most beautiful woman in the world, and we have three children: two girls [Lauren Holland and Gillian Holland] and a boy [Wendell Holland II] in the middle. And I am glad that I have had the experience of raising children, as difficult and as rewarding as it has been. I'm certainly glad that I've done that. From something simple to having a really bright young, young daughter, to a son who is just like his father and exceeded his father, to a daughter who is just stunningly gorgeous like her mother [Anita Persaud Holland]. But the three of them have helped the two of us continue to maintain that elusive thing called the nuclear black family. I'm very, very proud of that. We've been married thirty-four years, seven months and twenty-three days, and I mean that and I don't forget it because it's one thing that I'm very, very proud of. I've done a lot of things in my life, but I've been a father and a husband for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father [Jeremiah Holland, Sr.] see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Not--well, what's success? My father--
Speaker 1: Well did he, did he live to see you come out of law school [Rutgers School of Law - Newark; Rutgers Law School, Newark, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he was probably one of the happiest men on earth in June, June 1977 when I received my law degree and I was very happy that he did that. So I suppose to a man who chose not to go to college, to see his son become a lawyer, I think he considered me a success.
Story_ID: 632775
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't touched upon before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Of course there is, I just can't think of it, but maybe you can ask your last question.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'd like to thank you for keeping us chronologically on point.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: On the day and the, the month, the day and the year.
Speaker 2: You can check them.
Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, how would I like to be remembered? As--I guess a number of things. A civil rights hero, because I lived through integration and I was the guinea pig. As someone who genuinely believes in community and in his own community, because to this day I stand up for my small little black community. Certainly as a, as a father and a husband, because relative to other, relative to other ethnic groups, African Americans and African American males many say don't do to well in that respect. Certainly as a public servant, because when I had my chance, I really tried to do what I thought was best for the State of Pennsylvania, for the region, for the nation and certainly for the world. And certainly, someone who tried to do the right thing, who tried to use the few blessings of life that I've had in order to make life or in order to enrich the lives of others. So I think that might be just a number of things.
Story_ID: 632776
Speaker 1: Left to right: Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], [HistoryMaker] Wendell Holland and Jerry Smith [Gerald C. Smith], the president of American water company [American Water Works Service Company, Inc.]. It was a fundraiser in Morgantown, West Virginia and I'd just told the general about his real cousin.
Speaker 2: Okay and his name was?
Speaker 1: Victor Rogue [ph.], R-O-G-U-E.
Speaker 2: That was--this picture was taken in 1991. It's me and Charles Barkley, Philadelphia 76ers. It was a fundraiser at Philadelphia Electric Company [PECO, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Left to right it was Wendell Holland, [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson, Oscar Robertson and Ed Sammon [ph.]. This was taken at a Bill Bradley fundraiser in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] when Bill Bradley ran for president in 2000.
Speaker 2: This is me and Julius Erving when Julius played with the 6ers. We made celebrity--we played in celebrity tennis tournaments. This was played at the University of Penn's Levy Pavilion [Robert P. Levy Tennis Pavilion; Hecht Tennis Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in about 1991.
Speaker 1: Left to right is Wendell Holland, Governor Ed Rendell and Thomas Leonard [Thomas A. Leonard]. This was at Governor Rendell's inaugural in 2003 in Hershey, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is May 5th, 19--excuse me, 2012; it's Anita Holland and Wendell Holland at the Equality Forum celebration in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania at the Jewish history museum [National Museum of American Jewish History].
Speaker 2: This is Wendell Holland and Vice President Al Gore shot in about 1997 at the fundraiser in Maryland.
Speaker 1: Left to right; Wendell Holland, David Rolka and Joseph Rhodes [Joseph Rhodes, Jr.] at a coal plant in western Pennsylvania in 1992.
Speaker 2: That's Anita Persaud Holland, my wife and myself, Miami, Florida, January 1978.
Speaker 1: Wendell Holland, Kobe Bryant and Doug Young in the green- in the green room before the dedication of the Kobe Bryant Gymnasium at Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: This is my basketball--high school basketball team at a reunion that we had in 2002. Left to right is Michal Horsholt [ph.], Charles Smith, David Hall [David A. Hall], Wendell Holland and Billy Holland [William Holland] in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: This is me and Franco Harris at an energy event where we were trying to get low income people to sign up for energy heating assistance in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 2004.
Speaker 2: One of the proudest days of my life. It's my wife Anita, my son Wendell Foster Holland II [Wendell Holland II] and myself at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in 2006 when my son graduated Phi Beta [Phi Beta Kappa Society] from Morehouse.
Speaker 1: This is my whole family that same day. This is Lauren Holland on the left, my wife, my son Wendell II, my daughter Gillian [Gillian Holland] and myself at Morehouse College.
Speaker 2: This is me and Willis Reed at the Bill Bradley fundraiser, Madison Square Garden, 2000.
Speaker 1: This is a political event at the Springfield Country Club [Springfield, Pennsylvania]. Left to right is Ted Peters [ph.], Pat Meehan, Wendell Holland, Chris Christie and Joe Cox [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Wendell Holland as a two year old kid, circa February 1952--'54 [1954].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is, says it right there. This is us at the integrated school, Wynnewood Road elementary school [Wynnewood Road School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania], 1963, 1964.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me nineteen sixty- I'd say February 1964.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is me in a basketball game in let's say February 1970, we won that game.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me against--that's me at about again February 1970 playing our archrival.
Speaker 2: Who's your archrival?
Speaker 1: Haverford High School [Havertown, Pennsylvania], and this kid went to Kentucky [University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky].
Speaker 2: And what was his name?
Speaker 1: Ray Edelman you have no reason to know him 'cause he bombed out once he got there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And this is, I guess, me in action at Fordham University [New York, New York], looks like we were playing, I can't read--Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York].
