Story_ID: 221077
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Della Brown Taylor Hardman, D-E-L-L-A, B-R-O-W-N, T-A-Y-L-O-R, H-A-R-D-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, before I married, I was Della Louise Brown, L-O-U-I-S-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on May 20th, 1922 in Charleston, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired professor of art, and currently, I am writing--I'm a columnist for the Martha's Vineyard Gazette.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 19th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] at 86 Winnemack Street in Oak Bluffs, Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 221078
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  Well, my first husband [Francis Taylor] used to tell me that if I had a choice between him and chicken, it would be good-bye, dump Taylor.  I now have a diet that requires that I eat only seafood and poultry so I guess chicken almost has to be that favorite.  And I'm not really tired of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: That's very difficult for me, Larry [Crowe], because I'm a retired art teacher, so color is very much a part of my life.  Perhaps, I'm inclined now toward lavenders and purples more than lilacs now.  If I had to make a choice, I suppose, I find myself buying a lot of that and choosing a lot of that and other things.  Even in my house I've chosen lavender in the bedrooms and on some of the walls, et cetera, so maybe it's lavender.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: That's a difficult question.  (Laughter) This summer, I could almost say it's certainly not summer.  But the fall I enjoy.  No, I don't really have a favorite.  I'm, I, I find meaningful and exciting things to do.  I do enjoy every day of the year, so, no, I don't have a favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation residence?
Speaker 1: No, destination?
Speaker 2: Destination.  These questions seem so simple, but they're really so complicated for me because when I think of vac- when I thought of vacations when I lived in West Virginia, New England was always my favorite destination.  When I lived in New England, my favorite destination was abroad.  And now that I'm retired, before retirement, that is, now that I'm retired, I look forward to a few weeks in Florida every year.  But that does not necessarily mean it's my favorite.  It's just something that I do.  I enjoy travel and will take advantage of every opportunity to travel wherever in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question of this set is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right now I have one.  It's a relatively new one.  And it's one that I developed last year when I moved at the age of eighty.  I'm now telling all of my friends, don't move when you're eighty.  When I see them, if I haven't seen them for a long time, I'm forever telling them that because I'll be opening boxes for life.  That's my favorite today.  Might, that'll change too.
Story_ID: 221079
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Anderson Brown] side, and we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name, before she married was Captolia, C-A-P-T-O-L-I-A, Monette, M-O-N-E-T-T-E, Casey, C-A-S-E-Y.  She was born near Gallipolis, Ohio.  That's where she lived when she was growing up.  I think she was born--she might not have been born there, and I'll have to check on that.  And I'm sorry I didn't know that earlier because I could have gathered that information for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, what year was she born?
Speaker 2: Well, she died at the age of--oh, she died--and, she was born in 1899.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1899.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a particular significance to her name, Captolia?  Do you know how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I never knew that.  And I could have learned it too because my grandmother lived to be quite, quite--she lived to be in her nineties, but I do not know the significance of that name.  I have never heard it before nor since.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Captolia Monette.  That's an interesting name, you know.  That's not a--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Her mother was Lucy Thompson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she lived in Gallipolis, Ohio.  I don't know where she was born, but the house that she lived in is still occupied in Gallipolis on Third Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how far can--back can you trace your mother's family?  What do you know about her ancestors and--
Speaker 2: And that's as far as I can go.  I don't know anything beyond my mother's parents, know absolutely nothing beyond that.  I did hear somewhere along the line that--no, that's her husband.  That's her father.  That's her father, but I don't know anything about her mother's family.  I heard that her father's family had come from--her father, John Casey, had come from Columbus, Ohio.  But I have never had an opportunity to pursue that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there's, there's, Gallipolis has a historical significance as a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, [Marquis de] Lafayette was connected with the history of Gallipolis [sic. Marietta, Ohio], which is right there on the Ohio River.
Speaker 1: Lafayette, the French--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There was a hotel, I think--
Speaker 1: --solider that--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think there's a hotel in Gallipolis, I think, called the Lafayette Hotel [Marietta, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, and it's a place there've been black folks for a long, long time in Ohio, I know.
Speaker 2: Yes, and there's been a lot of intermarriage in Gallipolis for a long time too, I understand.  And when I think about it, O. Henry [William Sydney Porter], the writer seemed to, lived in Gallipolis [sic. imprisoned at Ohio Penitentiary, Columbus, Ohio].  It seems to me that comes to my mind.  Sorry, I didn't know you were gonna ask that because I could have done a little research and had some positive answers for you on that.
Speaker 1: No, that's fine.  Just--but Gallipolis does have just for anybody watching this, just want 'em, to let 'em know that Gallipolis has a long history of black--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --folks being in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in that area, and there's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a, I think they came over from Virginia, I believe, but I'm not sure, in a group, you know, but I'm not, you know, sure about all the details.
Speaker 2: I know they have the emancipation celebration there every year, and I have, on one occasion, I had an opportunity to participate in that.  But, yes, it was quite a, quite a history and it seems to me that there's a history to be written about the blacks in Gallipolis, Ohio.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I still have a number of relatives living there.
Story_ID: 221080
Speaker 1: Okay, well, so, you knew your [maternal] grandmother and your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Grandfather [John Casey].
Speaker 1: Grandfather.  And, now, what were they like?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Oh, I remember my grandmother, Lucy Thompson, used to smoke a corncob pipe.  I remember that.  I'll never--I was quite young, of course, and very positive person.  I can't even remember the year of her death, but I do remember as a strong personality.  And my grandfather died, I think, first.  And I was quite young, but I remember him it seems, uncle--Grandpa Thompson [sic.], yes.  My uncle, my mother's [Captolia Casey Brown] youngest brother was a year older than I, and he came to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] last summer.  We had a wonderful visit.  Unfortunately, he died this winter, and he would have had a lot of answers, but he does have brothers still living.  He has a brother living in Columbus [Ohio] now.  And as a result of this, I'm gonna write to them and see what I can find out because I'm sure they have documented a lot of the questions that you would like answers for.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll see if I can get them.
Story_ID: 221081
Speaker 1: All right, can you tell us what you do know about your mother [Captolia Casey Brown], you know, I know she died--
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know a lot about my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So much of my own life was influenced by my exposure to the things that I learned about my mother.  My mother was, she finished the schools in Gallipolis, Ohio, and then upon graduation from high school, she went to Ohio University which is located in Athens [Ohio].  And there, she earned her degree as a teacher.  And after that, she moved to Charleston [West Virginia] and married my father [Anderson Brown] who was in business in Charleston.  She had a job teaching, and I can remember when I was living in Charleston, on several occasions, different people would come up to me and tell me that my mother had been their first-grade teacher.  Tragically, my mother died in childbirth in 1924.  And I had a brother who was stillborn at the same time.  And, again, tragically--but fortunately, she and my father had named me for my Aunt Della [Brown], who at that time was not married.  And she was my father's youngest sister.  She was a teacher in the schools in Charleston.  And so she had the responsibility of rearing me.  But I was always interested in the fact that my grandmother [Lucy Thompson] had in her home several watercolors that my mother had painted as a young woman.  I don't know whether she was in college.  I don't know when she painted them.  But I remember those watercolors.  And I was always influenced by those.  And I have, to this day, I'm still enjoying watercolors.  I majored in art.  I chose to major in art.  And I always--I can see those watercolors hanging in my grandmother's home in Gallipolis at 731 Third Avenue, Gallipolis, Ohio, which is still standing.  And I think they had a great deal to do with my decision to go into art, as a profession.  My father wanted me to be a doctor (laughter).  And I'll never forget when I finished high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], it seems that that summer, Joe Louis was boxing somewhere.  And I don't think my father ever missed a Joe Louis fight.  But I remember I told him before he left that I was not going, you know, that I didn't want to take a pre-med course in college.  I wanted to major in art.  And I could tell he was disappointed, but he didn't say anything to, you know, to offend me or to even really hurt my feelings.  But I could tell that he was disappointed.  And when he came back from Chicago [Illinois], he brought me a book that I still have here now, 'The World's Great Paintings,' ['The World's Greatest Paintings: Selected Masterpieces of Famous Art Galleries,' T. Leman Hare] and he said to me, if you're going to major in art, just be sure you do the very best that you can with it.  And, you know, you have my blessings.  And so that's my mother's connection to my life, basically, in terms of my life decision, my choice in terms of what I would do with my life.
Story_ID: 221082
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any of your mother's [Captolia Casey Brown] artwork?  (Simultaneous) Has anything survived?
Speaker 2: I--there were two paintings that I remember in my grandmother's [Lucy Thompson] home.  And when my uncle, my aunt and uncle were here last summer, I said, where are those paintings?  Some member of the family has taken those paintings a long time ago.  And they don't know who has them.  But they're not available.  There were only two that I remember.  But maybe, you know, somewhere along the way, I can find them.  I just would like to know who has them.  But they certainly did inspire me.  I can see them now in the dining room of her home in Gallipolis [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, anything else about your mother that you know, that you can tell us, 'cause you were two when your mother died, right?  Two years old?
Speaker 2: I was twenty months old.
Speaker 1: Twenty months?
Speaker 2: So I don't remember her.  I--the only thing I can remember is so many people coming to me.  For example, Mrs. John Norman, Mrs. Ruth C. Norman, who taught English in Charleston [West Virginia]--in, in Garnet High School [Charleston, West Virginia], told me that her mother went to my mother's wedding, and she still had the shoes that she had worn or something like that, you know.  And as I say, students used to come up to me and say, "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], you know, your mother was my first grade teacher," or something like that.  I remember especially a young man by the name of Jack Green in Charleston, who told me that.  And everybody just had good things to say about her.  She was also a good friend of Lucy Cash Jones who's Julia [Jones] Kerr's mother.  Julia is a contemporary who lives in Waltham, Mass [Massachusetts] with her husband Otho [E.] Kerr [Jr.].  Her mother, her stepmother was head of the home economics department at West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] and died just last year.  And, but Julia's mother died as a young woman also.  But they were very good friends.  She was a good friend of hers in Charleston, I understand, but I was just twenty months old.  So I don't remember her at all.  But I have pictures of her that I have here.
Story_ID: 221083
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father's side of the family.  And I know we have to pay particular attention to your Aunt Della [Brown] too, when we talk, we tell this story--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, wouldn't be here without Aunt Della (laughter).
Speaker 1: But can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My father was Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Hunt, H-U-N-T, Brown, B-R-O-W-N.  And everybody called him A.H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His nickname was A.H.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born 18--18--was it 1880 or 1883?  He was born in 1880, I guess in Dunbar, West Virginia.  I know he told me that.  I know where he was born.  Dunbar is just outside of Charleston [West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, Dunbar, West Virginia.  And what do you know about the ancestors on his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Only his mother and father.  And I didn't know them at all.  I didn't know--they were both slaves, and they were freed.  And, but I did not know, I didn't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were freed after the Civil War.  And--
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: John Brown and what was his mother's name?  I have a paper here that I did on dad that I presented in a program at Marshall University [Huntington, West Virginia].  And I would have that information in there.  But I do--I know quite a bit about his life, about my father's life, but I know nothing about, very little, very little about his father.
Speaker 1: What did his parents do?  Were they, were they farmers or did they--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They worked.  Well, I know they worked with wealthy families in West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they did service type work?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 221084
Speaker 1: What did your father [Anderson Brown] tell you about growing up or what did you learn about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have tapes as I think I told you.  I have three incredible tapes that I had the good sense to make of my father after Aunt Della [Brown] died, and he was living alone because she made her home with him for a while after, you know--she never married.  She never married, and he was widowed three times.  And each wife died in childbirth.  My half-brother, Willard [Brown], was an attorney.  He was ten years older than I.  His mother died in childbirth.  My mother [Captolia Casey Brown] died in childbirth, and maybe ten years later, he married again, and don't you know she died in childbirth.  So that was the end of marriage for him.  But I remember he said when he was a little boy, they wanted him to work on a farm in Dunbar [West Virginia], near where he had lived, near where he was born.  So he went to--and I'm thinking, I'm remembering that those tapes now.  And he said that he, he worked there one day, and he knew that that was not for him.  And that didn't work out very well.  He had an opportunity to finish only the fourth grade in school.  And I don't know why--well, I know he was, there were other brothers and sisters, but it seemed that the responsibility of his mother fell on him.  He was living in Boston [Massachusetts] at the time of his mother's illness.  And my brother, he was living with my brother's mother at that time in Boston.  He was working at The Manhattan Market [Supreme Liquors] in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and that market is still in Central Square in Cambridge.  But he had a job there working in the meat department.  And that's where he learned the meat business with his brother-in-law, who was working there also.  But while he lived in Cambridge, he received word that his mother was ill.  And he went back to West Virginia.  And when he went back to [Charleston] West Virginia, he opened a meat market and had quite a successful meat business and continued that for a long time.  He became involved in real estate and for fifty years was a successful real estate broker and built a lot of property, encouraged a lot of people in the community to acquire property, and, again, one of the things that I can remember in Charleston is so many people coming, seeing me on the street and coming up to me or seeing me in other places and saying, "[HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], you know, I owe my home, the fact that we have a home to your father.  He's the one who encouraged us or made it possible for us to acquire our home."  I can't tell you how many people have told me that over the years.  And so he became quite a successful businessman.  He built the Brown Building [Charleston, West Virginia], right in the heart of downtown Charleston, and it provided services that were so needed for black businesses.  There were barbershops there, dental offices.  My brother had his law office there.  There was a dance studio in the Brown Building at one time, and what else?  Restaurants, there were restaurants there.  My father, as I say, in spite of his limited academic training, he had the, the good sense to know what was important, and he wanted us to do the things that, I guess, he had not had an opportunity to do.  So my brother went to West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] after finishing high school, Garnet High School [Charleston, West Virginia].  And then he went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] to law school.  Why Boston [Massachusetts]?  My father's sister, another sister, one who was older than dad and older than Aunt Della, had married and moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts.  And so dad used to visit her and that's how we got to know the New England area as opposed to Chicago [Illinois] or Ohio where so many other blacks were migrating at that time.
Story_ID: 221085
Speaker 1: And so on our trips to Boston [Massachusetts], we would visit Aunt Mariah [ph.] and she used to tell us how dad [Anderson Brown] would stop at the grocery store and come to their house with the car loaded with all kinds of, of things for them, you know.  So he finally bought a house for her after her husband died.  She had three children, one of who just died last year at the age of ninety-two or [ninety]-three, Dorothy, and Aunt Mariah was her name.  Aunt Mariah had three children, Julian Wood [ph.], Bunny Wood, who's Leslie, Everett Wood and Dorothy, Dorothy [A.] Wood Gatherwright.  And he bought a duplex house for her so she would have an income, his sister.  And so then when Willard got ready to go to law school, he lived with them.  Then when I went to graduate school, the house next door to that property on the corner was available, and dad acquired that property and told me, now, don't write home for money.  Manage this property.  And that property drained me for the, until just about eight or ten years ago when I sold it.  And that was a mistake.  And the reason it drained me so is because it was under Cambridge's [Cambridge, Massachusetts] rent control.  If a family moved out, and you had to remodel or redecorate, you couldn't do anything about that rent, you know.  And it was very, it was quite an expensive project.  And then shortly after I sold the property, Cambridge rent control was abolished, big mistake.  And now the property is invaluable, but you don't look back.  I remember when I wanted to go--when I finished high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], Willard [Brown], my brother, wanted me to go to Boston to college.  And my dad said, "Indeed, not."  He said, "I've been paying taxes in West Virginia all these years.  You will go to West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] for at least a year.  Then we'll talk about a transfer."  So I went to West Virginia State, and at the end of that year, you couldn't have torn me away because I had made such wonderful friends, and it was just a wonderful experience.  And I have no regrets not having left.  After I finished though, I went to Boston.
Speaker 2: Now, so your father was, was--could one say he was wealthy?  I mean he owned his own building--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't know say he was wealthy, but he was, he was, had a good business sense, and certainly not wealthy but--
Speaker 2: But, you know, all right, okay.
Speaker 1: --had a good business sense and was able to do things that a lot of people were not able to do.
Speaker 2: Right, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And I really realized that I was in an advantage, had an advantage over a lot of my friends.
Speaker 2: I was just guessing that in the black community in Charleston [West Virginia], you know, to have your own building was a, probably--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he did that late in life.  He built one building at the age of eighty-two up on Jacobs Street in Charleston, and I said, and I was in, I was living in Boston at the time.  And I said, "Dad, what are you doing (laughter)," you know?  But he did that, and it was much later.  He was probably eighty-four or [eighty]-five when he built the building in downtown, a little further.  And, but he was.  He was probably a very well-known businessman.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I marvel at him.
Story_ID: 221086
Speaker 1: Tell me, ma'am, what is your earliest childhood memory, your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory would be, would take me to 1219 Washington Street in Charleston, West Virginia.  That's the house that I lived in that was located behind a building that my father [Anderson Brown] had built, a two-story brick building that was located right next door to Charleston High School [Charleston, West Virginia], which I couldn't attend.  It was integrated--it was not integrated at that time.  But dad had built a building there, and the building is still standing.  And it has my mother's name [Captolia Casey Brown] on it.  At that time, they named, put names of persons at the front of a building.  And that building had "Captolia" on the front of it.  And the last time I was there, the building is still standing.  Whether or not they've covered that, I'll have to look 'cause I hope to go to Charleston [West Virginia] in October.  And I'm gonna look, make a special effort to see if the--I know the, as far as I know the building is still standing.  But it's where Garnet High School [Charleston, West Virginia]--Charleston High School used to be.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was a white high school, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't go.  My children, my daughter [HistoryMaker Andrea L. Taylor], my older daughter finished Charleston High School.  And my younger daughter [Faith Taylor Kinard] finished Charleston--did she?  No, yes, she was the first majorette at Charleston High School, first black majorette at Charleston High.  But I, that was before my time.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the--well, what was your neighborhood like that you grew up in?  Was it an all-black neighborhood or was it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, when I lived there, when I lived there, as I say, the schoolhouse was beside--the house was behind this black office building that dad had built, this--was it the restaurants, and was it a two-story building?  I can't--yes, it had to had to have been because her name was at the top.  And then there were other businesses.  That was not really a residential area.  All of our residential--and then later we moved to Shrewsbury Street, and that was definitely in the heart of the black community.  He had built a building there.  And Garnet High School, I lived right across the street from Garnett High School.  And I can remember leaning on the fence in front of the high school with all my friends.  I can--oh, I have many memories from that.  But that was more of a neighborhood.  I remember all my neighbors, Edith Pryor [ph.], and Luellen Robinson [ph.] and the First Baptist Church [Charleston, West Virginia] was on the corner, two doors from my house.  And the family next door, I remember, and it was, it was a white family who lived in this, in a house on the other side of us.  But it was predominantly a black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 221087
Speaker 1: Now, your Aunt Della Brown raised you basically, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --tell us about her, you know.  What--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Aunt Della was just a remarkable person.  There's her picture, and I have other pictures of her.  Aunt Della went to West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and she would, and she had a job teaching in the schools in Charleston [West Virginia] before she finished her degree.  And every summer, she would take courses to, you know, toward her degree.  And then when she traveled, wherever she went, you can be assured that I was right with her.  I think I told you that she had been engaged to be married.  But after my mother [Captolia Casey Brown] died, she broke that engagement and I didn't know that until I was in high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], and she concentrated all her efforts on rearing me.  She moved in with my father [Anderson Brown], and was all the mother that I had ever known.  Aunt Della was a strict disciplinarian.  And any of her students, many of--again, people often would tell me that Ms., Ms. Della Brown was my teacher, you know, and she didn't, she didn't stand for any foolishness.  She would go home and tell the parents this, that and the other that these young people had done, et cetera.  But she was fair.  She was never impartial.  She was a fair, sincere, warm, caring and inspirational person.  And she was well respected for that reason.  She was not what you would call a social butterfly.  She had a few organizations that she belonged to, The Colleagues [ph.].  I remember, I remember when they met at the house.  She was active in the first, the historic First Baptist Church [Charleston, West Virginia].  And she traveled.  She loved to travel, and I was always with her.  And I remember she didn't drive, but she had a nephew who would drive us to Boston [Massachusetts] or, you know, and that was mostly where we drove.  We would go to Boston to visit her sister, aunt, my Aunt Mariah [ph.] and Cousin Henry [ph.] who was her brother's son.  Henry Brown would drive us.  And I remember I always had to have a notebook, and when we came to historic places, we'd stop the car and I had to write, I had to take notes.  And he used to have a little joke, "Take note, Della Louise [HistoryMaker Della Hardman], take note, Della Louise", and then when I went back in the fall, I had, to school, I had so many things to talk about, places I'd been, things I'd seen, and things that I had done.  She was very much interested in history.  And she made me aware of it as well.  I remember when, when I went to, when I finished high school--I may have mentioned this to you, I wanted to major in art, and dad thought I should go into medicine.  Willard [L. Brown] had gone into law, and I guess he wanted a lawyer and a doctor.  But Aunt Della told him, "Anderson," she said, "she'll cry if she steps on an ant.  Now, how do you expect her to dissect a frog, you know.  She's, she's not interested in medicine."
Speaker 1: Were you that sensitive when you were little?
Speaker 2: I probably was.  Very sensitive to bugs even (laughter) today.  Some things you don't lose.  No, but I wasn't interested in medicine.  So, that's--I told you the outcome of that.
Story_ID: 221088
Speaker 1: But dad [Anderson Brown] was very active in the church [First Baptist Church, Charleston, West Virginia].  He was chairman--he was on the, he was one of--he was never a deacon.  He was a trustee.  At the age of eighty-four, dad decided he wanted to see Africa because someone had told him as a young man that his ancestors had come from the then Gold Coast, which is, of course, Ghana.  And he wanted to see Ghana before he died.  I don't know whether it was Charlotte Hawkins Brown or one of those early educators had told him that as a young man, and he always remembered that.  So Africa was very much in the news in the '60s [1960s].  And I had begun teaching African art in my art history courses.  So dad said, I wanna see Africa before I die, and at the age of eighty-four (laughter), I said, "Dad, you don't think you're gonna make that trip without me" because he used to travel a lot with his, with his buddies.  He had been widowed, as I told you and traveled to all of Joe Louis' fights.  He went to Cuba.  He, he enjoyed traveling.  So I said, "But if you're going to Africa, you can't, you don't think you're going to make that trip without me."  So he smiled and said, "Well, see what you can find out."  And I remember getting in touch with Henderson Travel Company [Henderson Travel Service] in Atlanta [Georgia].  And she, Freddye [Scarborough] Henderson was arranging trips to, to Africa at that time.  And I told her what we had in mind, what we would like to do, and we worked out an itinerary that took us from Senegal to Nigeria and had--
Speaker 2: Now, this is in 1964?
Speaker 1: Around '64 [1964].  I think it was '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so the Charleston [West Virginia] newspapers did a big picture story of dad, my younger daughter, Faith [Taylor Kinard], and of me.  Faith I think was twelve at the time, and so at any rate, when we, when we went to Africa on that trip, we sailed on the Queen Mary.  I'll never, ever forget this, and people aboard ship thought that my father--they knew our destination was Africa, but we were gonna stop in Europe on route.  And people thought that dad was a missionary, that I was his wife and that Faith was our daughter.  My father got such a kick out of that because in all of his life, he'd been accused of many things, but never a missionary.  You know, I'll never forget how he, he chuckled at that.  But we did go to Africa and had an incredible experience.  We went to, we did--Ghana, of course, was on our itinerary, and we--I'll never forget the Sunday morning that we went out to find a Baptist church in Ghana, in Accra [Ghana], near Accra where we were staying.  And there were no Baptist churches right in Accra.  There were Catholic churches, Presbyterian, Methodist, but no Baptist church right in the heart of Accra.  But finally, we found a cab driver who knew where there was a Baptist church outside of Accra.  And he drove us there, and I have a picture that I took of that visit.  There were two ministers, one was Ghanaian.  The other was an American, a white American man who was there with his wife and two children.  The, the Ghanaian was speaking in Ga which is the language of that area, and the other was conducting it in English.  And we were greeted with open arms and I'll--as I say, I'll never forget that experience.  And then I had an opportunity to go back to that church, maybe ten years later, and there were people in the congregation who remembered our visit from the first time.  And that, too, was a very meaningful experience.
Story_ID: 221089
Speaker 1: Dad [Anderson Brown] was, he always, he knew the importance of--he knew what was important in life.  He didn't, he saw to it that, that we read books and that we knew what was going on.  And I think I may have told you earlier, at the age of ninety-two, when he was sitting in his office, the radio was on, the television was on.  Someone was in there talking to him, but he was in complete charge of all three of those things.  He had a sharp mind, an agile mind and was well-respected.  He had a lot of friends, a lot of good friends, and he was missed when he, when he died.  He was missed, but he lived for ninety-four remarkable years.  And as I say, his fourth grade education meant so much to him.  He did so much with his fourth grade education that some people with Ph.D.s can't accomplish in terms of common sense.
Speaker 2: Did it ever bother him that he only went to fourth grade?
Speaker 1: Nope, oh, no, because he read.  He, he kept abreast of things.  He took the real estate course.  He read a lot.  And so talk about a self-made man, I can certainly look to him and say now, here is, here was really--'cause he was on, he became a member of the board of City Council in Charleston [West Virginia] before he died, to fill someone's place.  As I say, I've done an interesting study on dad.
Story_ID: 221090
Speaker 1: Now, was he [Hardman's father, Anderson Brown] involved in the civil rights struggle in Charleston [West Virginia] at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My brother [Willard L. Brown], my father and my brother together integrated (laughter) the City of Charleston.  Dad was in the real estate business and my brother was a lawyer.  And I can see them now sitting on the porch of a house in Charleston in a neighborhood that we might not have been in.  But they--I can see them now on the porch in Charleston on Washington Street.  And my brother was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I can remember the March on Washington.  I can remember the march at The Greenbrier [White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia] hotel, the mayor, with the governors.  What march was that?  Oh, yes, dad was very much involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  He and my brother were quite a team.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's your brother, Willard, right?
Speaker 2: Willard, Willard Brown.
Speaker 1: Willard Brown.
Speaker 2: He was my half-brother.
Speaker 1: Were they involved in the NAACP?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, yes.  Willard was president of the chapter until his death, I guess [sic. 1950-1966].  He died--
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's a wonderful story.
Story_ID: 221091
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling us about your Aunt Della [Brown] and growing up, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, well, (laughter) I don't know if this answers the question now, but every Saturday night, no matter whose son I was dating, I couldn't leave the house until I had made bread.  I can--and one thing that I can really do today is make bread that you've never--really delicious rolls.  I had to make that bread and put it down, as they called it.  And I used to date Leon [H.] Sullivan and he'd sitting around there waiting for me to finish this bread before we can go to the movies or whatever we were doing.
Speaker 1: Now, this is Leon Sullivan of the--
Speaker 2: OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers].
Speaker 1: OIC in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he grew up in Charleston [West Virginia].  Oh, I have great stories about the people who, that I grew up with.  [HistoryMaker] Sharon Farmer was Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] official White House [Washington, D.C.] photographer.  And I used to date her father in Charleston in high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia].  You know, in high school, you have a lot of beaus or some people do.  And so, Aunt was, they were very strict about that.  Now, dad [Anderson Brown] had a restaurant in Charleston.  And it was very--right there near the block, as they called it, "The Block" in Charleston.  Everybody knew The Block 'cause that's where dad's business was, the church was there, the school was there, the library was in that block.  And we lived--that was on Shrewsbury Street, at the corner of Washington Street and Shrewsbury Street.  So that was the heart of the black activity when I was growing up.  And the Baptist church [First Baptist Church, Charleston, West Virginia] was across the street, and the Methodist church was down the street a little further.  So that was really the center of our activity.  And we--let's see, now.  What was I, was I trying to tell about that?
Speaker 1: I was trying--I was asking you about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, and you were talking about dating, you know, and making bread and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, so--oh, he had a restaurant.  So I'd, you know, I'd go in (laughter), I wouldn't have to bother about cooking.  But some days I'd come home and there'd be a note, "Fix this," you know, "don't go"--and he had, his nieces were working in the restaurant which was a part, in this brown, in that Brown Building [Charleston, West Virginia].  And dad liked chitterlings, and he'd, I'd come home some days, and there'd be a box of chitterlings.  And I don't like 'em to this day.  And he wanted me to clean those chitterlings, and I didn't do very well with that.  So I didn't, I got out of that one.  I just (laughter), to this day, I'm not interested in ever seeing a chitterling.  But he enjoyed that.  So, but Aunt Della [Brown], she would, if--when it came to cleaning up the house, now, if I didn't dust everything, she'd go behind me to see that I had dusted.  And I can see her now with her finger, running across the piano or something to see if I had dusted it.  And, but I learned to clean.  You might not think so when you look around here now, but I really learned to clean.  She was strict about that.  I never was much of a cook, and, but dad decided, well, maybe it wasn't a good idea for us to be free to eat in that restaurant because I wasn't learning to cook very well.  But it was too late then.  And what else do I remember?  Oh, the Ferguson Theater was around the corner, in the Ferguson Building [Ferguson Business Center, Charleston, West Virginia], which was in the same block as dad's Brown Building.  And that's where--that was the only movie theater that we could go to.  So I spent a lot of time there with the Ferguson girls.  And sights, other sights--
Speaker 1: So was that a black theater?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Ferguson, okay.
Speaker 2: That was the only one that we had 'cause we couldn't go to the Kearse [Theater, Charleston, West Virginia] and other theaters.
Story_ID: 221092
Speaker 1: I remember when Marian Anderson came to town though, I'd like to share this with you.  And the Galperin family owned a music store [Galperin Music Co.] in Charleston [West Virginia], and they just were so upset that we weren't, you know, allowed to, to be involved.  And so they arranged it so that we could go sit in the balcony where the concert, where her concert was being held so that we could go there.  And the Galperins are still in Charleston today.  I remember them when I was there, and I left in '86 [1986].  And, but I'll never forget being able to go hear Marian Anderson during those segregated days.  Sights, sounds.  Oh, a lot of the musicians, you know, there were no hotel accommodations.  There was one hotel, the Brown Hotel [Charleston, West Virginia].  It was not my father [Anderson Brown].  It was another family.  And when entertainers came to Charleston, housing was always a problem.  But my first husband's [Francis Taylor] mother used to accommodate a lot of the professional musicians who came to town.  And that's how we sometimes got to know them.
Speaker 2: Did you--who did you meet of that, of musicians who came?
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to remember the names of some of them.  I was quite young then.  I don't remember.  I just know that that was something that she, she did.  I, I'd have to think about some of them who were there.  This is my aging process, see, that's keeping me from remembering that.  But that was Charleston then.  We used to have our football games at Laidley Field [University of Charleston Stadium at Laidley Field, Charleston, West Virginia], and we, we never missed that.  We, Garnet High School [Charleston, West Virginia] always had exciting sports activities, and our teachers there, you know, because of inter--of segregation, so many of the black teachers had to leave the state to get their academic training.  And so when teachers came to the black schools, they had degrees from all over the place, and were really better trained than many of the white teachers in our town.  So we had excellent teachers, among them, Ruth [Stephenson] Norman, whose son, John Norman, was--is a very important heart specialist today.  And so many others, you know, I could go into great detail on just our teachers.
Story_ID: 221093
Speaker 1: Oh, and our activities at church.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is First Baptist [Church, Charleston, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: First Baptist Church was our life.  I can remember the ministers, but I especially remember Mordecai Johnson.
Speaker 2: Was he the pastor there at one time?
Speaker 1: He was the pastor of the historic First Baptist Church.  And when we were working on our centennial celebration, I think it was, I happened to find--I was on the committee.  And I found a letter that Mordecai Johnson had written to the trustees at the First Baptist Church telling them that he had accepted the presidency of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He was traveling in England, and the letter was handwritten on stationery with the letterhead of the hotel that he was staying in.  I was so excited when I found that, and, of course, I made copies.  And I sent, sent it to Howard so they could have it for their archives too.  But I can remember him very well.  And then another theologian of note who followed--I'm not sure exactly what the chronology is, but I know it was after Mordecai.  And that was Vernon Johns.  Do you know that name?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: He was at the First--
Speaker 2: He preceded [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --at Dexter Avenue--
Speaker 1: Birmingham [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: --[Dexter Avenue] Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church] in Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Right, and so Vernon Johns was there.  And the thing that I really remember about him is people were a little disturbed because at his home, he was selling, was it fish (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's what he did in Montgomery too, sold fish.
Speaker 1: Did he, and some of the people were a little upset at, you know, to think that their minister was doing that.  And he would be out there doing that.  But I remember Vernon Johns very well.  And he--I remember him, he had a son named Increase.  I'll never forget that.
Speaker 2: Increase.
Speaker 1: And I thought about Increase Mather, historically.  But I can see Vernon Johns today.  And he and my dad [Anderson Brown] were great friends, and we lived, you see, two doors from that church at that time.  And dad's office was down the street at the corner on, at the corner of Washington [Street] and Shrewsbury [Street].  So it was a historic place.
Speaker 2: I'd say so, yeah.  And Mordecai Johnson and Vernon Johnson, anyone else?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of the name of the other members.
Speaker 2: It seems--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Other, yes, it was another--
Speaker 2: --like an unusual Baptist Church, yeah, in that regard.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: It seems like an unusual Baptist Church in that regard.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was.  It's "the" historic First Baptist Church, and--
Speaker 2: Do you remember, was Howard Thurman ever--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: --present?  Did he ever come?
Speaker 1: I remember him from Boston University [(BU), Boston, Massachusetts].  He was dean of--was he dean at BU?  Whatever.  I remember him there.  I remember hearing him speak at BU.
Speaker 2: Or [HistoryMaker] Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No, I don't remember him.  But there was another one, and I--his name is right on the tip of my tongue.  I know he lived in the--the parsonage was right across the street from where we lived, right beside the schoolhouse, Garnet High School [Charleston, West Virginia].  And Garnet High School is still standing, and they've changed the name now to a trade school, a technical school, a technical high school.
Speaker 2: Now is there--
Story_ID: 221094
Speaker 1: I understand West Virginia is the home of a lot of famous and noted black people, Carter G. Woodson--
Speaker 2: Tony Brown, Carter G. Woodson--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --G. Woodson.
Speaker 2: --in Huntington [West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Martin Delany was born in Charleston [West Virginia].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Garnet was born in New York, however, and is there a connection with Henry Highland Garnet in West Virginia at all because I just wondered why--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know how that happened.  I have no idea of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he's a great figure, but he's one that's not, doesn't get a lot of recognition outside of certain circles.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered why Garnet, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right, I don't know, I do not know.  And then currently, more recently, there's Leon [H.] Sullivan.  There's Dr. John Norman, Tony Brown.  Tony Brown grew up on the same alley Leon Sullivan grew up on.
Speaker 1: Okay, Tony Brown of 'Tony Brown's Journal,' right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My aunt was his teacher, Aunt Della [Brown] was his teacher.  Who else from West Virginia?  Well, I know mostly from Charleston [West Virginia].  Have you run into Ancella Bickley and Nelson Bickley?  They are some people you should certain get in touch with.  They've moved from--they were both on the faculty at West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and then he decided to get a law degree.  But they've retired now.  They're living in Florida.
Speaker 1: You've gotta give us their number--
Speaker 2: I will.
Speaker 1: --so we can--
Speaker 2: I will.
Speaker 1: --we can get in touch at the end.
Speaker 2: I will.
Speaker 1: Yeah, West Virginia has quite a few notable people, especially with Carter G. Woodson coming from--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --West Virginia and being involved in history to the extent that he was.
Speaker 2: And Ancella grew up in Huntington, and she's done quite a bit of work on Carter G. Woodson.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Who?
Speaker 2: Ancella Bickley.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ancella Bickley.
Speaker 2: Dr. Bickley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'll certainly give you her name.  And then the James Produce Company [Charleston, West Virginia], the oldest continuous black business.  The young son is here on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] vacationing now.
Story_ID: 221095
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the James Produce Company [Charleston, West Virginia].
Speaker 2: The James Produce Company is the oldest continuous black business in the United States.  And enter--Black Enterprise magazine did a cover story on them some years back.  C. H. James [Charles H. James] was the founder, and he and my dad [Anderson Brown] were contemporaries and good friends.  Mr. James was killed in an automobile accident, but his children, Edward James, Grace James, Doreath [ph.] James and, let's see, Edward, Grace, and Charles are the children.  And Charles still lives in Charleston [West Virginia].  He married Lucia Bacote, whose father was Dean [Clarence] Bacote at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or Dr. Bacote.  I don't know whether he was dean or not.  And they kept that business going for a long time.  And Charles, I think they sold a portion of it, and Charles is now involved in the business and living on the West Coast.  But--
Speaker 1: James Produce Company.
Speaker 2: James Produce Company, the oldest business--
Speaker 1: When was it founded?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know definitely, but it was back when my father was, you know, it had to have been in the first half of the 20th century 'cause he and my dad were good friends.  And he built a building down in Dunbar [West Virginia] or just outside of Charleston [West Virginia].  And that building is still there.
Story_ID: 221096
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about school, about you in school, and--
Speaker 2: About me in school?
Speaker 1: That's right.  Where did you start grade school?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a long story.  I could remember going past Charleston High School [Charleston, West Virginia] to go to--I can remember walking past Charleston High School to go to my school, which was Garnet Elementary School [Garnet School, Charleston, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Garnet Elementary--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I mean Boyd Elementary School [sic. Boyd School, Charleston, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Boyd, okay.
Speaker 2: Boyd Elementary School.  And then--
Speaker 1: Now, you say it was named after man named Boyd?
Speaker 2: C.W., Charles [Wesley Boyd], C.W. Boyd.
Speaker 1: C.W. Boyd.
Speaker 2: He was quite an educator.
Speaker 1: He was from Charleston [West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: He was from Charleston.  And he was principal there for a long time.  And then by the time I went to Garnet [High School, Charleston, West Virginia], I was living right there across the street from Garnet on, at 424 Shrewsbury Street, which is--
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's not standing now because that's where dad [Anderson Brown] built his building on Shrewsbury Street, and--
Story_ID: 221097
Speaker 1: But, tell us--let's go back to grade school [Garnet School and Boyd School, Charleston, West Virginia] first, and just talk about grade school.  What are your memories of grade school?
Speaker 2: My memories of elementary school.  Well, I can remember the two--I can remember the physical plant, two buildings, and a yard, large yard.  And I can remember the little store across the street, across Jacobs Street on the corner.  And I remember the wonderful teachers that we had.  Our teachers were like friends, you know.  It was a relationship that, that I wish all children could have now.  Maybe we wouldn't have so many children left behind if, if teachers had a different--if some of the teachers had the same caring attitude that our teachers seemed to have.  And then we had another thing.  You knew in Charleston [West Virginia] that if you did something that you weren't supposed to be doing, your parents would know about it before you got home because that was the kind of networking, you know, families stuck together.  And, and I remember even when I was in college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and I don't, I know you want more about grade school, but I remember one day I left the campus and came to Charleston--West Virginia State was about twelve miles from Charleston, but I had to come up to buy some art supply.  And I went to the art supply store, and when I naturally went by my home, before I went back to the campus, and Aunt Della [Brown] said, "Um-hum, I knew you were in town today."  Somebody, you know, they let you know.  People kept in touch with everybody--everybody reared us.  I guess that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: So you couldn't have come into town and sneaked out?
Speaker 2: I couldn't have come in and gone out without her knowing about it.  And so you--that was good, that was good.  But we had wonderful teachers, and I remember my--I'm so--I hadn't thought about this for a long time.  But it was a positive thing.  I don't remember any unpleasant experiences as far as I was concerned.  I know I always--it was understood that I would my homework.  And I had responsibilities and, you know, you just did things.  And I see a lot of things that are happening now with young people.  And I can't understand how that happened because Aunt Della would say, "I'll end up in jail and you'll end up in the hospital", you know, (smile) if you're not doing the right thing.  And you knew she wasn't, you knew she wasn't serious, but you knew you wouldn't, you knew you'd better think she was serious (laughter).  So I remember so many teachers.  If I begin with one, it wouldn't be fair because I'd leave all the others out.  But there were some who were really dynamic, and made us--we learned in spite of ourselves.  I guess that's what I'm getting at.  We had trips.  Aunt Della used to take her, her fifth graders on the cherry blossom trip to Washington [D.C.] every year.  So I got to do that.  That was one of the sights that I certainly remember, getting on the train, the C&O [Chesapeake & Ohio] Station, and going overnight to Washington, D.C. to see the cherry blossoms.  I used to go with her fifth grade class.  That was an advantage.  I can remember, I can remember our, our Sunday school activities, the programs, the things we had to memorize, the projects that we had.
Story_ID: 221098
Speaker 1: I can remember, oh, I'm--things are coming back to me now.  I remember most of all the March on Washington.  My brother [Willard L. Brown] had organized that as president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and we had a bus.  And I remember my children [HistoryMaker] Andrea [L. Taylor] and Buddy [Francis Taylor, Jr.], my son, went, but I wouldn't let Faith [Taylor Kinard] go because I felt she was too young should things get out of hand, and I'll always regret that.  Faith was probably, oh, was that '64 [1964]?  When was that?  Sixty-four [1964] or '68 [1968], March on Washington.
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], that's right because--
Speaker 2: It was just before [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy--
Speaker 1: [W.E.B.] Du Bois died the night--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Du Bois died.
Speaker 1: --night before.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, I felt Faith was too young.  But at any rate, we, we just did wonderful things.  We were in plays.  I remember (laughter) roles that I had in some of the drama productions that Louis Barnes [ph.] put on.  We had music lessons.  Maude Wanser Lane [ph.] was the, "the" music teacher.  Her--and every Saturday morning, I would march down to Maude Wanser Lane's to, for my music lessons.  And today, the biggest thing I have to show for it is 'To a Wild Rose' [Edward MacDowell], 'Melody in F' [Anton Rubinstein] and fragments of 'Clair de Lune' [Claude Debussy] (laughter).  But it was a wonderful disciplinarian experience.  What else can I remember about those days?  And then, as I say, by the time I went to high school, I didn't have to go by Garnet [High School, Charleston, West Virginia]--Charleston High [School, Charleston, West Virginia] because it was, the school was right across the street from me.  And all the young people used to hang out at my house.  And I remember we used to have parties at my house, and those were the days.  Those were the days.  And those friendships have lasted all our lives.
Story_ID: 221099
Speaker 1: What kind of little girl were you and what did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that, I know Aunt Della [Brown] kept me in tow.  I remember one day I was crying.  Aunt Della had, had said something to me or something.  But I was crying, and I decided to go to my dad [Anderson Brown] (laughter).  And dad said, don't come to me, you know, if Della, if your Aunt Della said for you to do this, you do that.  He didn't give me any support.  So she had complete control.  And I'll never forget that.  He, it didn't matter at all that I went to him.  And she--and that's, and I'll never, ever forget that.  And that helped me a lot with my own children [HistoryMaker Andrea L. Taylor and Francis Taylor, Jr.], you know, in rearing them.
Story_ID: 221100
Speaker 1: Did you start painting or doing artwork when you were in grade school [Garnet School and Boyd School, Charleston, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: In high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia].  In high school, we had an excellent art teacher.  Her name was Elsie Mae Davis.  And she had gotten her master's [degree] in art from Columbia [University, New York, New York].  And that was really something.  And we were just doing all kinds of things in art, in our art classes.  And she--that had a great deal of influence on me too.  And I used to go to S. Spencer Moore [Co.] and buy art supplies and I probably still have some of those fragments out in the--packed out there now.  But everybody respected Elsie Davis, you know, master's from Columbia.  I don't think any of the white teachers in Charleston [West Virginia] had a master's in art from Columbia.  So--and that was because we couldn't go to West Virginia University [Morgantown, West Virginia] at that time.  And I remember when I was ready for college, West--the State of West Virginia paid my tuition at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] because we were not allowed to go to West Virginia, to West Virginia University.  And when I went back there to teach, I, I met all the art teachers at the university.  We became very good friends, you know, because the art--state art, the college and university art teachers met together.  And it was--a matter of fact, one of the state art teachers is here on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] now, Fred Messersmith taught at West Virginia Wesleyan [College, Buckhannon, West Virginia] before he moved to Florida.  And I see him, and we reminisce about West Virginia frequently.
Story_ID: 221101
Speaker 1: What were race relations like in Charleston [West Virginia] in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, when I hear of a lot of things that happened around the country at that time, I'm really surprised.  We had our life, and I really wasn't aware of a lot of things when I was growing up.  You know, we had our theater.  We had our churches, our schools.  We had our life, and I, I really didn't miss anything.  But now, you know, when you, when you're older and become a little more sophisticated and a little more aware of things, you realize what's--the real world is all about.  But as far as I'm concerned, personally, physically, at that point, I didn't feel affected.  But when I look back, there were segregated schools.  There were segregated buses, you know.  But we had our own transportation.  We had our cars, and I didn't, I wasn't aware of the things that I had been deprived of until I was old enough to look back on it.  So I guess--I had white neighbors who were friends.  I didn't have a lot of, I didn't have white, teenager friends or youngsters when I was growing up.  We had our own world in Charleston.
Speaker 1: But black and white were living side-by-side in some neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: And when I was, when I moved, when I lived on Shrewsbury Street when I was in high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], there was a white family right beside us.  I can't remember their names right now.  But it was, you know, there was nothing unpleasant about it at all.  They were good neighbors.  We were good neighbors.  Nothing at all unpleasant about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nothing at all.
Story_ID: 221102
Speaker 1: Now, Garnet High School [Charleston, West Virginia], tell us about Garnet, and you told us about the art teacher [Elsie Mae Davis], but--
Speaker 2: Garnet High School still, they're still organized, and Henry Highland Garnet, they publish a booklet that comes out every week.  And I think I told you there was a house across the street from where we used to live, two doors down from--two or three doors down from the high school itself, that my father [Anderson Brown] owned.  And before I left West Virginia, I, I can't remember whether we sold it, turned it over to them, and they use it for the Henry Highland Garnett Foundation.  And they meet, and they have, they honor people every year, honorees who are members of the foundation.  They have functions and fundraisers and so on.  As I told you, our teachers were very well trained, and we had active music programs.  Maude Wanser Lane's [ph.] band, the Garnet High School band was something to see.  The whole town was proud of, of that band.  Our athletic program was successful, and involved a number of young people who went on to do things athletically.  What else at Garnett High?  Oh, we had, we published The Eye.  That was the name of the school newspapers, The Eye, and every now and then someone comes up with old issues of that publication that we had a chance to be exposed to and to participate in.  What else at Garnett High School?
Speaker 1: Were you involved in many clubs and activities when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I think I've always been busy (laughter).  We had the B Square Club [ph.], was a club that I remember being in when I was growing up.  And that was headed by Mrs. Ruth [Stephenson] Norman's sister, Mrs. Thelma Stephenson, who was an English teacher in junior high school.  We were members of the B Square Club.  And, but everything in our lives seemed to center around the school and the church, and so during the week, it was school.  Weekends there were church activities, and the summer program at, at church was quite active and one that involved us and kept us quite occupied.  And what else?
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard of the B Square Club before.  I've interviewed somebody else--
Speaker 2: That was the name of it, B Square.
Speaker 1: I, yeah, I think, you said it was started by Thelma--
Speaker 2: Thelma Stephenson.
Speaker 1: --Stephenson?
Speaker 2: Thelma Stephenson Carter .  She was married to Dr.--a dentist in town, Dr. Carter.  And her daughter just died last year in, in the Detroit [Michigan] area, Frances Lydia Carter.  It was just a group of girls, and we were taught how to do things properly, you know, like--I can't even remember the details of that.  But we were very proud to be members of the B Square Club.
Speaker 1: Now, did you excel in any of your other coursework, in addition to art and, or--
Speaker 2: Well, when we graduated, I wasn't the valedictorian, but I was, it seems to me that I was an honor student or something.  (Laughter) It's funny, I hadn't even thought about things like that.  But, oh, I was a good student.  Aunt Della [Brown] saw to it that I studied, didn't (unclear) and the library was right under the high schools, our black library.  See, we couldn't even go--my father and brother [Willard L. Brown] integrated the, the public library in Charleston [West Virginia].  And, but before then, we could only go to the Garnet High School library, the library that was at Garnet School, that was at the high school, in the building.  It had a separate entrance, but it was the only one we could use.
Story_ID: 221103
Speaker 1: Did your father [Anderson Brown] and brother [Willard L. Brown] ever get in trouble, like get arrested or anything--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --or any of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: They never got arrested.  And that's why they were such a good team 'cause see my brother was a lawyer, and knew how to avoid that.  But they did.  They were responsible for integrating the library and what else?
Speaker 1: How did they do it?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the details.  I don't wanna give you misinformation.  But I do know--and I remember seeing them sitting on a porch at one of the houses that they were selling.  And the library was one of those achievements.
Story_ID: 221104
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did you--so did you know you were gonna become an artist when you were in high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia]?  Had you planned to become an artist or an art teacher (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had planned to major in art, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that's when my aunt [Della Brown], you know, broke the news to my father [Anderson Brown] (laughter) about not being able to dissect a frog.  And as I say--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you told us how he, he said that you would go to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Oh, definitely,--
Speaker 1: --you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for a least a year.
Speaker 1: --and utilize that state money.
Speaker 2: He said, I've been paying--I can hear him now.  "I've been paying taxes in West Virginia all these years.  You will go to state school for a year at least.  Then we'll talk about transferring."  But, see, Willard had gone, Willard had finished West Virginia and had gone to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] to law school.  And he wanted me to come to Boston [Massachusetts] to go to BU for undergraduate school.  Dad wasn't ready for that.
Story_ID: 221105
Speaker 1: So how did you like West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  I told you.  You couldn't have torn me away.  I didn't even think about discussing transferring.  And the friends that I made then, I still have.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a black, state school, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --basically.
Speaker 2: It was a land-grant college.  And [HistoryMaker] Judge Damon [J.] Keith is a product.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: You know him?
Speaker 1: Did you know him in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a telephone call from him the other day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: We interviewed him in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: Yes, we did.
Speaker 2: Yes, seek somebody here, Elliott Hall.  Have you interviewed Elliott Hall?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).
Speaker 2: You haven't interviewed Elliott Hall?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He's with Ford Motor Company and when they, when the new Ford car came out two years ago, he had, had us driving them.  At any rate, he went back and gave Damon my phone number, and Damon called in July, hadn't seen him for a long time.
Speaker 1: Damon Keith, yeah, he's very, very--
Speaker 2: Very prominent.
Speaker 1: --much honored as a judge in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: A grade school named after him, and, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He's a federal judge.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Who else was there?
Speaker 2: Well, as I say, he and, he and Leon [H.] Sullivan were in the same class.  George Farmer who was the father of [HistoryMaker] Sharon Farmer, who was Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] official White House [Washington, D.C.] photographer. Oh, come on, [HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], name some more names.  Dexter [D.] Eure [Sr.], do you know him?
Speaker 1: No, Dexter Eure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was with the Boston Globe until he retired.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: E-U-R-E.
Speaker 1: E-U-R-E, okay.
Speaker 2: Trying to think of some others.  There are well-known names; can't think of others right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 221106
Speaker 1: Was there much--throughout grade school [Garnet School and Boyd School, Charleston, West Virginia], high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia] or college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], was there very much black history taught in schools in those days?
Speaker 2: We knew black history.  Aunt Della [Brown] saw to it that I knew black history.  That's why I'm so surprised always when so many young blacks do not know their history.  But Aunt Della--I knew black history.  Dad [Anderson Brown] bought every book he could find with his fourth-grade education.  And Aunt Della was just a history buff.  So I was aware.  I was aware.  Now--and I think most of us were aware, you know.  We were forever doing things.  We had a very active NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and very many groups in our church [First Baptist Church, Charleston, West Virginia].  And, and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.--oh, I had a radio station in Charleston [West Virginia].  Did I tell you that?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).
Speaker 2: I had a radio program (laughter), let's get that straight.  It was called 'The Black Experience,' and for ten years, between '78 [1978] and '88 [1988], I used to tape, for fifteen minutes, once a week, a show.  And when I moved here [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] in '86 [1986], I sent the tapes back for two years.  And then I terminated that.  But every person of distinction who would come to West Virginia, I would find them--which I guess is how I'm doing what I'm doing now.
Story_ID: 221107
Speaker 1: The very first person that I interviewed was--she just died, poet laureate of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Gwendolyn Brooks.
Speaker 1: Gwendolyn Brooks, the very first interview.  And how did that happen?  Well, the story about that is this.  My husband, my first husband, Francis Taylor, died in 1978, and my brother [Willard L. Brown], incidentally died a month later.  I'll never forget 1978.  And my--the radio station [WKAZ-AM, Charleston, West Virginia] had offices in the building next door to my father's [Anderson Brown] building in downtown Charleston [West Virginia].  And they knew my husband 'cause he was a very popular musician in town.  Everybody knew Francis Taylor.  And after he died, they approached me and said they felt that they were not doing enough to meet the needs of the black community and would I be interested in hosting a radio show.  Well, (laughter) I was shocked because I'd never done anything like that.  I had been writing art reviews for the state's largest newspaper.  And that's one thing.  I'm supposed to know something about that, but to host a radio show, I'd never done anything like that.  So I, I said, "Well, what makes you think I can do it?"  And they said, "[HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], you can do it."  So it just so happened the person who lived across from me--by this time, I had married and had children, and I was living in Kanawha City [Charleston, West Virginia] in Charleston.  And the person who lived behind me on another street, our backyards met, was a white neighbor.  And she was very active in the West Virginia Writers Group [sic. West Virginia Writers, Inc.].  And she told me, she said, Della, guess who's coming to be our speaker?  Gwendolyn Brooks.  And she said, I think you should know about that.  I said, oh, that's exciting.  And I said, Gwendolyn Brooks--and this was the time that they were asking me about this radio show.  I said, wouldn't it be great if I could get her to, to let me interview her.  So she said, she's staying--and she told me where she was staying.  And she was staying in a hotel close to where--you know, I could pick her up.  And I knew how to reach her.  I called Gwendolyn Brooks.  And I said, "Ms. Brooks, you don't know me, but we have a mutual friend, Hoyt [W.] Fuller."  Does that name mean anything to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it means a lot.  He was--
Speaker 1: Hoyt was a good friend--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the editor of Black World and Negro Digest, right?
Speaker 1: --of mine. Okay, I said, "We have a mutual friend in Hoyt Fuller," and I said, "Hoyt is a very good friend of mine."  I said, "I've been asked to do this radio show ['The Black Experience'], and I'm sure (laughter), I'm--I've never done this before."  And I said, "If you don't mind being my guinea pig, I'd love for you to be my first interviewee."  And she said, "Well, certainly."  So I picked her up and took her to the radio station and did this interview.
Story_ID: 221108
Speaker 1: I have ten years of interviews of every, significant, black person who came to Charleston, West Virginia.  It was called 'The Black Experience.' I also have interviews of people in the Charleston area, you know, who, for whatever reason, may or may not be of any importance, but have done something.  And now, public radio, West Virginia Public Radio [West Virginia Public Broadcasting], wants to do a series with those tapes.  So I'm in the process of having the tapes made into CDs and I've been in touch with James Muhammad, who is the program director at West Virginia Public Radio.  And we're working on that project.  I'll never forget when--you remember--are you old enough to remember Scatman Crothers?
Speaker 2: Right, in fact, he got started in my hometown, Dayton, on WING radio in Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Isn't that something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was his first radio show.
Speaker 1: You're from Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Do you know, Willie Leigh [ph.], the Willie Leigh Cab Company [ph.]?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't.
Speaker 1: My aunt was married to William Leigh.  He's still there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: L-E-I-G-H.  Well, at any rate, he had come to down with Clint Eastwood.  He was staying at a country club outside of Charleston for a golf session.  I knew he was in town.  I knew how to reach this place, and I called and asked to speak to Scatman Crothers, and do you know they had no more sense than to put him on.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I said, "Mr. Crothers, you don't know me, but I know you, and we would love to have an interview."  I said, "I'm on my way to Ohio tomorrow, and if I could come down at some point tomorrow, I would love to, to tape you."  "Well, sure", you know, how he used to talk.  And that's how I did a tape, an interview with Scatman Crothers.  I have, I have a lot of people.  So that was a, that was a fun experience later in my life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's something.  Do you find--the way you described these, you said, they didn't have any more sense than to put him on.  But sometimes, it's just the courage to make a call or to try to make a contract that makes the difference, right?  Do you find that to be true?
Speaker 1: Definitely.  It's the same with the column that I do now.  The paper--will you be here tomorrow?  The paper will come out tomorrow.  Buy the [Vineyard] Gazette.  It's seventy-five cents.
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: And look for Della Brown Taylor Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts].  They--last week, they had a whole half of page.  And people are running to, I overhear conversations, you know, and things like that.  It's just amazing how I get this information.  Some people call things in.  Some people email things.  But a lot of it is just, oh, as I said, yester--in the paper that's coming out tomorrow, I was standing in the post office in front of a man I never had seen before.  And one of his friends came in and said, "Hi, happy birthday" to him, so now, you know, I couldn't stand right there and hear that and not follow it up.  I said, well, happy birthday, you know.  And then that's how we met, and I learned about him and wrote about him and his birthday.  So it is being aggressive and enjoying it and not being insulting and not offending anyone, and just doing it.
Story_ID: 221109
Speaker 1: But let's get you out of college now.  When you graduated--tell me about graduation from West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]?  What was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I was a mid-year graduate, and summers--while I, before I'm out of college, I used to work summers in my dad's [Anderson Brown] real estate office.  In high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia], I had--my father insisted that I take typing.  And (laughter), he, he just knew everything that was, that should have been done.  And I hadn't taken, I didn't have typing down.  But he says, oh, no, no, you've got to have typing.  And it's a good thing because typing got me through so many jobs that I had after, after high school.  But summers, I used to work in his office, and then when I went to, when I got ready to leave West Virginia--are we, have we left West Virginia yet?
Speaker 1: Well, we're getting ready to.  Now, you're graduating.
Speaker 2: We're getting ready to.  I graduated from West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I told you about my father saying I, you know, I could go to Boston [Massachusetts] for graduate school.  So I decided that even though I had majored in art at West Virginia State, and I had a fine background in art, I felt that I wanted to go to an art school to do a little more or to really test what I had done.  So I went to Massachusetts School of Art, which is now Mass College of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts], for a year.  And I found that really I--my training was, left nothing to be desired, really.
Story_ID: 221110
Speaker 1: And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, what year is this that you went to Massachusetts School of Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 1: I graduated from West Virginia [State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] in '43 [1943], midyear of '43 [1943].  And I went to Boston [Massachusetts] and stayed with my cousins, the children of my father's [Anderson Brown] sister, the daughter, Madeline Lawrence [ph.], and her family in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  Now Willard [L. Brown] had lived, as I told you, with Aunt Mariah [ph.] when he was there.  So my first year there, I lived with my cousins in Cambridge.  Well, I heard my cousin say on the phone one day, "My cousin is here from West Virginia, and she's at Boston University [(BU), Boston, Massachusetts].  And I don't know how she's going to survive, having graduated from a historically black college."  I didn't like that remark.  I had lovely cousins.  My--Sylvia [ph.] was here just two, three or four weeks ago for a visit.  You know, we were contemporaries and good friends.  But that remark bothered me.  And so I've often said, did I do what I had to do at BU because I was able or because I wanted to prove a point (laughter).  But at any rate, that was my first year in Cambridge, and then after that I went to Boston--stayed over at student housing because you can't--couldn't live in the dormitories at BU at the time.  I stayed at 558 Mass [Massachusetts] Avenue, which is a historically very important building that is being maintained today.  And while I was there, I met a wonderful group of friends.  And we still stay in touch.  Eloise Coggs [ph.] was there from Little Rock, Arkansas.  We, we just had a wonderful, wonderful group and as I say, we're still in touch.  And I remember having a lot of experience that I had never had being away from West Virginia for the first time, you know, those years.  It was really a growing-up period for me.  And 558 was on Mass Avenue, and I remember we could, we could--we were not far from Symphony Hall [Boston, Massachusetts], from the theater district.  It was just another, a whole new experience, and, but it was a wonderful experience.  We--all the black students would get together at either 558 or 464 Mass Avenue, and we got to know the students who were there from other schools because you're still feeling, you know, the, the pangs of integration in terms of places not being too segregated--too integrated at that time.  We used to go to restaurants though, and we could eat where we wanted, and it was just a wonderful time.  That was a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 221111
Speaker 1: You got your master's [degree] at Boston University [(BU), Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I got a--and after that first year at Mass Art [Massachusetts College of Art and Design, Boston, Massachusetts], I said this is, I don't need any more of this.  So I enrolled in a graduate program at BU and completed a master's degree in '45 [1945].  And at that time, after that, Francis Taylor, who had grown up with me in Charleston, West Virginia, came to Boston [Massachusetts], and the next thing I knew, we had gotten married.  And--
Speaker 1: Hold up.  It happened that fast (laughter).
Speaker 2: Not quite as fast as that.  But we did, we married, and as I say, we had known each other in Charleston.  And I had known several young men in Charleston.  But the War [World War II, WWII] had intervened, and a lot of things happened that changed our lives a lot.  Now, the young man [Leon Hardman] that I married, the man that I married after Francis' death is someone that I had dated in high school [Garnet High School, Charleston, West Virginia].  And, but that's another story that I will get to very quickly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But at any rate--
Speaker 1: So, Francis Taylor, yeah, he's a--
Speaker 2: Francis grew up in Charleston.  We were both members of the First Baptist Church [Charleston, West Virginia].  We all had gone to the same schools, you know.  We used to--I remember his mother used to have parties at his house, and Francis was a musician.  He learned--when he was a little boy, his parents had him taking violin lessons from one of the leading, white violin players in Charleston.  And so he grew up knowing the violin and knowing music.  And when he was in high school, he had a jazz band, and they used to play for a lot of the functions around.  And, of course, when he went to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], he had a jazz band and was playing.  And music was his life.  Well, when we married, he--I remember I went back to Charleston to be married.  And I didn't wanna a big church wedding.  For some reason, I've never been interested in that.  But we were married in, in our home.  I was living at that time at 505--my parents--my father [Anderson Brown] was living at 505 Egan Street in Charleston and Aunt Della [Brown].
Story_ID: 221112
Speaker 1: We [HistoryMaker Della Hardman and Francis Taylor] were married at home [in Charleston, West Virginia], and we had a little reception afterwards at home, and then we went back to Boston [Massachusetts].  And he was enrolled in a graduate program at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] in music.  And then our family began.  We had three children.  [HistoryMaker] Andrea [L. Taylor] was born in 1957, we got married in fifty--'47 [1947]--oh, I have to think.  I put it on that paper (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But at any rate, we were married, and after I got my master's [degree], they weren't hiring married women to teach in the Boston school system, and so my father [Anderson Brown] had some men come up from West Virginia and they built a pottery workshop on the corner of the property where I had lived.  And I had children's art classes there, and I was making pottery there, and trying to keep occupied.  That wasn't enough for me, and I went up to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--and I'll never forget the conference that I had with John [P.] Coolidge who was director of the Fogg Art Museum [sic. Fogg Museum, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I told him that I, you know, I had this master's in art, and I was all set to set the art world on fire, but I couldn't teach.  And I'd love to have a job at the Fogg Art Museum.  And we talked for quite a while.  I'll never forget that interview with John Coolidge, and before I knew it, I had a--he told me, can you report to work, you know, the following Monday?  And I was so shocked.  I really, I don't, I don't--I don't think I really expected to get a job.  But when he hired me, I was delighted.  So I had the privilege of working at the Fogg Art Museum for a year before we decided (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was--
Speaker 1: --to move back to Cambridge [Massachusetts].  And I think that was in 1954.
Speaker 2: Was John Coolidge related to the former president, [President John] Calvin Coolidge [Jr.]?
Speaker 1: They're probably of the same family.  I'm not sure.  I'm not sure, but he--
Speaker 2: I know he's from that area, yeah.
Speaker 1: --was director of the gallery at that time.  And I had a wonderful year at the Fogg Art Museum, and thoroughly enjoyed that experience.  I remember the names of people that I worked with.  I remember the curators of various departments, and what a learning experience that was, authors of some of these books that I had studied over the years were coming to Harvard for one reason or another.  And it was just a meaningful experience.
Story_ID: 221113
Speaker 1: Now, why did you leave [Fogg Museum, Cambridge, Massachusetts] after you--
Speaker 2: I left because I wanted to teach.  And they weren't hiring married women to teach, and Francis [Taylor] could work wherever.  He was doing well.  He was working as a musician in Boston [Massachusetts].  He had a radio show.  He was playing at the Simpson House in Newton [Massachusetts], at various establishments.  He played at the Hi-Hat [Boston, Massachusetts], at several of the popular clubs in town.  But we decided to go back to West Virginia and that's when I got a job teaching at West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  And he taught for a while at West Virginia, West Virginia Institute of Technology [Montgomery, West Virginia].  And so it was a different experience for both of us.  And we stayed there.  We weren't planning to stay that long.  But he, we stayed.  He died in '78 [1978], and we left in '56 [1956], and he died.  He lived until '78 [1978].  And then I stayed until '86 [1986], and the children [HistoryMaker Andrea L. Taylor and Francis Taylor, Jr.] by that time were all feathered and flown.  And in the interim, I had some of the most incredible experiences.  I remember my first teaching experience at West Virginia State.  I was giving a profound lecture on Greek art, and after I finished, I was so relieved.  And I said, how did I do?  And I said, I think I did all right.  And when I finished, a hand went up in the back of the room.  And this young man said to me, "Mrs. Taylor [HistoryMaker Della Hardman], I lived in Athens [Greece] for three years."  I said, "You did?"  I was overwhelmed.  I said, "You lived in Athens for three years?"  I said, "Well, why don't you gather as much material that you can about your three years in Athens, and bring it to class for next time, and we'll have a shared experience."  Well, I went home that night and told my husband, "I can't do this without seeing these places.  I'm gonna have to plan to travel.  I'm gonna have to see all these places that I've read about, studied, researched, whatever."  And so he said, "Well, make some arrangements."  So that started the beginning of my travel.  And that summer, my older daughter, Andrea and I, joined three other ladies, and we went--we planned an itinerary to Europe.  And I had to see--I had a chance to go to London [England], to go to Paris [France] and didn't go to Greece at that time, but saw, the highlights of Europe.
Speaker 1: You can probably see some Greek art in London [England].
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, definitely.  And then each summer, I would plan a trip, and I'd try to take one of the children.  And meanwhile, my--I had two other children, Buddy [Francis Taylor, Jr.], my son, who's three years younger than Andrea, and then I have, my younger daughter is two years younger than Buddy.  And that's Faith [Taylor Kinard].  And so in 1964, my dad [Anderson Brown] decided--I told you about the experience of going to Africa and Faith went with us on that trip.  And then Mr. Taylor, my father--my father-in-law, his younger son, my husband's younger brother was living in France.  And so he took my son to France on the summer that they drove across the continent and spent time with John, who was playing at the Crazy Horse Cafe [Le Crazy Horse de Paris] on Avenue George V in Paris.  He's now living on the [French] Riviera.  He's retired, but not before having played for years at the large casino place or whatever in, in on the Riviera.  But we had a chance to visit him when he was living in France with his wife and family.  So I've had wonderful travel opportunities, and it made my teaching experience so much richer.  And I have all those slides to show for all the places I've been privileged to go.  I had a chance to go to West Africa on four occasions, have been invited to South Africa, but my cardiologist says no.  He said, it's too far to go.  But everybody says, if you really wanna go, you can break the trip up and go.  But I think I'll be contented with the trips to West Africa and read everything I can about South Africa and learn as much as I can about it that way.
Story_ID: 221114
Speaker 1: Now, you attended the first--
Speaker 2: FESTAC [sic. FESMAN, World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --FESTAC ['77], International Festival of African Arts and Culture [sic. Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria].
Speaker 2: First World Festival of Black and African Art and Culture.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Fest--(unclear).
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: In Dakar, Senegal.
Speaker 2: Hoyt [W.] Fuller, Hoyt Fuller was, was a driving force behind that group.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your relationship with Hoyt Fuller and tell us who he was and, and what--
Speaker 2: All right, Hoyt Fuller was a dear, very dear friend.  I have a photograph of Hoyt, and I have a book that he's written.  Hoyt was a student in Detroit [Michigan], and when they started the ASTP, Army Specialized Training Program, Hoyt was among the young African American men who was sent to West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] for this ASTP training.  And that's when I met Hoyt Fuller.  I was a student at the college.  And he was in the ASTP program which brought a lot of fine, young men to our campus.  Hoyt later went to Europe in the, in the [U.S.] military.  He was in Italy.  I have letters that I had saved that Hoyt wrote to me during all those years.  And we were good friends.  And then when he came back, he went to Charleston [West Virginia] and worked with I.J.K. Wells [Ira James Kohath Wells] who published Color magazine.  Are you familiar with Color?
Speaker 1: (No audible response).
Speaker 2: Color was a magazine that sort of pre-dated Ebony, and had he kept going with it--I had, I have somewhere among my things, copies of issues of Color magazine, but he worked with I.J.K. Wells, who was the editor of Color for a while, and then he went to Chicago [Illinois] and later became editor of Negro Digest and finally Black World.  And he was editor of Black World at the time of his death in Chicago.  Hoyt was a dear friend and his, his death was quite, quite a loss, quite a tragedy.
Speaker 1: I heard--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Such a young man--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Brent--
Speaker 2: Brilliant writer.
Speaker 1: Right, he died in '81 [1981] (unclear).
Speaker 2: Some, I have, yeah, because, yes.  I'll never forget that.  So my daughter had a chance to meet Hoyt.  He met my children, and, and as I say, his death was, indeed, a tragedy, so young.  I was published in one of his Negro Digests when, in his poetry section.  I have a poem in one of those.  But he was quite a presence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Black World magazine, I don't--which was formerly Negro Digest, I don't--there's nothing to take that, the place of that today.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Nothing.
Speaker 2: And I'll never forgive Johnson Publication [Johnson Publishing Company] for abandoning, what was it Negro Digest.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was Black World at the time that he closed it up.
Speaker 2: There was not enough--he felt that there was not enough--I, I'm not sure what it was.  But he really, as I say, I have some great photographs of Hoyt among my things.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the magazine gave, I think black people a sense of the international activities of black people all over the world, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, you've got writers from the Caribbean, from Africa, from--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --Brazil, would contribute and then black Americans and their activities in these different countries.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the various connections being made.  There's nothing, and reports on theater, art and culture all over the world, you know.
Story_ID: 221115
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the festival [FESMAN, World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal].  Now, in Dakar [Senegal], Hoyt [W.] Fuller was there, but there was also Langston Hughes is there, Arna Bontemps, the Fisk Jubilee Singers, quite a few black Americans went over.
Speaker 2: I can remember, I can--oh, a lot of people were there.  I happened to be on the plane that the state department [U.S. Department of State] had provided.  And [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, I remember she hosted a party.  Frank--what was the actor's name?  I have a picture that I showed with him--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Frank Silvera, I think, was that the one?
Speaker 2: No, another one.
Speaker 1: Not Silvera?
Speaker 2: Not Silvera, the other one, the larger man whose name just leaves me now.  But at any rate, I'll never forget the opening ceremonies in that huge theater.  I'll never forget--in that huge arena, I'll never forget the theater, which I think was designed by a Hungarian.  And the architecture of it is such that it looks like the, a captain's hat, the way it's designed for all those events.  And then I remember the lines of people waiting to get into the opening ceremonies.  And then with all the participants filing in, it reminded me of the thing that I saw, looking at the [2004 Summer] Olympics [Athens, Greece] the other night, all the countries, in their native attire.  It was magnificent.  I've never seen so many people gathered.  Audre Lorde, I have a picture of her, I have--oh, it was, it was, remember.  And then I remember Festac Village.  They built cabins for us to live in, and I became friendly with the children in the Harlem Children's Dance Group [ph.].  They were there, and two of the dancers, particularly, I got to know quite well.  One was a little Puerto Rican girl with the name of Daria [ph.], and the other one, I hear from regularly now.  He lives in Amsterdam [Netherlands] and is a dancer.  And whenever they're performing in New York, he lets me know, and I've had a chance to go once to see him.  I remember I had to leave early, and I had all this money--not all this money, but I had quite a bit of money that I couldn't use.  So I let, I let him have it, and, to share it with Daria.  And that's how we got to be very good friends.  And it was, it was just a meaningful experience.  And then meeting the people in Senegal.  I have, they made a dress for me while I waited on the street that day.  I still have all of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the president was Senghor back then, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Senghor.
Speaker 1: Leopold [Sedar] Senghor.
Speaker 2: Keith Derrick Randolph is the name of the dancer, Keith Derrick Randolph, and every Christmas, I get a card from him.  He's in Europe.
Speaker 1: And tell us about the pageant on the Island of Goree [Senegal].  Now, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the details of that pageant, but there was so much going on simultaneously, I just couldn't see it all.  That pageant, I did not have a chance to experience, but everything else, I think I did 'cause every day was full.  It was full.  I remember going to, to so many of the events, and I have pictures of the dancers rehearsing outside, getting ready for their performance, wonderful, wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 221116
Speaker 1: And you went again [to FESTAC '77, Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, Lagos, Nigeria] in 1977, eleven years later--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --when it was held in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Lagos, Nigeria.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and I have it all very well documented.
Speaker 1: Now, did you participate in the workshops and--
Speaker 2: I had, I had exhibited.  I exhibited some fibers.  I remember before--my father [Anderson Brown] died before the first one, I had--I was making a quilt.  And I had the pieces on the floor in his home 'cause Aunt Della [Brown] had died, and he was alone.  So I had all these things on the floor in one of his rooms.  And that was--he, he couldn't imagine what I was doing, you know.  And I finally finished it, and he was so pleased with it.  So I named it, 'A Tribute to Dad,' and sent that ahead of time.  And I said, I'll never see it again.  And it was there.  And I did get it back.  And, and then I remember going, one afternoon, somebody said, "Langston Hughes is at such and such a place, and he'll be there at four o'clock."  And we went down to hear Langston Hughes.  That was when I met him.  And just things like that, you know.  It was just a--something was going on constantly.  I remember the Russians [sic. Soviets] had a ship out in the harbor.  And they were there.  So many people were there.  So many events.  It was unbelievable, an unbelievable experience, and I'm so glad that I could be a part of that.  But those were just a few of the travels.
Story_ID: 221117
Speaker 1: I had an opportunity to go to [South] Korea in my experience.  I went as a member of the Friendship Force [International].  Are you familiar with the Friendship Force?  Well, it was started by a young minister in Charleston, West Virginia and Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] mother [Lillian Carter].  It involved people from around the world who went from community to community, and they tried to match participants up with people in those communities who were doing things similar to what they were doing.  When I went--I had a chance--I wanted to go with another group, but I was teaching and couldn't get away at the time.  But I was told, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], they're going to Korea in June and if you'd like to go, we can, you know, arrange for you to go with that group."  So I said, that'll be fine because I've not had an opportunity to go to the Orient at all.  So I joined a group from New York, and I remember flying into [John F.] Kennedy [International Airport, New York, New York] and meeting them.  And we flew from New York to California to Alaska to Korea.  And I lived with a Dr. Kung Ho Kwan--Kung Ho Khan [ph.] and his family.  He was a dentist.  And I still hear from him every year.  That was in the early '80s [1980s].  And I had a chance to live in Busan, [South] Korea for a week, and then the second week, they wanted me to stay with them another week.  But I wanted to go, you know, I wanted to Seoul [South Korea].  And I wanted to see the, a university there and some other things.  So I had that wonderful experience.  But it's called the Friendship Force, and whether or not they're still in existence--I think they are, but I'm not sure.  But that was an unforgettable travel experience.
Story_ID: 221118
Speaker 1: My husband, Francis [Taylor] died.  He had cancer.  We weren't expecting that.  And--
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: --we had been married for twenty-five years.  And someone had accidentally bumped into me.  I was leaning in the rear of my car, and someone backed into me.  And I was all banged up, and I had been in the hospital.  But I was home recovering.  And Francis had to go to the hospital, and I found out that his illness was terminal.  And I remember a cousin, this very cousin that I called this morning, was working at the hospital.  And she picked me up and managed the wheelchair for me so I could go to see him.  And I was so shocked.  We had to determine whether or not he was gonna have some more surgery.  And it was much more serious than we had anticipated.  And tragically, he died three or four days later.
Story_ID: 221119
Speaker 1: So your husband [Francis Taylor] died in nineteen seventy--
Speaker 2: Eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Eight [1978], okay. Now, let me backtrack a little bit to your artwork.  Now, you won a first-place award for pottery, I think in 1970, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).  (Nodding head).
Speaker 1: And, now, did your--tell us about your artwork?  What did you start doing as an artist, and what did you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I suppose you're more famous as a potter now than--
Speaker 2: I'm not famous now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Or more noted as a potter, you know.
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess mainly noted as an art educator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] to teach--well, in college, you know, you get a smattering of everything.  And I was very much interested in watercolors, very much interested in watercolors, but I had to take all these courses.  So when I went to the college to teach, I taught art education, art history and studio courses.  I taught drawing, and then we set up a pottery studio.  And all those years, I'm still thinking about my mother [Captolia Casey Brown] and her work at Ohio University [Athens, Ohio], and I always wanted to go to Ohio University because she had spent time there.  I wanted to spend a sabbatical there.  So when I took my first sabbatical leave from the college, I chose to go to Ohio University for that year.
Speaker 1: Now, Ohio University is in--
Speaker 2: In Athens [Ohio]--
Speaker 1: --Athens, and it's very close to West Virginia.  And, in fact, it's the same terrain--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A hundred miles, 100 miles from Charleston [West Virginia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, same terrain, hills and, yeah--
Story_ID: 221120
Speaker 1: While at Ohio University [(OU), Athens, Ohio], I told 'em, I said, "Now, I wanna do studio work," but it so happened--and it so happened that the person who had come there recently was Henry [Huan] Lin, and do you think Henry Lin is?
Speaker 2: Probably a potter (laughter).
Speaker 1: A potter, a master potter.  But who else is Henry Lin?  The father of Maya Lin.  And who's Maya Lin?  The designer of the Vietnam [Veterans] Memorial [Washington, D.C.].  She was a little girl about so high running around the campus at Ohio University with her brother [Tan Lin] when I was there that year, studying under her father.  And he had just come from China, not too long prior to that year that I was there.  And they have since named one of the buildings for Henry Lin.  He's no longer living.  But he, I, I took pottery courses with him, and I did a lot of things that I always wanted to do.  I had art history, some courses that I wanted--I just took courses in art that I really wanted, either more of or a new experience.  But that pottery experience with Henry Lin I'll never forget.  He was kind enough to come over to West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] and to help us establish the pottery program that we had there.  And I, there's a book that has--one of my, Joann--Judy Lombard's--Judy Davenport's [ph.] sister picked up a book at one of the old antique bookshops here the other day that has a picture of me with my pottery in it.  I have a copy of the book here, but she found it in a store that buys old books.  And that was quite a surprise to see that.  So that was an experience that I'll never forget, the year with this man, you know, the year at OU with Henry Lin and being where my mother [Captolia Casey Brown] had studied.  It meant a great deal to me.  I had a chance to work in fibers at that time too.  And then after that, one summer, as I told you, the college sent me to, to University of Minnesota [Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and I had a chance to meet Fred Chambers [ph.] and got involved in the doctoral program.  And that was mainly research, and, and that was back at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], when I got into the program.  And I told him, I said, now, I'm gonna do the research 'cause I know that's very, very important.  But I have to do some studio work as well.  And I had a chance to, to have a broad-based program there.  And so the students benefited from all these experiences that I had because I'd go back and share them with them and where possible, set up specific programs for them.
Story_ID: 221121
Speaker 1: It so happened that the man that I chose to do my dissertation on had married my first husband's [Francis Taylor] mother's cousin.  And he used to come to Charleston [West Virginia] to visit and with--later with his wife and children.  And I got to know him and that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this man was the second black, graduate of the [School of the] Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 1: Exactly, William Edouard Scott.
Speaker 2: William Edouard Scott.
Speaker 1: E-D-O-U-A-R-D, Scott.
Speaker 2: Edouard.
Speaker 1: I understand he changed it once he went to Paris [France] to study with, to study in Paris.  But at any rate, I did my research on him, and his daughter, was the, was appointed the first assistant secretary of the [U.S.] Department of Agriculture by [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.].  She had her Ph.D. in sociology, I think, from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], and she's retired and living in Florida now.  But I had access to his work.  He died in the '50s [1950s], but she was living in Florida then.  And I had a chance to go down to Florida and to see a lot of his works.  And I have two of his paintings that were in the high school here now.  I have them right out there in closet.  One needs restoration on it because it was damaged wherever it was.  But this same I.J.K. Wells [Ira James Kohath Wells] recognized his talent and brought him back to West Virginia on several occasions.  And he painted any number of portraits of ministers, of teachers, of political figures in the state.  The Huntington Gallery [Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens, San Marino, California], for example, has two or three of William Edouard Scott's landscape paintings.  There's a young woman here on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], Terri Trotter, who owns a large and valuable painting by William Edouard Scott, and we, I learned that quite by chance.  So you know we have quite, quite a mutual bond now.  So it was exciting to do that research.  And another of the projects that I'm working on is a biography of his life and work.  I hope I can get that finished.
Story_ID: 221122
Speaker 1: And other experiences at the college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]--oh, I used to take students to Europe.  I think I made about three of four trips with students, and we--I remember one day, a Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] resident, Davenport Snow [ph.], Karen Price [ph.], a young Jewish fellow, let's see, who else?  And two other young women, both white, one African American, made a trip to Europe.  And then their other--they were in a class and said, you know, you've got to take us to Europe.  And this is a time when students were backpacking and going on their own.  And when I told my husband [Francis Taylor] that, he just, well, if they want you to take them, you've got to make arrangements to go.  So, again, we worked that trip out.  And then there were, there were just two or three--three or four trips to Europe with students.  And we had marvelous times.  And on one of those trips, I finally made it to Greece.  And I'll never forget one of the restaurateurs in Athens [Greece] said, "These are your children, and you're their mother," and we had, we had another integrated group of students because when I went to West Virginia schools were integrated then when I went there.  It was never segregated.  When I was a student, it was.  But when I went back to teach in '56 [1956], it was an integrated institution.
Story_ID: 221123
Speaker 1: I was asking you about your pottery before we got into this, but this has been good 'cause it's taking us down one of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I enjoyed the pottery.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, but when I retired, I said, I am not going to mix up two hundred pounds of clay a week in my retirement.  I don't think I can handle that.  So I haven't done any pottery since I left West Virginia.  But I did a lot when I was there.
Speaker 1: And you say you started your radio show ['The Black Experience'] in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Seventy--, the year my husband [Francis Taylor] died.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you interviewed Gwendolyn Brooks, and quite a few other people, Scatman Crothers, and--
Speaker 2: I've got a whole list in there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right (laughter)
Speaker 2: --of all the--I'll have all those tapes, I have almost ten years of fifteen-minute tapes--
Story_ID: 221124
Speaker 1: Now, when did you start coming to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I've started coming to the Vineyard with Aunt Della [Brown] as a little girl.  She used to work summers on the Cape [Cod, Massachusetts] before my mother [Captolia Casey Brown] died and got to know the Cape then.  And then after, after my mother died, she would visit the Cape, and she learned about Martha's Vineyard.  And she came to the Vineyard and fell in love with the Vineyard.  And she wanted to buy a house.  Now, my father [Anderson Brown], her brother, is in real estate.  He did not like Martha's Vineyard.  He didn't like it because he didn't like the idea of being dependent upon a ferry to get his car here.  That was just was inconvenient for him.  And the one business mistake that he made, as I look back over it now, is that he did not invest in the property on the island because I have pictures of him with Evon D. Bodfish [ph.], a realtor, who was selling property to whomever.  I have a picture of dad on porches, looking at property that he could have gotten.  And when I think about it now, it's unbelievable.  But he just was not interested in getting to the island, you know, with his car, that way.  So he wouldn't--and Aunt Della would never do anything without, you know, his backing it.  And he never encouraged her.  So she--but she always would rent a house summers.  And I guess I was in junior high school, maybe younger when she first brought me over.
Speaker 1: So would you spend all summer here?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, maybe two weeks, three weeks, never more than a month.  And part of that time would be spent in Cambridge [Massachusetts], probably.
Speaker 1: So when did you come here to live?
Speaker 2: I just--when I retired from West Virginia [State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]--well, December 23, 1985, I left Charleston, West Virginia and flew to the Vineyard for the first time.  And that's when I bought the house that I lived in, that I moved from last summer at 2070 DeBettencourt Place in Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 221125
Speaker 1: Okay, when you left off, I think we were talking about coming to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] for the first time, and you said your father [Anderson Brown] missed a opportunity to buy some property.  You know, but you purchased some property in 1986, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I--Aunt Della [Brown] had died, and I had gotten into the habit of coming to the Vineyard.  Once I married, Francis Taylor and our three children used to come and stay with the Dennistons who have quite a history here on the island.  And Dean [Kimball] Denniston [Sr.], who has been featured in a video that's being shown this summer here.  Linsey Lee has done an incredible movie about Dean.  And [coughing], excuse me--he's in Boston [Massachusetts] now.  But his father was brought here by a white minister to minister to the black community back at--a long, long time ago.  And, and Dean, he, Dean and his sister and brother are products of that.  And so Dean (sneezing) excuse me, Dean had a degree from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], but he was, he worked at the Simpson House in Boston [sic. Newton, Massachusetts] with Winston Prescott who died this year, and my husband was the musician.  So we got to know them very, very well, and our families--Dean and his wife had two children--three children, and our children were close to the same age.  So we got to be very good friends.  And they had a house here.  He still has this home here.  And we would visit then.  And I'll never forget the day we left Boston to move to West Virginia, we packed our belongings, our children and ourselves in a car, and drove to the Vineyard and stayed for a week, before heading out to West Virginia.  Well, I, I had learned to love the Vineyard then, by then.  And so we would come back periodically, not often, but from time to time, we'd rent a house and come back.  So when I was thinking about retirement, after twenty-nine years at West Virginia State [College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], I said now, I would love to have a house on the Vineyard so that I can come in January if I want or April or October, you know, not necessarily just for the summer.  So on one of the breaks at college, I had been looking for property that summer that I was--before retirement.  And I saw several things of interests but nothing that I felt that I wanted to commit to at that point.  But there was one house--and this might be of interest, on Ocean Park.  And the house at the very opposite end of the house that [HistoryMaker] Stanley Nelson did his documentary, 'A Place of Our Own,' about, I had told the realtor to let me think about that one.  And he said, well, let me hear from you by Wednesday when you get back to West Virginia.  So I got home on Sunday night, and I think on Monday, I got a telephone call from Stanley Nelson's father, Dr. [Stanley] Nelson [Sr.], and he said, "Is this Della Taylor [HistoryMaker Della Hardman]?"  I said, yes, it is.  He said, well, I understand you're interested in that property on Ocean Park.  He said, I need that property.  He said, I need it to live and you want it for some esoteric purpose, like putting an art museum on there.  He said, I need it to live in.  And we bickered back and forth about that property (laughter) until I finally said, "Dr. Nelson, take the property because we're talking about more money now than is, than is being asked for."  So I bowed out of that, and I never met Dr. Nelson until about five years ago (laughter).  And neither one of us got the house, incidentally.  And I'm glad--he did me a favor because it would not have met my needs.  It was much too small and the town probably would not have let me build another story on the house so that I could use the downstairs for an art gallery.  So that was my first incident with property on the island.  And so when I came up that fall, I found the house that I did move into on December 23rd, 1985, I bought that house.  I flew to the Vineyard, and flew back to West Virginia.  And I moved, I retired in May of '86 [1986].  And so, I came that summer.  Had no intention of living here year around, but after driving back to the hills of West Virginia, three times, by myself, I said, this does not make any sense at all.  What am I doing?  So I decided to come and live year around, and I have no regrets.  I've been here since then.  So that's that story.
Story_ID: 221126
Speaker 1: Now, what is the charm of Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts]?  I mean, so--I mean it seems, everybody who lives here seem to love it so much.  Oh, well, why?  Well, why is it so special?
Speaker 2: Well, I always--I love the mountains.  I love the hills of West Virginia, but having been exposed to the ocean as a youngster, I missed the ocean.  The Kunar River in the Kunar Valley [Afghanistan and Pakistan] is beautiful, but it's not the ocean.  I just enjoy the ocean.  And I used to look forward to coming so I could swim in the ocean, so I could enjoy the fresh seafood, and they tell us that the seafood we got in West Virginia was fresh, but we knew it was flown in.  You know, it had to be.  But, and then there's a kind of serenity, for me, of peace and serenity that I have never experienced, that I thoroughly enjoy.  So I--everybody in West Virginia said, "What on earth do you do?"  Well, you're free to do what you want to do.  And there're so many things for you to do, you know.  And with me, I've always had a plan.  Now, I feel sorry for anyone who retires and who does not have a plan for retirement.  Then you might ask the question, what do you do?  But I've got a thousand things to do.  I'll never be--the only thing that will stop me will be a physical hindrance that will prevent me from doing the many, many things that I have on a list of things to do for my life.  So I just find that the island provides the setting where that can be done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Does that work?
Speaker 1: Yes, it does--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --it does work.  And what about the community here on Martha's Vineyard?  Is there something special about this community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think so because when you chose the things that you're, you want to be involved in, you find people who have similar interests, similar tastes, and similar objectives and goals.  So you have a chance to become a part of that community.  And I think it's very rewarding.  I enjoy the committees that I've been privileged to work on.  I've enjoyed my church experience.  I was born and grew up in the Baptist church, and I frequently say, when I die, I'll be Baptist dead.  But I enjoy the experience that I've had there.  And, whatever your interests in art, there're so many galleries, there're so many people who are involved.  There're so many opportunities to be involved and to experience new and exciting things.  That certainly adds to it for me.  Yes, it's a simulating place, I think, but, of course, you have to bring your own motivation into the community.
Story_ID: 221127
Speaker 1: Now, you are a reporter.  You write a weekly column, in--what's the name of the paper?
Speaker 2: The Vineyard Gazette.
Speaker 1: The Vineyard Gazette, and you cover Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts], which is part of--correct me if I'm wrong, but Oak Bluffs is a historic--I mean part of it is a historic black community basically--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, historically--
Speaker 1: --in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: --I think more blacks have been here.  But now blacks are everywhere, like everything else.  Yes, there's an interesting story about my becoming a part of the Gazette staff.  I had a major heart attack in 1998--was it '98 [1998]; can't even remember that, in '95 [1995].  And it as in '95 [1995], and I was going to take a writing course because I'm thinking about these memoirs and that biography and someone was offering a, a writing course that I thought would add a great deal to what I wanted to do.  So I took the writing course.  And while there, you had to read whatever you had written.  And someone was in the class who worked for the Gazette and she went back and told [Richard] Dick Reston that she thought she'd found someone who might want to replace Dorothy West.  Now, can you imagine that?  So Dorothy was not well, and had not written a column for some time.  She was a friend of mine.  And I knew her quite well.  So when I was approached, I said, well, there're two or three things I have to consider here.  The first thing I have to do is discuss this with my cardiologist because I've had a major heart attack.  And if there's anything I do not need it's stress.  So they said, well, talk to him, and, you know, think about it, and let us know.  So I talked to my cardiologist in Boston [Massachusetts] and we discussed it.  And he said, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], since it's only for, once a week, and if you'd like to do it, why don't you give it a try.  And if you find that you can do it without pressure, go ahead.  And if not, you know, don't.  You don't have to commit yourself."  So when I went in to talk to them about it, I had written a piece.  They printed the piece that I wrote.  And that's how I got the job.  And I--that was, let's see.  I talked to Dorothy about it, and she was very pleased.  I said, "Dorothy, I've never done anything like this."  I used to write the art reviews for my school paper, for maybe the state's paper, the state's largest newspaper, The Charleston Gazette and the Sunday Gazette Mail [Charleston Gazette-Mail].  I said, but I've never done anything like this.  She said, "Oh, Della, you can do it.  And you'll enjoy it."  Well, I'd had that radio experience [program, 'The Black Experience'] which was a little bit similar.  So at any rate, to make a long story short, I've done it now--I said, Dorothy did it for thirty years.  And I said, I'll do well if I can make it to thirty months.  And I've done it now since, since Dorothy died.  So I've enjoyed it, and I do the column every week.  And from time to time, there will be other stories that I do as well.  And this, two weeks ago, I had three things in the paper, including the column.  And if they print everything that went in yesterday, there'll be three this week.  So I enjoy it because I, as I say, I like to be busy, and I like to know what I'm doing when I wake up in the morning and I've got to work out a schedule now that's going to allow me to fit other things into my schedule, and especially, do I want to just take a certain day that I'm gonna do nothing but write on those projects that I'm working on for me.
Story_ID: 221128
Speaker 1: What are some of your favorite stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's difficult.  It's hard for me to have favorites.  I--
Speaker 1: Well, tell us a couple of good ones, I mean, or at least a good, one of the good stories?
Speaker 2: That's difficult, that's difficult.  I'm--
Speaker 1: Well, what are you writing about [for Vineyard Gazette] this week?  Let's put it this way.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, this week, I'm writing about [HistoryMaker] Bill Overton's book, 'The Media[: Shaping the Image of a People,' Bill Overton].  And I want you to see it if you haven't seen it before you leave.  And I've also--what else have I written about?  Oh, Kay Banks [ph.], who's a, is ninety-two years old, lives on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] in the summer.  And her family had a personal relationship with W.E.B. Du Bois, and she's having a book signing tomorrow--no, next week.
Speaker 1: What's her name again?  Kay--
Speaker 2: Kay Banks.  I'll give you a--
Speaker 1: Banks?
Speaker 2: --I'll give you a flyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: B-A-N-K-S.  And so she and [HistoryMaker] Robert [C.] Hayden have compiled those letters into a book, and she's having a book signing next week.  So I wrote about the Banks and the Du Bois' relationship.  And, and on and on.  So this--it's just reflecting some of the things that are happening on the island this summer.
Story_ID: 221129
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you remarried.
Speaker 2: I remarried.
Speaker 1: Did you remarry after you moved to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] or before?
Speaker 2: After (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you married someone you knew in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: I married Leon Hardman, who had grown up in Charleston, West Virginia.  We used to date in Charleston, West Virginia, and when World War II [WWII] came along, I can remember he left Charleston and that--you know, we both went our separate ways after that.  Now, how did that happen?  How did we reconnect?  That's really an interesting story.  I needed an escort for my fortieth class reunion at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  My husband [Francis Taylor] had, had died, and Leon's wife had died.  And I always say everyone I knew in Boston [Massachusetts] was either unavailable, undesirable or unsuitable.  So I couldn't think of anybody in Boston to ask.  And I said, Ah-hah, Leon lives in Hartford, Connecticut.  And he and his wife used to come to visit us when they would come to Charleston.  And my children knew both of them, and we were family friends.  So I said, "Ah-hah, I'll call Leon.  He's in Hartford, and he could probably drive to Boston without any effort."  And they were providing housing.  They were providing just a wonderful schedule of events and activities.  And it should be shared.  So I said, I'll get on the phone and call Leon Hardman.  So I called Leon.  I said, would you be--would you consider coming to, to Boston that weekend for my class reunion.  And his comment--I'll never forget, was, "[HistoryMaker] Della [Hardman], I don't know any of those people."  And my reply was, "After forty years, how many do you think I remember?"  So he, he agreed to come, and, and had a wonderful time.  He had never been to the Vineyard before.  And before going back to West Virginia, I said, "I'm going to, to the Vineyard.  I wanna take a look at something over there.  Would you like to go?"  He said, "Yes, I'll go."  He wasn't impressed at all.  I don't know if it was the ferry ride or what.
Story_ID: 221130
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the last episode, you showed your husband [Leon Hardman] the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], and he was not impressed, I mean your future husband--
Speaker 2: Not impressed--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) yeah, at that point.
Speaker 2: --not impressed.  So that was all right.  I'd gone to my [fortieth class] reunion [at Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].  That was the main thing.  Do you know, two years later, we got married, and I told him--when we were talking about marriage, I said, "Leon, I have never heard of anyone retiring in Hartford, Connecticut.  So if you're gonna marry me, you're gonna have to develop an interest in Martha's Vineyard."  So we laughed about that.  And we would go back to Hartford weekends because he had quite an active life there.  And I could understand that, you know.  So he, in the meanwhile, he was becoming interested in activities here.  And so our trips to Hartford became less and less which was a good sign for me because at the same time, I was learning to enjoy Hartford and making friends there.  So it worked out, it, it canceled itself out for both of us.  But, and finally he came to love the island as much as I do.  He enjoyed working at the senior center, and doing the things, you know, that you enjoy doing here.  He (laughter), I remember he always wanted to fish.  We never had much luck with that.  But, but he enjoyed being on the island.  And so it so happened that the governor of West Virginia, his wife had invited several of my West Virginia art students to come back to the state house with an exhibition of their work and for me to come back and to give a talk.  And they had invited [HistoryMaker Henry Louis] Skip Gates [Jr.] to come back because he had just published his book 'Colored People[: A Memoir].'  So the two of us were guests of the governor's wife that weekend.  By that time, Leon had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.  And we went--I'll never forget.  We went to Boston [Massachusetts] to see the doctor that day and had no idea that that's what it was.  And we were gonna have dinner.  It was his birthday.  We were gonna have dinner in Boston.  So when he was diagnosed with that and asked the doctor what that meant in terms of how long he had to live, the doctor said, "Six months."  So he said, "Well, let's go back home, and let's have dinner on the Vineyard."  So we did.  We came back to the Vineyard, and had dinner here, and he said, "I've had a wonderful life.  And he said, but I'd like to choose a place to go that neither of us have been to."  He loved to travel.  He had no children.  He and his wife had no children, but they traveled a lot.  And he took me on cruises that I had never been on before.  So we planned a trip to Bermuda.  I had never been to Bermuda and he had never been to Bermuda.  And we took the last cruise out of Boston Harbor that year.  And it was rough.  It was rough, but by that time, he was in a wheelchair.  And we were able to go and to enjoy that trip.  Then when the governor of West Virginia had this event, we went to that in, in March of that year.  I think it was in March, and the governor had us, had Dr. Gates and his family and Leon and me at their, at the mansion for dinner.  And Leon will never forget the fact that the governor wheeled him out of the governor's mansion into his car in his, with his wheelchair.  And that was on a Friday night, and Sunday night, we went back to Hartford and Leon collapsed at the airport and died ten days later.  So that was, that was his life.  But we had seven and a half really incredible years.  I was not thinking about remarriage.  I had all these things that I had to do.  My children were all feathered and flown, but my children encouraged me.  They knew Leon, and they, you know, they liked him very much.  And they thought that I should.  So that's how that began and ended.
Story_ID: 221131
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your children?
Speaker 2: I have three, three wonderful children, [HistoryMaker] Andrea [L. Taylor], Buddy [Francis Taylor, Jr.] and Faith [Taylor Kinnard].  Andrea is the older daughter.  Buddy is three years younger and Faith is two years younger than Buddy.  Buddy has never forgiven me for putting him in between two girls.  The older one is too bossy and the younger one blamed everything on him, he says.  Andrea, both the girls finished Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  And I took them back from--they were born in Boston [Massachusetts].  I took them back to West Virginia, and they grew up in West Virginia.  But they went to West Virginia--Boston University to college.  Buddy had driven over to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] one summer when I was in a summer institute there.  And he fell in love with the campus at Hampton and wanted to go to school there.  So we let him go to Hampton.  And that was an interesting experience because he had a wonderful four-year experience.  He had spent his junior year in France.  He had had a job all the time, while he was there, had a wonderful experience.  But the one thing that disappoints me about that is the year that he was to graduate, several of the students decided to set fire to the Wigwam which is the oldest building on that campus.  And instead of the president dealing with the persons who were responsible for that, he ordered the campus closed.  Everybody had to leave, and I missed graduation.  My only son, I did not see him have a formal graduation from college.  The closest thing to that was going to [Fort] Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania to see him get his commission in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], which was hardly, you know, the thing that I wanted in terms of actual graduation.  But other than that, his Hampton experience was, was marvelous.  Andrea worked for ten years in the, and ended up as director of media, for the Ford Foundation.  When she left there, she worked with, with some projects in West Virginia.  And then she became president of the Benton Foundation which is Encyclopedia Britannica.  And now, they have merged with Educational Development Corporation [sic. Education Development Corporation] in Newton [Massachusetts], so she's a vice president there, still working with Benton.  Buddy worked in the corporate world for a number of years, and before Sammy Davis [Jr.] died, he worked as his PR [public relations] person.  And after his death, Buddy decided to get involved in a program that would prepare him to teach for the rest of his life.  So he's now teaching middle school in Englewood, California and feels that he's making a difference.  Faith, my younger daughter, is working as a financial officer in Atlanta [Georgia].  When I had my heart attack, the three of them decided somebody's got to be with mom, instead of asking mom who she would like to be with.  They decided, Faith came to live with me.  She gave up her life in Atlanta, and she and her two sons came to be with me.  And her older son [Taylor Solomon Kinard] is the one whose picture is on the mantle.  He's my proud Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], twenty-one years old in Iraq.  And her younger son is [Leon] Romero [Kinard].  Both of them went to the new elementary school here when it was opened, the year that they came.  Romero stayed for two years.  Faith stayed for two years, but Solomon left the year that he found that his father was suffering from cancer.  And his mother and father were divorced.  But they had a good relationship because of the boys.  And so he went back to Atlanta that year and to our surprise, his father died.  And that's when Solomon decided to go into the Marine Corps.  And one of the most meaningful experiences I've had is going to Parris Island [South Carolina] to see him become a proud Marine.  Andrea has three children.  Her older son is Wole Coaxom.  And he is, he was a vice president at Salomon Smith Barney for a time, and he's now a CFO at the Willis and Company.  She has a daughter, Kamara [Coaxom] who left just last week to go to the United Arab Emirates where she'll be teaching for two years.  And we're all excited about that.  And her younger son, Kofi Coaxom is finishing up his work at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And let's see, Buddy.  My son has two sons, Francis Taylor, III and Michael Anderson Taylor.  And so those are my seven grandchildren, six grandsons and one granddaughter.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Wait, I have one more.  Kofi, I'm sorry, Wole married Labor Day, 2000.  And so I have a daughter-in--granddaughter-in-law, and that's Kim. Kim Coaxom.  She's an attorney and, from Atlanta, and they're doing quite well.
Story_ID: 221132
Speaker 1: Okay, ma'am, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that--I feel that things are improving.  Maybe I'm just the eternal optimist, but I like being the eternal optimist.  I think that race relations are improving.  There's still evidence of, of a lot of things that we don't like.  But I begin to see us visible in places that we haven't been visible, especially in the media.  I see people seemingly caring a little bit more about individuals as individuals.  I see relationships, and you certainly see it on this Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] during the summer.  I see mixed relationships, children as a result of that.  I see evidence of the fact that we are beginning to care and to be a little bit more concerned about how we relate to, treat, how we affect one another.  So I hope it's going to continue.  I hope it's going to continue.  Respect, concern, care.  That's what I hope for.
Story_ID: 221133
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, and the things that you've done and, of course, you're still writing and everything now, but what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: You're really giving me some powerful things to think about (laughter).  I don't, I hadn't thought about, I hadn't thought about--I haven't had time to think about my legacy.  I've been busy trying to do things.  I just hope that I've tried to be respectful of others and I hope that that will come across where it matters to those whose lives I might have touched.  I, I--to be concerned, to care.  That's important to me, respect.  If we have that, if we can respect one another, I think our world would be a so much better place to be in at this time.  Hadn't thought about it in terms of legacy to me.  But, yes, if we care about each other, I think that that helps to solve a lot of problems on all levels.
Story_ID: 221134
Speaker 1: When you look back at the things that you have done, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you had to do it again?
Speaker 2: Hadn't thought about--you've given me a lot of things to think about now.  You're gonna have to come back, and I'll have answers for you.  I hadn't thought about that.  What would I do differently?  What would I do differently?  I'll have to, I'll have to--I can't think about that.  I don't know.  You know, I don't know where to begin on that one.  What would I do differently?  As I think in terms of my children, my family, I'm sure they would have lots of answers for me (laughter).  But I cannot--I don't know what I would do differently in my life.
Story_ID: 221135
Speaker 1: How did your father [Anderson Brown] and your aunt [Della Brown], you know, like your career as an artist?  Did they--
Speaker 2: Oh, they were very supportive.  I told you my dad, once he recovered from the shock that I wasn't going to pre-med, he brought this big, beautiful book that I have here, 'The World's Greatest Paintings' ['The World's Greatest Paintings: Selected Masterpieces of Famous Art Galleries,' T. Leman Hare] or something like that.  And Aunt Della was always supportive of everything I did.  They were very supportive.  When I had an opportunity to travel and the children maybe were not old enough or not able to go, they were there for me.  You know, they were supportive of everything I did.  And whatever I've done, could not have been done without a loving and caring aunt, father, husband, brother [Willard L. Brown] and the children.  They've all been supportive.  I've run into some things recently, and I can't believe how, how my children have been--Mother's Day, for example.  [HistoryMaker] Andrea [L. Taylor] said, "Mom, can you pick me up at the airport at 10:30?"  I said, "Sure, I'll pick you up on my way to church," 'cause her house, as I told you, is right behind mine.  So I went to the airport at 10:30 and just as we were driving out, who should come running out the door, but my son [Francis Taylor, Jr.] from California.  And I had, we hadn't planned that.  And there was Buddy, "Mom."  I said, "Don't do this.  I'll have a heart attack right here in the, in the, at the airport."  And he was only here for five hours.  He had to go right back to California that day because he and Andrea had worked that out on the spur of the moment.  And he brought me this little heart necklace which I cherish.  And I have wonderful photographs of that surprise visit.  But he had, he was still teaching Mother's Day.  He hadn't arranged to be off.  And he manages property as well, and he had to go back.  But to make that red-eye trip, you know, and be here for five, four or five hours, I appreciate that.  When I have medical problems, they're all collaborating, you know, what are we gonna do?  With travels, whatever.  They're there.  They're very supportive.  And I'm most appreciative of that.
Story_ID: 221136
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we haven't asked you that you want to talk about?
Speaker 2: What have you not asked me (laughter)?  What have you not asked me?  Well, the only thing I can say is that, another thing that means a great to me in my life now is the fact that I've been touch with so many of the former students that I've had.  It's amazing how I'll run into one of them or we'll have a chance encounter.  And, again, I won't name names because there're so many and I don't wanna leave any of them out.  But they've, they've made my retirement very happy.  And when they tell me things that they've done and how appreciative they are of whatever I might have said or done, that means a great deal.  For example, Doughtry Long is a poet.  Do you know Doc Long?  Do you know his work?  Nia Long's father.  He was a student.  Someone said he was going to be at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York] last spring.  And I said, oh, maybe I can go see Doughtry.  I hadn't seen or heard from him for years.  We've reconnected.  Lee Frank Brown [ph.] is one of my students who's exhibiting in SoHo in New York [New York] right now.  Theresa [Polley-]Shellcroft from California is exhibiting in New York.  I had a chance to see one of her quilts in New York Sunday--Palm Sunday weekend.  Adrienne Biesemeyer, Adrienne Belafonte Biesemeyer was a student who, who takes students to South Africa, and other persons, to South Africa.  She is in touch and so many others, so many others.  Jo-Anne Bates who is here on the island [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] as we speak, who's just had a major exhibition at the [Carol] Craven Gallery [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts], had a chance to be there for that.  It's just wonderful to see these young people and to know that they are doing what they wanted to do and doing it, you know, well.  It's very gratifying, very gratifying, very moving.
Story_ID: 221137
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, how would I like to be remembered?  To be remembered (laughter), first of all.  I wanna be remembered, and I, I just--I hadn't thought about that.  You're making this hard for me, Larry [Crowe].  But I guess I wanna be remembered as someone who cared, someone who cared.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's for every life I might have touched, children, grandchildren, students, colleagues, friends, acquaintances, I wanna be, somebody that cared.  I'd like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, ma'am, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: My pleasure, my pleasure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 221138
Speaker 1: This is Francis Coolidge Taylor, Sr.  And he was quite an accomplished musician, as a violinist as a child and as a pianist, as an adult.  He has his master's [degree] in music from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], and here he was playing in, in Boston [Massachusetts], Francis Coolidge Taylor.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my mother, Captolia Monette Casey Brown.  And she's holding little Della Louise Brown [HistoryMaker Della Hardman].  Tragically, my mother was to die when I was twenty months old.  She died at childbirth, but that's Captolia.  She was born and lived in Gallipolis, Ohio.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my cousin, Dorothy, sitting behind the wheel, Dorothy Wood Gatherwright who died in 2003 at the age of ninety-two, I think she was.  I'm the little girl with my Aunt Della [Brown] who reared me after the death of my mother.  And this was taken at, up at Booker T. Washington's home in Cedar Grove--Malden, Malden, West Virginia.  That's my dad's car.  Dad's sitting in there, but you can't see him too well.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, started recording.
Speaker 1: This one shows my father, Anderson Hunt Brown, my brother, Willard Louis Brown, and there I am in the middle, holding an orange, and not too happy that day, it seems.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my father, Anderson Hunt Brown.  This one was in his office in Charleston [West Virginia] until the time of his death.  He was a realtor, a real estate broker.  He was a member of the city council in Charleston and quite a, quite a figure in our hometown.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Leon Hardman and me.  We're at 505 Egan Street where we lived when I was in college in Charleston.  He was in the service and had come back for a leave for a time.  I used that on an announcement when we were married.  I happened to find that picture from all those years ago.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Leon.  We were, as I mentioned in the dialogue, we--he traveled a lot, and I enjoyed that a lot.  We were in Spain at a timeshare that we purchased there shortly after we were married, and that's what this is, Leon Herman Hardman and Della in, in Spain.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This picture shows my eightieth birthday, May 20, 2002.  This was on the deck of my home on Bettencourt Place in Oak Bluffs [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: This was taken the same year.  [HistoryMaker] Andrea [L. Taylor], Buddy [Francis Taylor, Jr.] and Faith [Taylor Kinnard], my three children.  This was taken at a hotel in Atlanta [Georgia].  The occasion was for the wedding of my grandson, Wole [Coaxum] and his bride, Kim, Kimberly.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, I'm rolling if you can tell us about (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm a spinner.  I'm learning to spin, but I'm a weaver, and I had gone up to, to these friends' homes, and they had the little goats and little animals up there.  And someone took my picture when I was up there that day, and I decided that that would make a great Christmas card.  So I used it.  It's really a goat.  Everybody thinks it's a little lamb.  But it's really a baby goat, and that was Christmas 2003.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of A.J. Calloway.  A.J. is the host of 106 and Park on BET [Black Entertainment Television] every evening from 6:00 to 7:30.  He came to the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] and happened to be here during my birthday and gave me a wonderful birthday party at Lola's [Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts] that, during the time that he was here.  His father grew up in Charleston, West Virginia with my daughter, Andrea.  And his father came for the occasion as well.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: Palm Sunday, I was in New York [New York].  I had a chance to go to Ebenezer--Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York].  They were honoring Adam [Clayton] Powell [Jr.], [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.  One of the persons who came was Nina Simone's daughter, and that's who is with me on this picture.  She had come, and there was quite a delegation of, of Ghanaians there with her that day.  She has established a foundation in honor of her mother in Ghana, and they were there on that occasion, Nina Simone's daughter.
Speaker 2: When we were chatting, I mentioned that my son had surprised me on my eighty-second birthday this year.  He flew into the Vineyard and was only able to be here for five hours, and that's the three us.  What a surprise that was.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: The same weekend that I was in New York, I had an opportunity that Palm Sunday weekend to go to the concert of Heather Hill.  Heather Hill is the daughter of Winston Hill, and the niece of [HistoryMaker] Brenda Cole.  She was giving her graduate concert recital and I was privileged to be there to hear her.
Speaker 1: Just before Christmas, the New York chapter of [The] Links [Incorporated] had a program of--and you were supposed to go dressed in the '20s [1920s].  This is a picture that shows my grandson, Wole [Coaxum], his wife, Kim, a friend and my daughter, Andrea, in the red hat.  That was in New York, down in the Bowery.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: One of the persons that I enjoy so much during the summers here on the Vineyard is [HistoryMaker] Isabelle Powell, the first wife of Adam Clayton Powell.  She lives in the Highlands, and I go to see her every day.  I take her her mail and check on her.  She's a delight, ninety-six years old.  I tell her all the time, when I grow up, I want to be just like Belle.
