Story_ID: 658682
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, would you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Millicent Hunter: M-I-L-L-I-C-E-N-T, H-U-N-T-E-R [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Millicent Hunter].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nine, three, fifty [September 3, 1950], Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Doctor, and bishop, and reverend and missus.
Speaker 1: And what is your, I guess, religious affiliation?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and, you can name your church (laughter).
Speaker 2: The Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June the 11th, 2014 [sic. June 12, 2014].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the Baptist Worship Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 658683
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask that only require a short answer.  They're sort of a warm up.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Maybe summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Thailand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No.  Not one, no.
Story_ID: 658684
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side; and then we'll try to put them together.  But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Doris Barbara Thomas Hall [Doris Thomas Hall]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --H-A-L-L.  The entire name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: D-O-R-I-S, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, T-H-O-M-A-S, H-A-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ten--no, 8/10/32 [August 10, 1932].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: Louisburg, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's L-E-W-I-S?
Speaker 2: L-O-U--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I-S--
Speaker 1: Glad I asked (laughter).
Speaker 2: --B-U-R-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.  North Carolina, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace her side of the family?  And what were they doing?
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) I am somewhat aware that the family goes back to Europe, Ireland, and the Cameroon--only because I did somewhat of a minor research of family ancestry a few years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had DNA test, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Europe, Ireland, and the Cameroons.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family about how these divergent people came together and?
Speaker 2: We have a photograph of my great-grandmother's father, who was an Irishman.  I can picture him now with a very long white beard.  Of course, I never met him.  His name was Augustus [ph.], and he was Caucasian; and that was probably part of, a lot of what was going on at that time.  I was really fortunate in that I did have my great-grandmother and--until she passed away I was able to ask her a few questions about family history, so she filled in a little information.  She was almost 100 years old, so I knew a little bit about that background, that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us some of the stories from that side.
Speaker 2: Not anything too specific.  Just that he was Irish and that there were a number of persons in the area where my great-grandmother grew up who had Caucasian relatives; and there was a great deal of intermarriage at that time, which I found quite extraordinary for the farming area of North Carolina at that time.  And I always regretted that, if she had lived for me to be a teenager or in my early twenties, I would have been more aware of the importance of asking about family history, and probably recording it and writing it down.
Speaker 1: So does the, do you have any history that goes back, any, any memories of slavery on your side of the family or?
Speaker 2: I do remember my grandmother--great-grandmother referring to the fact that there were people in slavery in her family that she was well aware of, but she didn't talk about it very much but was very much aware of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I would ta- I take it that your grandmother was African--I mean, or your great--great-grandmother was an African, and (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Great-grandmother, oh, yes.  Yes.  With a grandfather [sic.] who was Irish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were living as man and wife?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: North Carolina, okay.  So, do you know on your grandmother--on your mother's side what your, were they farmers or what, back in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories about life in those days that could come down to us?
Speaker 2: No, I can't really recall any on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not very many.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the Irish, I guess, influence as a husband would have to disappear at a certain point in time because they didn't allow, you know, they didn't have like, there wasn't a legal (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  Absolutely.  And I didn't, I really didn't know enough to inquire about, was there a legal marriage or was there just a living situation.  I didn't know, at my young age, to really delve into that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I just assumed because there were a lot of children in the family, so.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Story_ID: 658685
Speaker 1: So, were your grandparents farmers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: On your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, was your mother [Doris Thomas Hall] raised in Louisburg [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --basically?  Okay.  And, she was she able to finish school, and?
Speaker 2: Not high school.  She married at a young age and moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and completed high school here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she talk about why she moved to Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Her husband, her young husband relocated for work.  There was very little work in North Carolina unless you were involved in farming; and I always remember my father [Judge Hall, Sr.] saying, "I never, ever want to do another farm."  I didn't understand what do another farm meant, but evidently that meant to be, you know, involved in cultivating season, harvest, that kind of thing.  He really didn't like that kind of work because when he was in the [U.S.] military, he was a chef, so he wanted a job working in a restaurant or a hotel; and, of course, you couldn't do that in the South.  So, he relocated to Philadelphia, and worked at one of the largest hotels here [Bellevue-Stratford Hotel; The Bellevue Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I can't think of it right now, one of the really famous hotels here, for a period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The only old one I could think of is the Ben Franklin [Benjamin Franklin Hotel; The Franklin Residences, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but I, it may not, it wasn't that, was it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's the, the biggest one here, but the name escapes me now.
Story_ID: 658686
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your grandfather was a chef at a big hotel [Bellevue-Stratford Hotel; The Bellevue Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: My, my father [Judge Hall, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Oh, your father?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father.  Um-hm.  Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Well I was, I haven't gotten to him yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about your mother's--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --father.
Speaker 2: My mother's father [Eddie Thomas]--
Speaker 1: He stayed in--?
Speaker 2: --yes.  He was a chef as well.  A chef in the sense that he worked at a very small restaurant; and during those times it is my understanding that families were often separated where a husband would live in another city or another state because there was work there, and the family would stay in the South.  So, I remember being aware that my grandfather lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because he had work here and my grandmother [Inez Thomas] remained in the small town in North Carolina with, with the family until she finally relocated here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But well, back to your mother [Doris Thomas Hall], when your mother came here, now she was married, right, to your father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did she, did your mother have any stories about Louiston [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Louisburg [North Carolina]?
Speaker 1: Louisburg, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That there was a good side of town and there was a bad side of town. I found that very interesting.  She called it--she told me one time that the bad area of town was called black town, and that there were lots of clubs and speakeasies and the good quote unquote people were not allowed to go to that area; and it was a very small town where everyone in Louisburg was somehow connected, either by--everyone was somebody's cousin or everybody knew everyone because it was very small and there were maybe two or three churches in the entire town and everyone belonged to one of those three churches and everyone was very interconnected.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're talking about the black community or the whole community?
Speaker 2: Yes, the black community.
Speaker 1: Black community, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So mother moves to Philadelphia and she finishes high school here; and now where does she go, do you know?
Speaker 2: I think Lincoln Prep [Lincoln College Preparatory School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], perhaps.  I think I remember that name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what did your mother do for a living, or did she work outside the home at all?
Speaker 2: She worked inside the home for the most part.  There were five of us.  I'm number two among my brothers and sisters.  So, for the most part she was an at home mother and very involved in our schooling, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then she did jobs in stores, cashier type jobs; and in her forties, she went back to school and got a bachelor's degree and a master's degree, which I thought was tremendous.  That was always a dream of hers, and it was--I was just really happy for her that she accomplished that educational dream.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she use her degree for a profession or some- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She became a high school counselor.
Story_ID: 658687
Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your mother's--I mean your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Judge Hall [Judge Hall, Sr.], middle name David [ph.].  He changed his name to David.
Speaker 1: So he added David or changed it?
Speaker 2: He changed it to David.  He didn't like his middle name.
Speaker 1: What was the--well--
Speaker 2: B-U-S-T-E-E was his middle name; and he wouldn't even let us say that name, and he changed it, (laughter) he told me, because he knew when he passed away he didn't want that name on his funeral program, which I honored that, you know.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind his name, well the Judge and the unwanted middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The unwanted middle name, I don't know where that came from, but when my, his mother [Lona Hall] gave birth to him she didn't know what to name him and it was sort of a, what's the right word, a custom in that area for people to name their sons Colonel and Judge and Major and General, strange things like that.  And there was a, I think a physician--my grandmother, of course, gave birth to my father in her home as all the women in the community did, and the physician said, "Why don't you name him Judge?"  And she says, "Well, that's as good a thing as any."  And that was his name and he was the youngest and the name stuck with him, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I thought that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there is a tradition.  I remember there was a fellow named Lawyer Tillman that played wide receiver for the Browns [Cleveland Browns].
Speaker 2: Lawyer?  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a General Larry [Larry Platt] from Atlanta [Georgia], I can't think of his last name, but he's the one that sang the song 'Pants on the Ground' (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, uh-huh (laughter).
Speaker 1: I think it was General Larry somebody, but yeah, this is a--yeah, a tradition in the South.
Story_ID: 658688
Speaker 1: Any rate, so what is your father's date of birth?
Speaker 2: Let's see, July the 4th, 1926.
Speaker 1: Now did he take special--special note of being born on the 4th of July at all?
Speaker 2: He always said the whole nation celebrates his birth, so we, that was always something very funny in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, where was your father [Judge Hall, Sr.] born?
Speaker 2: In the county, Franklin County [North Carolina], that's near the town of Louisburg [North Carolina], (clears throat) in the home.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, once again like what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Cherokee.  Cherokee Indians [Native American].  There was a very, very large American Indian community in North Carolina; and there was a lot of, I won't call it intermarrying, but people having children with the Indians of the area, and when I go to my family reunion on my father's side, the Indian influence is extraordinary and I can always tell who my relatives are because everyone has prematurely white hair and of all of my--of my brothers [Ronald E. Hall and Judge Hall, Jr.] and sisters [Iva Hall Fitch and Barbara Hall Harvin], I got that mark more than anyone: the early graying of the hair.  And all of the, my relatives on my father's side have extraordinary white hair in their twenties and thirties, and that was from the Cherokee side; and I, the photographs of my father's grandmother and great-grandmother, they all are women with their hair parted with long braids with feathers and beads around the braids, and it's fascinating to see them because--and with very strange names.   And the Indian influence even in the kind of food that we used to eat when we lived in North Carolina--when I moved to the North some of the things that we did because of the Indian influence that I took for granted, people found to be very strange here; and I just find that very interesting.  There was very much of a comingling of the Indian community with a lot of African Americans in North Carolina, which makes for an extraordinary kind of community.
Speaker 1: So what was the, what were the strange eating practices that?
Speaker 2: Frying corn and making meal out of corn, and instead of cornbread looking like cake, which I never experienced 'til moving to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I always thought cornbread was a fried meal kind of a concoction; and the different ways of serving vegetables and certain things people never heard of, what is succotash, and I'm thinking, you don't know what that is?  But coming here people found some of those things unusual.  And my grandmother [Lona Hall] pickled everything--everything that grew and moved some kind of way, she found a way to pickle it; and there was a separate house in back of her house that contained all of the food that was for the winter.  She pickled.  They grew most of everything on the farm and every- nothing got thrown away.  If you eat watermelon in the summer, you save the rind and you make pickles and you eat that for the winter and, you know, very interesting things; and they learned a lot of interesting things from the Indian community of how to preserve food, how to prepare food, and, you know, do so many kinds of things that don't require refrigeration.  I found that fascinating, fascinating.
Story_ID: 658689
Speaker 1: Now what about the African side of the family?
Speaker 2: You know, I am aware that there was a great deal of prejudice even in the black community.  The (clears throat) African Americans who had a very extensive Indian [Native American] background saw themselves as quite superior to the African Americans in the community where you did not see the influence of the straight Indian long hair or the lighter skin; and my mother [Doris Thomas Hall] was a dark-skinned African American and my father [Judge Hall, Sr.] was a very fair-skinned, straight haired Indian looking African American; and in the community I guess your--she experienced a lot of, a lot of ostracism because of that from my father's side of the family because she was a dark-skinned African American woman.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: We thought they had passed and now they, we seem to (unclear) seem to be living it.
Speaker 2: Coming back to it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, any rate, so this is a, was this a strain on their relationship, having a--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I remember my mother being determined not to remain in the South and moved to the North; you know, they were back and forth in Louisburg [North Carolina], back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and my mother finally decided I'm gonna stay in Philadelphia because she was not, she did not like the country life.  She was, you know, she didn't like the farm type community.  She was so very much interested in education; and being an only child, in an unusual way, she had goals and dreams, but back then women didn't have many choices.  So, but she held on to those dreams and when she was able to, got an education, which was a wonderful thing; and really instilled that in me as well.
Story_ID: 658690
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did--did your father [Judge Hall, Sr.] have a chance to go to school, too?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I remember--I was very curious about his education and his schooling and life as a child, but he would never talk about it.  But then I remember overhearing a conversation that there came a time when African American fathers demanded that their sons work the farms with them because that was the way--you know, women had as many children as they could because that meant workers for the family; and I remember my father saying that his father [Ernest Hall] said, "I need these boys to work this farm," so I found out that he went as far as eighth grade and was forced with his other brothers to drop out of school.  And then there came a time when all young African American men were drafted to fight in the war, so he was immediately shipped off to Korea and lived on a ship; and that was the, those were the limited choices that African American young men had and he was caught up in that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was he in the [U.S.] Navy or the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Navy.
Speaker 1: Navy, okay.  Yeah 'cause all of the Navy people that I knew from that area, I'd say that the highest you could aspire was just to be a chef.
Speaker 2: And that's exactly what he did.  He was a chef, yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So they were still trying to reform the white Navy culture, you know, at the time your dad was in the Korean War.  So, he was one of the--yeah, he came along right after the World War II [WWII] generation.  So he was a young man in the Korean War just as they were integrating the Army--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, well the [U.S.] Armed Forces, those days.  Did he have any stories about that?
Speaker 2: He always talked about (clears throat) because he was so young in the [U.S.] military that--and he was such a country boy that being in a foreign country there were so many dangerous situations where he could have gotten killed and he knows that--he knew that it was only the grace of God that he survived and made it back home because so many young men did not; and he talked about how when he came back home to the South, it was just as bad or worse for African American people despite the fact that they fought in the war.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm wondering, now did he join the Navy as a teen?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He had to have been a teena- well, I would think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because if he went as a teen, there's a chance that he would have served his time without being in the integrated Army because--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: --he would have been twenty--let's see (unclear) he was born in '26 [1926], that meant he'd have been twenty in '46 [1946]; and the Army didn't integrate until he was, he was twenty-two--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I guess, in '48 [1948] when they finally started integrating--and that didn't happen easily either (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah (unclear).  Right.  Of course it was--
Speaker 1: That was--it was a struggle that lasted a few years to get that (unclear), right, so.
Speaker 2: It was in writing but not in reality.
Speaker 1: So we could guess that he's pro- you know, if he was in as a teen, then chances are he was still in the segregated Army before Truman [President Harry S. Truman] integrated the Armed Forces in '48 [1948], so--yeah, and that contradiction of coming back and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) seeing the same thing is--
Story_ID: 658691
Speaker 1: So, he was anxious to get to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] too?
Speaker 2: For the sake of finding work, yeah, because the choices were so limited for African American men in the community, especially if you didn't have a lot of skills; and the skills that you did have, you were limited in the kinds of jobs that were available.  So, he was--my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] were part of that flight from the South to the North when so many of the members of our family, they went to one of three places: Washington [D.C.], Virginia, or Philadelphia; and we ended up in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So he ended up as a cook in a big hotel.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) major hotel.
Speaker 2: Bellevue-Stratford [Bellevue-Stratford Hotel; The Bellevue Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--that's name of it.
Speaker 1: Oh, Bellevue-Stratford, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And when I say a chef, I probably--I'm sure I don't mean the sous chef; I mean the person who is just maybe, you know, making the fries, chef is (air quotes) just a general term.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of work in a kitchen, you know, peeling and cutting and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Sure, that kind of thing, probably what he did in the [U.S.] Navy--yeah.
Speaker 1: The Navy is not known for its cuisine, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he probably--but that's still probably a decent job, you know, those days especially.  So, did he stay there his whole career, is that?
Speaker 2: No, he received some kind of training to become an arborist--an arborist in the sense that he worked for the Fairmount Park Commission; and I remember he always talked about how much he loved the outdoors and because he was a farm boy quote unquote when he was younger, he loved doing things outdoors.  So he worked for his entire career, employment career and retired from the Fairmount Park Commission; and always kept us filled with facts about parks around the world.  He knew everything about Fairmount Park [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--everything: the trees, the plants, the kinds of grass they grow, how y- low you cut it, how you trim trees, those kinds of things, so he was involved in that.  And I think he really--for a person with a lack of education and degree, he became very high up in the commission, a supervisor, that kind of thing.  He went as high as he was able to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, as a person who visits, you know, Philadelphia, you know, I'm impressed at the size of the trees. Really, we were talking about that in the car--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --because we're both from the Midwest, but you know, I know this is Pennsylvania, woods are named after William Penn and all that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Penn's Woods.
Speaker 1: --Penn's Woods.  But the trees are magnificent around here.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: There's--I mean don't know why, but he was one of the people hired to take care of the trees for the park.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think that's one of the things that make, because I've travelled so much around the world and probably in just about every city in the United States, I do appreciate the beauty of Pennsylvania and the greenery is just absolute- and William Penn did an extraordinary thing in that Fairmount Park is the only municipal park in the world--that's what my father used to tell us, now maybe there's another one somewhere but in the world; it's the only part that really just completely weaves its way through the city, which makes this old city very picturesque and very, very beautiful with the river [Schuylkill River] and the water.  I think Philadelphia is extraordinary. A beautiful place.
Story_ID: 658692
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, their opinions, what they look like, what they walk like, what they talk like--who do you think that you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, my mother [Doris Thomas Hall], absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, what d- why?
Speaker 2: I seem to have either a real or a created memory, because I don't know if this really happens, happened, but I so very deeply feel that there was a time when she stood over my crib as a baby, when I was a baby, saying that I would be a very educated woman.  My mother always h- so highly valued education, and that is so supreme in my life I know that I got that from her.  Her dream for herself was to be an educated person.  She did not have that choice or that opportunity, so she instilled that in me; and I always had a love for education, always loved school.  I'm a career student--I never stopped school and still have not done so, but I think that she felt that education was the key to a lot of success in life, which I agree with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, do you take after your father [Judge Hall, Sr.] at all, in any way?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Great sense of humor, strong, courageous, brave, focused, and very Christ centered--both of them were, very much so.
Story_ID: 658693
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, can you name your siblings for us--
Speaker 2: Ronald--
Speaker 1: --from the oldest--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to the youngest; and just tell us a little bit about what they're doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Ronald is a professor at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], and a very prolific writer.  He's written some wonderful books.  He is the expert on race relations in the United States and around the world.  He's done a lot of research in the Philippines; and he's--
Speaker 1: So, this is Ronald Hall [Ronald E. Hall]?
Speaker 2: Ronald, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's been on TV a lot doing interviews.  He is a wonderful sociology professor at Michigan State; and he's, we are thirteen months apart.  So he's the big education guy as well.  I'm number two.  I have a sister, Iva, I-V-A [Iva Hall Fitch].  She is a real estate person and business, very much involved in business.  (Clears throat) She is also an associate minister here at our church [Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] as well; and she is the head of our media department and the head of our finance arm of this, of our church ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have another brother, Judge, Jr. [Judge Hall, Jr.], he is an attorney here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]; and a, our youngest sister Barbara [Barbara Hall Harvin] has a yoga studio, massage and that kind of thing--very earthy and artsy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, it's just, so you and your--one, two--four--
Speaker 2: Five of us.
Speaker 1: --just five of you altogether--
Speaker 2: Including me, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 658694
Speaker 1: So, where did you grow up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: West Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two blocks from Overbrook High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], (clears throat) which, at that time, was the, a very stable blue collar community where African Americans were doing, not as well as people who lived in Yeadon [Pennsylvania] or the suburban areas, but very stable two parent household, working families.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did your community have a name, they just call- basically West Philly, or?
Speaker 2: Just West Philly.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what are the demographics of Philly?  Is there, are there certain sides of town that black people are known to live on or?
Speaker 2: West Philadel- now or back then?
Speaker 1: Then, then, that--
Speaker 2: Back then: North Philly [North Philadelphia], West Philly, and Southwest Philadelphia--not South Philadelphia.  That's--South Philadelphia was very heavily Italian and Irish; and Philadelphia is a very, is such a melting pot.  There are Puerto Rican neighborhoods, African American neighborhoods, you see a little less of that now, but back then you lived in your neighborhood.  There was a lot of redlining and you, African Americans were confined to certain areas; and it was not spoken about but everyone was aware that that is the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the white people in Philadelphia basically lived in West Philly, and?
Speaker 2: No, they lived in South Philly.
Speaker 1: South Philly.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 658695
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: Is that the memory of your mother [Doris Thomas Hall] speaking to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  That's, that's a very early childhood memory.  Christmas and holidays and Easter, they were always--chur- growing up, I was allowed to do two things: go to church [Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and go to school.  Nothing else.  My parents, I always--my perception of my parents was that they were terrified people from the South, who were not city slickers, and were afraid of everything.  Everything.  I think they thought--I remember my father [Judge Hall, Sr.] telling me that as a teenager he wanted to see the world; and moved with one of his sisters to New York [New York], and was sitting on a step one evening and a bullet came across his face.  There was some kind of violence in the neighborhood.  He moved back to the country the next day and stayed in North Carolina, so his perception of the city was that it was a very dangerous place.  So, we were never permitted to do anything if it didn't involve going to church or some activity at school.  We--we didn't go across the street to jump rope.  We were not permitted to do anything.
Speaker 1: So you were restricted to the yard of your home?
Speaker 2: In front of the house, yeah.  You didn't have yards but yeah, you had a little--yeah, we played in the little probably ten by ten foot backyard, fenced in, and in the front on the sidewalk; but we couldn't go up the street, down the street, across the street.  We were very, very much kept close at home.  So, I was very involved in the church because that was the only thing I could, I was permitted to do, but I loved it.  I absolutely loved it.
Speaker 1: So did you live in a row house?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That means you don't have a gangway between the houses.
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.
Speaker 1: There are houses that are owned, but they are linked.  They're all linked together--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  Yeah.  Okay.  Now, this is the East Coast phenomenon that people in other parts don't know anything about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, going to college [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], I remember so many of my friends were fascinated that you live in a house where you can't around the house.  I said, "What do you mean, you can't walk around the house?"  "Well, they're attached."  "Well, what else is there?"  You know, that's all we knew.  I didn't even know about a twin house.  You know, it's just a row--that's what you live in.  You live in a row house.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  This is odd to other people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but not the people from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Yeah, somebody was telling me that the gang dynamics are such that if you, you know, you're in trouble you can't cut through--
Speaker 2: Through, right.
Speaker 1: --so you really have to know where you are at all times in order to get away--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause you can't--or know somebody who lives some place--
Speaker 2: To run in someone else's house--that's what you do.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, any rate, well, tell us about the neighborhood you grew up; and, was it the same neighborhood or did you move around a lot, or?
Speaker 2: Two neighborhoods.  The first one, a row house neighborhood; and my parents, now that I look back, they did well because we lived in what a lot of people lived in, a three story house and they rented out the third floor, always to some young couple having, you know, a child and they were kind of starting out their family; and that was something for them to be business minded to do that.  And, it was always a community where when we moved there the first year, it was very much a mixed neighborhood and within two years the neighborhood changed like overnight, because there was such a custom of white flight then and in my elementary years [at Edward Heston Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], we moved up to Overbrook [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a major, major thing.  You had to have it going on if you moved up to Overbrook in those areas, because they were the quote unquote well to do African Americans that moved there, which we were not but my parents were very forward looking; so, they accomplished that, which was a really great thing.
Story_ID: 658696
Speaker 1: You started school, I guess, in the first neighborhood, which would have been (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, what street was that that you lived on?
Speaker 2: 56th Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --1693 North 56th Street; and I went to Heston Elementary.
Speaker 1: Heston, like in Charlton Heston?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Heston Elementary School [Edward Heston Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; and well, did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved it, um-hm.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because it was one of the only two things I could do, so I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] or anything else that?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  Oh, my goodness, no.  Oh, no.  I thought, I used to think the greatest thing was to be able to go to summer camp, but my brothers [Ronald E. Hall and Judge Hall, Jr.] were permitted to go but my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] didn't think it was proper for a girl (clears throat) to be away at a camp, because things could happen; and looking back I've thought many times that if they had just told me what they were so afraid of I would have not resented it so much.  Now I understand, but, you know, I didn't at that time.  It just seemed like they were afraid of everything in the world.  Everything was a bump in the night.  Everything.  I think that was, that came from living in the country where you go to bed at eight o'clock because there are no lights on the street so no one ever did anything, so that's how we lived in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, Heston Elementary School, now did you have a favorite teacher there?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Turner [ph.] and Mr. Primio [ph.].  There were a lot of Italian teachers as I remember.  But Mrs. Smith [ph.] and Mrs. Turner, fifth grade and sixth grade; and Mrs. Douglas [ph.], my kindergarten teacher.  It is fascinating that we remember teachers that far back, but they were wonderful, wonderful people.
Speaker 1: And what were you interested in school; what kind of little girl were you?
Speaker 2: Everything, everything--just knowledge and learning and drama and singing.  I was very shy, but very interested in a lot of things.  I usually always ran for student government, some area of leadership.  I was always involved in so many things that my parents allowed me to be involved in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, if an activity required you to stay after school or--
Speaker 2: Some of them did.
Speaker 1: --was that okay?
Speaker 2: Some of them.  Not many.  Yeah.  That was--they limited that because that was scary to them.  You had to come home where you could be seen in the yard for the rest of the day, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But, but you were involved in some activities and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 658697
Speaker 1: Now at church, now what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: The Vine Memorial Baptist Church [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Vine Memorial Baptist; and so did both of your parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] attend?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And were officers, leaders in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what roles did you take on in the church?  Were you in the youth choir or you-?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  From the first time I was permitted to join something I was seven [years old], and I joined the children's choir, which was a major thing.  I thought that was just the end of the world.  It was the most wonderful thing.  And there was, there was nothing in the church that I was not involved in or part of at some point.  In my whole history, I was there my whole life, I was involved in everything; and president or vice president of everything that involved youth and young people, so I really was very well connected in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Connected into.
Speaker 1: Now was your church a member of the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go to those meetings (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Never went to a convention.  Only went to one in my life and that was about six or seven years ago, but my pastor [Leonard G. Carr] was the founder of our church; and he was very, very high up in the National Baptist Convention, like the national treasurer, and everyone in the nation knew him.
Speaker 1: Now was this a large church, I take it then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for that time, not compared to what people call quote unquote the megachurch today, but back in the day an African American church with twelve or fifteen hundred members was a large church; and that's what we were a part of.
Speaker 1: Now, your pastor, because he was treasure for the National Baptist Convention (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is, for those who are watching this who don't know, the National Baptist Convention was and probably still is the largest black organization in the world.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: So, this is major money--
Speaker 2: Major.
Speaker 1: --he's in charge of, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I guess at the time it would have been Reverend Jackson out in Chicago [Illinois] would have been the president?
Speaker 2: J.H. [Joseph H. Jackson]?
Speaker 1: When you were a kid--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He would have been the president.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, now, yeah 'cause I--we talked about that when I interviewed Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] too, 'cause they--he was a part of the group that split off from National Baptist Convention (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the progressive [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.], yes.
Speaker 1: --over the--yeah--over the activities of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  Fascinating story, fascinating.
Speaker 1: --which Reverend Jackson seems not to li- appreciate.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 658698
Speaker 1: Did your family like follow--now you grew up during the civil rights--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --era.  You were, you were a child, not old enough to participate in a lot of the activities but you could, you know, watch him on TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was very well aware of it; and I remember having a black and white composition book and I literally watched television for six and eight hours writing in pencil everything that happened when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  And I remember begging my mother, "If you never let me do another thing in life, please take me to the March on Washington."  She said, "No way," (laughter).  And I watched it on a thirteen inch black and white television day and night until I was told, "Go to bed.  Turn the television off."  But I was so profoundly aware; and my pastor was very active in the nation.  He was a Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] graduate, which I just thought was wonderful in and of itself, but he led the boycott in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] against the Tastykake company [Tasty Baking Company] and the, what was called the transport- PTC [Philadelphia Transportation Company] back then, which is SEPTA [Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority] now; but he led the boycott against some major corporations here and forced them to hire the first African American hired at the Tastykake company, and he was one of the ushers, one of the men at our church [Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And he was always in the news boycotting something or some business, and forced a lot of companies in Philadelphia to hire black people.  I thought that was wonderful.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your pastor?
Speaker 2: Leonard George Carr, C-A-R-R [Leonard G. Carr].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so Reverend Carr was the leader of--was he associated with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] or NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Both, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm, I think maybe Martin Luther King preached at our church, but this is when he was not as well known, but I remember seeing pictures of my pastor with Martin Luther King, who was such a young man, and now that I think back that when he did all the things he did, he was in his mid-thirties, it's just fascinating.  And I think he was assassinated at thirty-nine [years old].
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: That's fascinating.  He was a youngster--well, not a youngster but, you know, and you can understand--not agree, but understand how some of the older people thought he was just some young whippersnapper fresh out of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], who just, you know, was living in a dream world and refused to follow someone that young and green, as they thought.  You know, it's interesting, very interesting looking back at the history of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I guess you were probably not allowed to participate in any of the civil rights activities in the city.
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.
Speaker 1: You'd have been pretty young, anyway, right?  And in middle school or high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  And my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] didn't either.  They were, they didn't participate in the marches with our church and with our pastor, because my perception of them is that they were afraid.  You know, they came from--I remember visiting the South when we moved to Philadelphia.  Every summer, you know, black vacation was going down south, you know; and I remember my parents lecturing and letting us know, now, if we go into a store, keep your hands and your arms--we would walk in the store like little soldiers.  Don't turn to the left or the right, don't touch anything.  Don't look anyone in the face--I mean in the eye.  Oh it was, it was unbelievable, unbelievable.  And just the many places you couldn't go, so, you know we went south and just hung around in the yard with the chickens; and that was a vacation.
Story_ID: 658699
Speaker 1: Now, were you able to go to the movies and that sort of thing in, when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: As a--oh yeah, as a youngster.  My parents were not, fortunately my mother [Doris Thomas Hall] was not legalistic like that.  She, that was an activity that she took us to, to see 'The Ten Commandments,' bible movies because it was ten cents to see a matinee; so that was a daily activity, yeah, we saw matinees.
Speaker 1: Well, not daily, right, but?
Speaker 2: Well matinee in the sense that we didn't go to the movies at night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We went to the movies in the middle of the heat of the day when it was a dime.
Speaker 1: Oh daytime.
Speaker 2: Daytime, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you'd go on weekends, or?
Speaker 2: Sometimes.  More during the week because in the summer we did nothing.  We just watched TV and stayed out of the sun and invented our own activities.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So your brothers [Ronald E. Hall and Judge Hall, Jr.] and sis- you must have been very close with your siblings--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know?  Or at least it got intense 'cause everybody was there together, you know (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean people used to call us--we were stair steps.  We were close in age.  So, we were very close and we still are to this day.
Speaker 1: So, was your brother able to work outside of the home at a certain point or?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really remember that.  He loved athletics and loved basketball, but my father [Judge Hall, Sr.] was not--coming from the country you know you don't play basketball and football and that kind of thing.  So my brother was very athletic and got some scholarships to college playing basketball, but my father never supported that, which wasn't a good thing.  I always thought that was not good.
Speaker 1: Well he considered it kind of frivolous to be involved in athletics?  You should be working or something?
Speaker 2: Well, just something foreign to him.  He just didn't know--he just was not exposed to that, athletics, you know, so not that it was frivolous.  It was just not something that you do.  You drive a tractor.  You plant things.  You take your horses and mules and raise tobacco and cotton, you know.  Who goes and sits in a stadium to watch somebody bounce a ball?  That's not his background, you know.
Story_ID: 658700
Speaker 1: By the time you get to high school, now you're going to Overbrook [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Overbrook, you know, the most famous graduate, I guess, is the Dipper, Wilt Chamberlain, maybe, I don't know.  There may be somebody else, but (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And Will Smith.
Speaker 1: Will Smith.
Speaker 2: Of course (laughter).
Speaker 1: The Fresh Prince ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'].
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you've got, those are two famous graduates, and--
Speaker 2: I'm sure there are some others.  I can't think of them offhand, but those are the two that people really know about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was Overbrook like when you went to school there?
Speaker 2: Very segregated.  There was still a very high--there was a very large Jewish community just across the bridge in Wynnefield [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and the, on one side of the bridge was the Jewish community.  On the side that I lived on was the African American community.  So at the high school it was very segregated; and there was one African American counselor at Overbrook High School, which I know it, if had it not been for that person and my mother [Doris Thomas Hall], the trajectory of my life would have probably been very different.  Because I so vividly remember in junior high school and high school, when it came time to choose majors, the African American students were not permitted to be in the academic classes; and I remember my mother going up to the high school and the junior high school, and almost starting a fight with people--almost having to be taken out of the school because I was told that I would be in the clerical classes.  My mother said, "No, she's going to be in the academic strand of classes because she's going to college."
Speaker 1: Now what were the demographics of Overbrook in nineteen sixty--I guess you started in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Percentages, I don't know, I just remember there being more Jewish students than African American students.  There were more Jewish students in my class than African Americans, I'll say that; and very few African American teachers.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you said you only had this one black counselor.
Speaker 2: One black counselor, Mrs. Sessions [ph.]; and I had a white counselor at first and I was not supposed to have this counselor, but my mother raised such a fuss that they assigned me to a counselor that I was not supposed to be working with, and it was World War III [WWII] in that school over me.  I remember that; and then being put in classes where the teacher knew I was that kid whose mother started all of this ruckus, so it was difficult but, you know.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students in academic track classes besides you when, in your grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember a few but not many.
Speaker 1: But clearly the intent was to keep the numbers down.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, why would you want to go to college?  You need to get a good job and make money--get out of twelfth grade and, you know, take care of yourself and live your life.  And my mother said, "Oh, no."  She was prepared to do whatever she had to do to make sure that I didn't get lost in the fray.  But, I find it fascinating even today that two minimally educated, very country people like my parents have produced such phenomenal children.  That is--I don't know where that came from with them.  You know, my brothers [Ronald E. Hall and Judge Hall, Jr.] and sisters [Iva Hall Fitch and Barbara Hall Harvin] are doing some extraordinary things; and for them to, my parents to have not had that background but yet instilled that in us, I think it's a wonderful thing.
Speaker 1: Well, they had the aspiration and focus, I guess, to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --try to keep their children from being distracted by anything else, it sounds like.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  They just didn't have the choices.
Speaker 1: Church, school--that's pretty much it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.   (Clears throat) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and your mother went on to pursue a master's degree for herself, she's (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  At middle age, after she raised her five children.  Yeah.  That was tremendous.  I remember helping her a lot and was glad to do it, you know.
Speaker 1: They sound like interesting parents.  Your father [Judge Hall, Sr.] being interested in parks around the world (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, I mean he takes his job and makes it global, has a global vision for it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 658701
Speaker 1: So how did you do at Overbrook [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  Did you, were you still involved in activities like you were in hi- in elementary school [Edward Heston Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], because you had, you all moved right at this point by the time you started high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  We just moved once, yeah, from West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to upper West Philly, which was Overbrook.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're in a new neighborhood now but basically you're at Overbrook.  It's an integrated school, Jewish--primarily Jewish students, which I would imagine Overbrook had a high academic rating.  I mean I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, the Jewish schools in Ohio are pretty much like that.  So, did you run for class office, were you involved with?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember, well in junior high school, which was even more, it was really right in the middle of the Jewish neighborhood.  That was really tough because, oh gosh, the few African Americans, we were so ostracized in that school, and I ran for class president and I was the runner up.  It's so interesting that another person who ran for class president, Allyson Schwartz, is now the senator [sic.] of Pennsylvania, or she ran for senator of Pennsylvania.  I remember that so well.  She didn't win, I didn't win either; but I ran for student government at Overbrook and did, I was active in that, very active in the drama ministry and the choir--everything I could get in where I was doing something, I was involved in; and I loved every minute of it.  It was wonderful.
Story_ID: 658702
Speaker 1: You ran for some offices.  Were you involved in any other activities?  Did you do any--?
Speaker 2: Drama.
Speaker 1: Drama.  Okay, now, now--
Speaker 2: Yes, drama and choir--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --all those things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you mentioned drama a couple of times and like did you, was, did you have a good drama instructor; and what roles did you get a good chance to play?
Speaker 2: I remember having a teacher--I wrote a play and it was a weird thing for me to do, and I wrote the characters in and I remember this teacher, who was a wonderful teacher, drama, head of the drama.  He said, the--, "We can't use these characters," because some parts that I went out for, I remember being told, "but you're colored and the husband in the play is Jewish or white and that, we can't have that."  So there were parts in plays that I was limited to because the colors didn't fit; and I remember we had a production of 'Guys and Dolls,' and the drama instructor told me, "You know, you're the best for this particular part, but your partner is the white guy. He's get- and we can't have that."  So, I ended up having the part of like a dancer.  I never forgot that 'cause that enraged me, but that was that time.
Speaker 1: Well they couldn't find you an African American partner, or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  Because the best person for the male part was always one of the white guys because we had a lot of Caucasian kids in the school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so my parts were limited because my color wasn't right.  That was horrible, but I remember that like it was yesterday.
Speaker 1: Okay nowadays they have nontraditional casting in the schools, and--
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --you can play any role you want.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, those were the days.  These--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --are the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Now, you, so you were, you mentioned the March on Washington before; and I guess you were, must have been in seventh grade when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot, right?
Speaker 1: Eighth grade, yeah.
Speaker 2: Eighth grade?  Okay.
Speaker 1: I remember, like most people I remember the day like it was yesterday.  I remember where I was, what I was doing, what was said--yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, so a lot of the major activities, the Selma, Montgomery march [Selma to Montgomery March], the Freedom Summer in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 1: Oh, all of that, yeah.
Speaker 2: --all of that takes place when you're in high school.
Speaker 1: Yes, and all of those--James Chaney and those students [Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner], those murder; and those bombings and those buses and everything that took place in Mississippi and hangings--all of those things, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, did you, did you get a lot of you know magazines and newspapers at home in those days?
Speaker 1: Everything I could get my hands on to read, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Those are the days of the big picture magazines like Life and Look--
Speaker 1: Look, yeah.
Speaker 2: --Time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  I used to collect all of those; and The Tribune [The Philadelphia Tribune], of course, the black neighborhood newspaper, kept up with a lot of things in the African American community.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  And your role at church as a teenager, did it change much?
Speaker 1: I, no, I pretty much continued to run for every office I could; and I was involved in everything that teenagers were permitted to participate in in the church [Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], every area, because I loved it and because that was pretty much only thing that we were able to do.
Speaker 2: Now if it weren't for the church, if you had to depend on school, I guess, for you know recognition and leadership opportunities, you probably would be in trouble, right?  'Cause the school, you couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, no other outlets, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  So, in high school you're still kind of restricted, then you're saying, in terms of where you can go.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: What about your teachers in high school, were there any special teachers or mentors there?
Speaker 1: A Mr. Best [ph.]--yeah, I remember him, an African American gentleman.  He encouraged all of us and he was one of the few African American teachers; and he's really the, I had a lot of--not a lot but a few very bad experiences with teachers, but he was a good one, very good one.
Story_ID: 658703
Speaker 1: Well into your senior year [at Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I guess this i- so your grades are, how are your grades during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Excellent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Very good.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, putting you on the academic track was not a mistake, they (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, not at all--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --no, my grades were excellent.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And, so as you were approaching graduation, what kind of advice did you get from the, did you have the one black counselor?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had no (clears throat) thought or concept of, or just no thought of doing anything other than going straight to college.  I had no desire--I had jobs, of course I had been working since I was thirteen or fourteen [years old], babysitting and doing all kinds of odd jobs here and there, housecleaning for people in the neighborhood.  But it was always my goal to go to college, you know, so that I was just so excited.  Matter of fact, I started at sixteen.  There were, that was a time when, his name is Moynihan, I think, came out with this study, horrible study.
Speaker 1: Oh, Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Moynihan.  Oh, my gosh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Study of the black family in America ['The Negro Family: The Case for National Action'], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  But then that was the time when all of these programs like Upward Bound and those kinds of programs gave tenth and eleventh graders an opportunity to spend a summer at a college to be introduced to college life because most of us were first generation college educated young people; and I was in one of those programs, and, for me, it was like going to summer camp.  So by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was the name of yours?
Speaker 2: Upward Bound.
Speaker 1: Upward Bound, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So, by the time I started Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] in September, it was the best thing for me because I was so terrified, but because I was familiar with the campus and the whole program, I was able to get into college and kind of know my way around, because I was first generation educated in my family.  My brother [Ronald E. Hall] had gone to college, but, you know, to my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] this was new to us.  They didn't know how to fill out the applications.  The college counselor held our hand through the whole process because she really worked with my mother (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, so your brother, by the time you're a senior, your brother's already in college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was at Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Shaw, okay.
Speaker 2: --on an athletic scholarship playing basketball--yeah, Shaw.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you're next.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so you were counseled about Cheyney, or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you figure out the best place to go?
Speaker 2: Well, (clears throat) I wanted to go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], but my parent- because (air quotes) I had heard about Spelman, or Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], but my parents didn't have Spelman money; and there was no way they would ship me off to a college when Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] has more colleges, I think, than any other state.  In the United States, there's a heavy concentration of colleges in and around the Philadelphia area; and Cheyney is the oldest African American school [HBCU] in the nation.  It was started in 1837, which is, you know that was slavery times; and it was, what, forty-five minutes from home, so for my parents that was a safe place for me to be because I was away, but I was close enough I would get on the bus every weekend and come home to go to church [at Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So it was ideal and it was a family setting and it was a black college with all, well mostly--yeah all black teachers.  I don't know, maybe I had one white professor, but everyone in leadership was black, which was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought that was great.
Story_ID: 658704
Speaker 1: Now, in '68 [1968], when you graduated, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is the--that spring was the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, how did that affect your senior year?  Were there riots in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as a result, or?
Speaker 2: I remember vaguely a riot be- down in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] all around Cecil B. Moore Boulevard [sic. Cecil B. Moore Avenue].  I don't recall too much about that, but Cecil B. Moore was an attorney here; and there was a lot going on in Philadelphia but--and at Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], oh my goodness, there were protests and they burned a building and that was black power was major.  That was--
Speaker 1: So this is while you were still in high school [Overbrook High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or were you at Cheyney?
Speaker 2: And then it escalated when I started college, which was strange because we were, you know, if you're African American at an African American college [HBCU], why tear up your own stuff?  So, I didn't get involved in that.  I watched it, but I didn't get involved in it because there was no way I was gonna do anything to be put out of school, (laughter) so, no.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have an Afro then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had all of it.  Oh, yeah, the beads, (gesture) Afro out to here, wearing African clothing--oh yeah.  I did that for years 'cause that's what everybody did, and I loved that.  I thought that was great, you know.  I was a super homecoming queen with the big Afro and everything.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were homecoming queen at Cheyney?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, all right.
Speaker 2: Cheyney University, yeah, 1972 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Cheyney State, we interviewed one of the anchors in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that went to Cheyney State.  I'm blanking on his name [HistoryMaker Jim Vance] right now, but he went to school with--Ed Bradley was in school with him--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at Cheyney State.  So, we've interviewed--in the last couple weeks, we've interviewed about four or five people who went to Cheyney State--I don't know, it just comes in waves like this.  But, so what was Cheyney State like?  Did you work during the summer before you went to school or did you just?
Speaker 2: I was in the Upward Bound program at sixteen [years old].
Speaker 1: Okay, Upward Bound--that's right.
Speaker 2: (Clears throat) And then once I started Cheyney, I went back to the Upward Bound program as a counselor for new students coming in.  So I worked there and worked in the library; and I would come home every holiday and I would work in the neighborhood at a clothing store.  And the Jewish man that owned the clothing store--which was really in the inner city, dangerous neighborhood--loved me because I was a college student and I wasn't stealing the clothes and the stockings and the jewelry in the store.  So he said to me, "Whenever you're home," (clears throat), "give me a call," and I would go to work for three days or for Saturday or for Christmas vacation.  I always had a job there, which was just really great for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--I didn't ask you this, but were you allowed to listen to secular music when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, yeah.  I, thank goodness I came from a seriously Christian family and upbringing, but my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] weren't weird and legalistic; so, oh yeah, I danced and did all that--oh yeah, which was, you know, great.  I didn't come up in that background where, you know, you can't wear lo- short dresses and lipstick and red color, you know, that kind of weird stuff.  I didn't come in that background.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you all could participate in popular culture--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but you just had to restrict where you could go.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't go out to dances and bars and, what do they call that back in the day?
Speaker 1: Lounges?
Speaker 2: No, it was some- oh gosh, what did they--when people get together and everybody brings food and--it'll come to me.  But I didn't go to any of those kinds of things, but I could listen to records and the radio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or, cabarets and things like that?
Speaker 2: Cabarets, yeah.  That.  Right, that's the word, yeah.  (Laughter) I didn't go to cabarets.
Speaker 1: That was big in Chicago [Illinois] (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 658705
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors at Cheyney State [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh, gee.
Speaker 1: Oh but first, what was your major?  I'm sorry.  I didn't ask you what your major--
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: Education, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So your goal, then, was to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you want to teach any particular subject?
Speaker 2: Children.
Speaker 1: Children?  (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As opposed to, you know, college, university.  But I even majored in--dual major, special education and education, only because I had to choose something so I chose special ed too.  I wasn't interested in that, but I just, I chose it.  And my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.]--in the African American community in the South, (clears throat) one of the only things that a woman could do was to be a teacher, and you were highly respected and thought of as very intelligent if you were a teacher.  So I was not exposed to so many of the other choices of careers; so I said fine, I like to talk.  I like kids.  I'll be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You get your summers off.  It's a good job, good benefits.  I'll be a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay now, your teachers.  Now who were some of the special ones or the ones that you remember, if there were any?
Speaker 2: I can see some of their faces but I don't remember their names as standing out being anything great, no.  Not at Cheyney.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved them, but, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember who the president was or anything in those days?
Speaker 2: Wade Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, Wade Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, his name was mentioned yesterday as a--
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: --as part of a Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] gathering in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Carl Singley was talking about him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Carl Singley.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, so, well you were homecoming queen--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you're making good grades, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And, well, let's see, and you were there from '68 [1968] to '72 [1972]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is that?  Okay.
Story_ID: 658706
Speaker 1: Did you have any experiences outside of the university where you interned someplace, or worked?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was interesting because (clears throat) there was a lot of, there was something going on in the suburban areas of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  One of those areas was Radnor Township [Pennsylvania]; Villanova [Pennsylvania]; Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania]; Bala Cynwyd [Pennsylvania] (background noise).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: There was something very interesting going on in the suburban areas around Philadelphia--the very wealthy areas of Villanova; Radnor; Bryn Mawr; Bala Cynwyd--where a lot of elite colleges were located.  There, there were small African American communities in these suburban areas usually populated by people who work in these major homes and mansions.  Well, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] became very active in the suburban areas because that was a civil rights area; and they started asking questions, why aren't there any black teachers in these areas?  Well, a group came to Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] and to kind of, kind of keep down the controversy, they grabbed a few students and said, "Look, we're gonna put some student teachers in Radnor [Radnor Township School District]," and I was one of three girls, so I did my student teaching there; and some people there took me aside and kind of schooled me because I was not wanted.  One of the white teachers that became my supervising teacher, she took me aside and she talked to me like a mother, and told me: "This is how they view you, but this is what you do, this is what you say, this is how you act," and I was so terrified I followed everything she said.  Before I finished my student teaching, they offered me a job and my mother [Doris Thomas Hall] thought that was the--she must have told everybody at her high school.  That was major in Radnor, because they had no black teachers.  But who would they hire but a twenty year old fresh out of college.  They don't have to pay me a big salary.  They can--I don't have tenure.  They can deal with me; and then get rid of me in one or two years.  I had all white students.  The parents would look at me like, you know, I'm not as smart, not as this, you went to Cheyney, you know, black state school.  You know, you didn't go to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], that kind of thing.  But, I had been prepped so well that I did well, got tenure, stayed in Radnor, they financed my master's [degree], half of my doctorate.  I ended up with a salary bigger than the superintendent (laughter).  That was, that was phenomenal.  And I stayed--that was such a wonderful experience because I was able to pick and choose.  I taught kindergarten part time one year making a full time salary because I had the education and they couldn't deny me that, so I was able to be an at home mom for my youngest child that I adopted [Melissa Thompson] because I was teaching kindergarten, I was done at 11:30, I was making all this money.  That was wonderful.  That was a wonder- and they sent me to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to work on my doctorate, went to Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and then went to Nova Southeastern [Nova Southeastern University]; and they paid my ticket.  It was a wonderful experience.  But that was interesting, so I was a groundbreaker in Radnor Township.
Speaker 1: Now is that what they call like a Main Line community?
Speaker 2: It was strictly Main Line.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Villanova--because the railroad goes right down past Villanova University [Villanova, Pennsylvania]; and the school I taught at was a block from Villanova--one block.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was interesting.
Story_ID: 658707
Speaker 1: So, that was a fortunate turn of--well, you know this is the age--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when these things are happening--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where black folks are stepping into a lot of places for the first time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, were there any black students at Radnor?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There were some; and there were many times I was very angry because I saw what I, because I was right in the middle of everything.  You know, I was at the teachers' meetings, all of the things were done that I had no control over, and I watched it and it was so disturbing.  I watched the bright African American children who were not being challenged right away pushed into the--put on Ritalin and put in the classes for children with behavioral problems; and I would see the Caucasian students with the same challenges, but it was always, "Well, they're gifted," and I saw them create classes.  One time, I got into a lot of trouble because, for the first time, I recommended a young black girl to get testing for the gifted program and the principal came to me and said, "No way."  That was shocking.  It was like I was in 1950s Mississippi.  She said, "There's no way.  We will not have a colored child in the gifted program."  Well, I almost lost my job because I went to the mother and I said to her, "This is how.  This is what you do.  Start making some noise with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]."  When that girl was tested, the principal sat in the room when the girl was being tested.  I'll never forget that she wanted that child to fail.  So, what I would do after that, I would go to all the black students' homes and I would give the parents the textbooks for the coming year; and I would say, "This is what you do in the summer, so when Johnny comes to school in September, he has the textbook.  He knows what's gonna be covered, you have a problem with some exams and tests, come to me.  I'll slide you anything you need," and that's what I did.  And so glad I did, because then it broke open the gifted program in Radnor Township [Radnor Township School District].  That was something else.
Speaker 1: So, the principal was balking at allowing the student to e- to take the test?
Speaker 2: To even take the test, because she thought that parents would think the program was polluted because if we have a black student in the gifted program, that probably brings down everything.  But then the white teacher who took me under her wing, she said, "This is how you deal with the principal."  I remember one time she said, "Take a box of pansies, some flowers, go in and talk to her and ask her how her husband's doing because he's ill and suck up to her like this."  I did everything she told me to do and it worked like a charm; and I had a good career, a great career in Radnor [Pennsylvania], because after I got what I needed, I retired at forty-one [years old], and they told me I was crazy to retire, but I was done (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you taught then from '72 [1972] to--
Speaker 2: To--oh, gosh, eight- in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Ninety- okay--
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was the '80s [1980s], yeah.  Oh--hm.
Speaker 1: Another twenty--
Speaker 2: It was, well, I took a sabbatical for--you know, I had my children for, I took a sabbatical for--I never took a sabbatical 'til I realized that I had missed three o- three sabbaticals or something, so I kind of took them all at one time and they couldn't deny me that.  So, I had in twenty plus years because I'd worked consecutively.
Story_ID: 658708
Speaker 1: You have your bachelor's in education from Cheyney State [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --seventy-two [1972]; then--
Speaker 2: Master's [degree] from Antioch University.
Speaker 1: Oh, Antioch University, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is Antioch in Ohio [Yellow Springs, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So is this--did you actually have to go, physical go there, or did you?
Speaker 2: They had a wonderful satellite master's program in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], so I attended that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The year that I got out of Cheyney, the rule was you could not start working on your master's until you were a year, you know, into your job; and when that day came, that day I signed up to start working on my master's, so I'm like a career student.  I just stayed in school.
Speaker 1: So when did you get your master's in Antioch?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think, let's see--
Speaker 1: 'Cause that'd be like?
Speaker 2: --if I graduate in seven- maybe '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And I know you went to Nova for your Ed.D., right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But I went to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] first.
Speaker 1: Okay, University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In the doctoral program in education there.
Speaker 1: So, but you didn't finish the Ed.D. there?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I didn't.  I had, I did very, very well, but I was in a program to become a reading specialist and I realize, this was boring, I wasn't interested in that; and University of Pennsylvania, I was always the only African American in my class, and I hated that, because I had, I had one pro- a statistics professor say to me, "What makes you think you can get a Ph.D. from this school?"  Oh, my, I'll never, it was a very unpleasant experience there.  I was always the one and only, and always looked at.  I remember at one per- this statistics professor assigned another student to me to collaborate with.  I remember a white girl, she had me to, come over to her apartment and we studied together and I hated it, but she told me, she said, "You know, professor whoever whatever whatever said you're not gonna pass the statistics class because he's not gonna pass a black student."  It was interesting that she told me that because I knew she didn't like me, or whatever.  And, one of the teachers in Radnor [Radnor Township School District] had gotten her doctorate at Penn.  She says, "Oh, you have statistics?"  I said, "Oh, yeah.  I hate it.  It's so boring."  She says, "Oh, well, you want me to tutor you?"  I said, "No."  She said, "Well here are the exams that I've gotten."  You know, you kind of--she gave me an exam that was not the exact final, but it was close enough that I ended up getting an A; and that professor, he met with me and grilled me, "How did you do it?"  Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  I said, "Because I'm just as smart as everybody else in the class."  But that was a time when Penn was very prejudiced, outwardly.  But I hated being a reading specialist, so I--
Speaker 1: So this had to be in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--yeah, late '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: So this is not ancient history, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like '78 [1978]-ish, '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: This is not ancient history for Penn, this is (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.  It was, oh, it was just horrible.  But, I started at Nova Southeastern University [Fort Lauderdale, Florida], and I started on the ground level.  I started com- they accepted none of my credits, which was fine; and I was the only, the one and only in my class.
Speaker 1: So, did you actually go to Florida (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had to--
Speaker 1: So you went on sabbatical or something?
Speaker 2: No, you had to do a residency there.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: They had peer groups or focus groups, whatever they called them, in different areas; and I did have to do a residency every summer there, and it was not a nice experience.  I was always the loner, the one and only, the black person in the group.  But I said, you know what, I'm gonna get this degree, and if y'all don't like me that's fine but, you know, the paper's gonna read the same.  So I just did what I had to do, and went through it and got the degree in education.
Story_ID: 658709
Speaker 1: I get a sense there are probably two realities going on here, even at, even while you're earning your Ed.D. and teaching.  Now what--what are you doing in terms of the church?  Are you still a member of your, the Vine?
Speaker 2: Yes, always, even though I was in college I was close enough to home where, every Saturday morning I was on the bus coming from Cheyney [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] to come home just to go to church; and then I'd go back Sunday night on the bus.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you're still going to Vine Memorial [Vine Memorial Baptist Church]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 2: And still very connected into the church the whole time.
Speaker 1: Now, in any--during this period of time, I guess, to 1985, were you thinking about ordination or anything in, during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Up to '85 [1985]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was licensed as a minister in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay, now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's where, we're getting somewhere now.  So, so, how did, when did the idea come to you that you ought to be a minister and not just be a support of some male minister (laughter), you know, in the Baptist church?
Speaker 2: My first clear understanding that I would be a minister: I was nine years old, saw myself preaching, being a minister, which was very bizarre because I had never seen a woman minister; and I was always involved in some kind of oratorical contest in the Baptist church, statewide, citywide, and I always won--I always won.  And, I had wonderful coaches who just, you know, worked with me; and my mother [Doris Thomas Hall] was always very involved with that with me, because she saw that I had, you know, some giftedness in that area.  But as a teenager and in college I put that out of my mind because it was strange and weird and not accepted (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were these oratorical contests always--
Speaker 2: In the church.
Speaker 1: --church based?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I know the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and other black organizations sponsor these kind of things too.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was always in that, always in the Baptist Training Union and state oratorical contests; and I, I would travel around--my mother would take me around to places where I would be in a contest.
Story_ID: 658710
Speaker 1: Now ministers always talk about a calling--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  I know when I was in church as a kid, our minister talked about a misty morning in Louisiana when he was called--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --I mean, but he would do it periodically, you know.  But is there a moment like this for you where you felt like you were called (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  When I thought I had successfully set my path to be an educator and a professor and ultimately a college president--that was going to be my journey, and I had it all worked out and moved forward in that direction; then had an experience where for an entire week I don't remember sleeping.  I just, I'm sure I did, but I don't remember sleeping.  I remember just having this urgency that I needed to be in ministry and function as a minister and start preaching; and I finally--
Speaker 1: Was this, was this during the summer when you weren't teaching or what were you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was te- well--
Speaker 1: You were teaching?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was teaching, I don't know if it was during the school year, but I was a teacher at that time, teaching elementary school in Radnor [Radnor Township School District]; and I went to my pastor [James S. Allen, Sr.], who was not Reverend Carr [Leonard G. Carr], second pastor of the church, and you know, he knew me very well because I was so involved in the church, and I told him I know that this is what I'm to do and, you know, if you throw rotten eggs at me or tell me to leave, it's okay because this is what I'm gonna do and, you know, my whole family's here, my parents [Doris Thomas Hall and Judge Hall, Sr.] are here, whatever, but I have no problem with just being gracious and kind and excusing myself and leaving because this is what I'm gonna do.  And he says to me, "Well, what took you so long?"  That was shocking because there were no women in ministry at my church.  It had never been done.  No one, no woman had ever been in the pulpit doing anything.  But he said, "You know, this is gonna be a battle."  I didn't care at that point.  I didn't care.
Speaker 1: So he was all right with it?  He thought it was a good--
Speaker 2: He was totally all right with it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And many of his ministry colleagues--and he was very well known in the country too, and he's still pastoring there--you know said to him, "Oh, you're opening up a can of worms because as soon as you let one go through, here comes everybody," and the, when he brought it to the church officers, some of the deacons, and my father was a deacon, some of the trustees, which was the, what they call the governing board of the church, were just so totally against it; and my, I remember my pastor saying that he said to them: "There's only one person that I'm 100 percent sure of who is called to ministry," and he said, "that's myself," meaning him.  He said, "Now if there's anybody else, that's God's business, and I'm not gonna be someone to stand in someone's way."  Every- all the people that, and it wasn't a lot, some of the leaders, the men, they couldn't say, well, she doesn't have an education, she doesn't know what she's talking about, she's not involved in the church, and--they just couldn't find a reason so they said, "You know what, let this girl go through the process, whatever.  We'll shoot her down real good."  I remember the night of my initial sermon.  The church had about a thousand people there watching to see what I was gonna do; and I did what I did, you know, pulled off a nice speech, and people totally and completely embraced me, 100 percent.  And my pastor told me later, he says, "Nobody, no one could say anything--no one had anything bad or negative on you.  They just couldn't come up with, 'Well, this is why.'"   And they were pulling out scriptures and biblical stuff, and my pastor would say, "Well that's not what the scripture says.  That might be what you think, but let me show you what it says, non-Bible student."  So, that was a unique experience.  But I, the Lord had so dealt with me that by the time I made it public that I was called, I knew that.  Because I knew at nine years old.  There was no one in my family that was a minister, no one.  So, I didn't get this idea in my head from anyone.  I knew that it was truly a calling; and God had so dealt with me that I was at the point where I didn't care who said or did what.  I knew this was my path in life, and I was gonna do that.
Story_ID: 658711
Speaker 1: When did you tell the, your minister [James S. Allen, Sr.]; and be- and how long was it before you all were ordained in '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: I was licensed in '84 [1984] and ordained in '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was--
Speaker 1: So you get a license first before you get a (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  You have to be licensed first; and you're ordained in--you know, you are, in my background, you're only ordained if ministry is going to be your vocation, and I remember some of the ministers there saying, "Well, you'll never be ordained.  No one's going to call you to pastor a church and what are you gonna do?"  Well, Palmer seminary [Palmer Theological Seminary, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was Eastern Baptist seminary [Eastern Baptist Theological Seminary] at that time, asked me to be an instructor at the seminary.  I said, "Well, I can't be an instructor unless I'm ordained," and I went to my pastor [at Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I said, "I need to be ordained because they want me to be an instructor."  Well, that shut everybody's mouth.  That shut 'em down so fast (laughter), so it's like oh, my gosh.  Now we are--licensed a woman, now we have an ordained woman.  Women are gonna just take over the church.  That was their fear: they're gonna take over.
Speaker 1: Now knowing something about church in the black community, women have a lot to do with the church (laughter), so.
Speaker 2: The church would shut down if we decided to take off one day, yeah.  But people, you know, it's always an issue of power; and, you know, when you don't have power and influence in any other area of your life you can come in the church and feel like you're somebody, you know, and for some of the men, that was the way they thought.  You know, I, you know, "I'm nothing until I'm Deacon So and So in this church, and I don't wanna sit in a meeting where I have to listen to a woman's thoughts and opinions and say why don't we do this or be involved in this way.  No, teach the children, get the women ready for baptism, iron the tablecloth for the communion table; and shut up."
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a passage about Ella Baker, when she--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --goes down into the Civil Rights Movement in Mississippi in 1961, I think it is, and that--dealing with it as a volunteer for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and it--I don't know if she writes it or somebody writes about it, but she said there's so many pastors down there, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--everybody was a pastor.  Said it was, they expected her to do everything (laughter).  I mean, in service to all these pastor- all of them, all of them had a fiefdom; you know, they were important, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, say it was just like, she had to break away from (unclear) (laughter) 'cause she wasn't even doing anything meaningful, you know, just bring them coffee and all of that, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they were--
Speaker 2: And take notes.
Speaker 1: And take note- yes.  Right.  Take all the notes and handle the phone calls and all that, you know, appointments and, you know.  So, but this is the (laughter) the situation, I guess, as you, as you come in.  You're the first one not to--you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The first one, yeah, the first one.  But I had, I had had such a history of always being the one and only that I was used to that, so I didn't care, you know; and I was not in the locker room.  I was not able to be in the dugout or the locker room, but I didn't care.  That was okay.
Story_ID: 658712
Speaker 1: By that time, I was doing some things that all the other ministers never dreamed of doing, so I--you know.
Speaker 2: So, what things were those?
Speaker 1: I wrote a book in 1986 [sic.] I think, 'Don't Die in the Winter'--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --'Your Season is Coming' ['Don't Die in the Winter: Your Season is Coming,' Millicent Hunter].
Speaker 2: --right, I was looking through it before we came in.
Speaker 1: And that book, it's amazing.  It took me two weeks to write it.  That book, when I went to the Destiny Image publishing [Destiny Image Publishers], they just thought, oh, I remember overhearing them, think I was a little crazy lady.  I went up to Shippensburg [Pennsylvania].  I was an untested author; and just to get rid of me they said, "Oh, we'll print her like 100 copies and get rid of her."  (Clears throat) A station in Chicago [Illinois], Channel 38 [WCPX-TV], the head of the station was going through a terrible time in his life, talked about it, a pastor was planning on taking his life.  He found my book and he said that saved his life, because he was going through a winter; and they said, "We want to produce an eight week television series around your book.  We want to bring you to Chicago, interview you on the show; and we'll take every chapter of your book and develop a story around what you wrote."  Well, that sent me through the stratosphere; and because the publishing company printed the book in several foreign languages, I got invitations from Japan, South Africa, India--all over the world to come and preach behind that little, that little book.  And it's still, of the seven, eight books I've written, that's still the best selling one.  That little simple, what, 120 pages or so.  So that book was pivotal in my life.
Speaker 2: Now--tell us now, what is the essence of the book?  I think, you know 'Don't Die in the Winter'--I was reading it, but explain to us what's the--?
Speaker 1: The essence is that we all have challenges and adversity and difficulties and struggles in our life, but some of them, some of those struggles God puts there, and others God allows; and if you are willing to receive the lesson that those struggles can teach you, you can use adversity as an opportunity to grow and to learn and to be better; and if you can understand that difficulties don't last always, that there is another side, then you don't get stuck there, but you can glean from that situation what the gift that it brings you, and the gift is always some learning, some instruction, some talent, some ability; or something that needs to be removed out of your life, like fear and a lack of courage and ill confidence.  Adversity makes you either stand up and learn and do something and grow, or it makes you buckle under and fall apart.  I learned that through adversity, I welcome that because if God allows certain things, it's there for a reason and a purpose, and that reason and purpose is always good--always good.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, this is the message of, yeah, 'Don't Die in the Winter'; and the imagery is, winter is a bad time, the hard times--
Speaker 1: Yes, but it's seasonal.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Winters are bad, cold, dark, lonely--all of those things.  But spring always comes, always.  There's never been a time on the planet when there was a winter and there wasn't another season following--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know?
Story_ID: 658713
Speaker 1: Now this is--you write the book ['Don't Die in the Winter: Your Season is Coming,' Millicent Hunter] right after you got your Ed.D. from No- Nova [Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I didn't ask you what your dissertation was about at Nova, so?
Speaker 2: I, oh I used to know the title by heart.  I'm surprised I don't, I can't recall it right now, but it was addressing different learning modalities and styles in instruction--mathematical instruction.  Designing implementation of a mathematical program that addresses different learning modalities and learning styles in youngsters, I think.  Maybe not even in youngsters because I made it more broad, but it was an education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a good experience, and it was good for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did, did the activity, which is, when you work on an intense activity, at least for most people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so you're also going through an ordination, and you're, you write the book in '86 [sic.], though you said it took only two weeks, but that's, you know so you're, do these activities dovetail together, the educational--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I can see how (clears throat) being an educator was, and--was the best profession and area of concentration for me to be in for what I'm doing now.  The very--it was the best preparation for pastoring, and because pastoring is leadership, it's working with people.  Being an educator, I'm very detail oriented.  I love information, and I love working with people.  I'm very hands on as a person; and that has been--all of those things are an asset to me as a pastor and a church leader.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  The Ed.D. is in mathematical instruction too, that's?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so, your goal at one time had been to become a college president--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but now you're, so after you get your Ed.D., you were convinced you weren't going to be a college president and you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That--no, no.  That one week experience of hearing the voice of God in my spirit, too, you know, to be a minister was so strong and so profound, after that experience I thought of nothing else, you know.  I didn't come kicking and screaming; it was just an affirmation of what I knew at the age of nine that I would be.  I thought I had successfully tucked that dream, that vision for my life.  I thought I had successfully tucked it away; and after getting my doctorate in education, it was like God saying, okay now, let's get back on the road that you know I put you on as a child.  Okay.
Story_ID: 658714
Speaker 1: In '92 [1992], it says here on the outline that you started a bas- a Baptist Worship Center [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in your home.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was this, so this is extra--this is--are you still a member of Vine chu- [Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: N- I went to be an interim pastor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at a Baptist church in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Church of Christian Compassion, which was absolutely revolutionary.  It was just not done that a Baptist woman is called to pastor a Baptist church.  It's just not done.  And it was an interesting situation because this was a church that came out of a great deal of pain from the founder of the church [Leonard Smalls] who ended up in jail and a whole lot of things; and then their new young pastor [Anthony L. Trufant] only stayed there a few years, married the mayor of the city's daughter [Muriel Goode Trufant] and just moved on to greener pastures and just left.  I went in as a healing balm for that church, as an interim pastor who happened to have a woman as the chairman of the deacon board, which was not done anywhere; and this woman was wonderful to me, and the church absolutely thrived; and I knew that that was not a permanent place for me, and I was there for two years as the pastor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what was the name of it again?
Speaker 2: Church of Christian Compassion, and I certainly brought Christian compassion to that church and loved the people; but I knew that it was just a training ground for me.  And I started the Baptist Worship Center in my living room with five, six people, and I knew people thought I was crazy but the Lord was wonderful in that I never heard the gossip or the conversation or the negative comments about, you know, later years--I knew that it was being said because I know how people are because number one, women don't start churches.  Number two, Baptist women don't start churches.  Number three, Baptist women don't pastor; and number four, there's a church around every other corner in Philadelphia, who are you to have to start one; and people just don't start churches.  Where do you think this is going?  I knew, I knew what I was supposed to do and I just did it.  I didn't care.  I just did it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, all right.  So, so the church starts in your home, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, in short order you've got, you know, it's too large.  I mean it's too large of a congregation for your home, or too large a group, right?
Speaker 2: Five people?  Well, I started with five.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it was really a bible stu- well it was a bible study, but I still called it a church; and we grew rapidly and we moved to the basement area because I could fit twenty people down there; then we moved back upstairs and it was in the living room and dining room of a row house, so you know you can fit maybe twenty-five, thirty people and you have every corner covered.  Then we just moved to a rental property; and I was always from day one, and even now, twenty-three, twenty-four years later, I was always committed to teaching, 'cause that's my background, I'm an educator; and people were so hungry for instruction, so many pastors still come to me and say, "How did you do it?  How did you do it?"  And they expect me to give them some magical formula of--or, "Who backed you, or who gave you this or who did that," and I just have no magic for them.  I just say I was obedient and I taught people and discipled them; and they came and they're still coming, you know?  And they--
Speaker 1: Who were the initial five that you started with?  Were they people you knew already or family members, or?
Speaker 2: They were people I knew already, yeah, all--couple college students from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and some other people that I knew at my former, at that Church of Christian Compassion; although when I left I did not ask any of them to come with me, because I had nothing--no money, no building, nothing.  Just a desire to teach and to pastor people.
Story_ID: 658715
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you about this, but, now you--you had your children already, right, at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you had been I guess married previously.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  To someone named Thompson [Preston Thompson], right?
Speaker 2: A pastor, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a pastor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A pastor--was he a pastor of the, of Vine [Vine Memorial Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or?
Speaker 2: No, no, a pastor of a--St. Joseph [St. Joseph Baptist Church], another church in West Philly [West Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], on the--used to be on the campus of University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, your children were born in the '70s [1970s], or, or '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, my son [Jason Thompson] in '86 [1986] or '87 [1987]--'87 [1987]--'86 [1986]; and I adopted my daughter [Melissa Thompson] in eighty-s- no, not in '87 [1987], I adopted her when she was ten months old.  So, I have one son, a birth son, and he's in college now at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]; and I have a daughter, she's training to be a dental hygienist.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so well this is really a busy time (laughter).  This time from '85 [1985] to '86 [1986] is really when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I look back and I don't, I--
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], '85 [1985], '86 [1986] are, you know, that's--
Speaker 2: A lot going on.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Well, I don't know how I did it, how I had the energy to do it, but I was on sabbatical, so when I started the church [Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I was an at home mom, which was really great for me; and with the church being so small and having nothing, I did everything.  But I loved every minute of it, loved every minute of it, and to this day, twenty-three however many years I--twenty-three, four--twenty-four years, I think I probably missed (pause) six Sundays.  That's because my husband and I went on a honeymoon, so I was out that Sunday.  I'd go to Africa, and I'd taken a Sunday off.  But other than that, I am never away from my church, and wouldn't have it any other way.
Story_ID: 658716
Speaker 1: Well, walk us through the growth of the church [Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We know we started--so, you have like, you have about thirty people in living room and dining room of a row house; and (unclear) from there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes, and when we outgrew the space, we moved to a rental property of a pastor in the city whose church was really going through a lot of transition.  He had such a large space and welcomed us in because we would pay rent; and then another female pastor, a Bishop Audrey Bronson [Audrey F. Bronson] offered a chapel space in her church [Sanctuary Church of the Open Door, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We outgrew that and she finally told us we had to leave; and it was the best thing that ever happened, because the American Baptist Churches [American Baptist Churches USA], I was very much involved with the American Baptists, and that's a white denomination and they kept telling me, "We have a church up in the Northeast [Northeast Philadelphia], in Frankford [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] right near here.  You should go look at it."  For two years I said no way, no way.  And then when we were forced out when Bishop Bronson said, "You have to leave.  I love you but you have to leave," it forced me to come up to this area to see the church and when I looked at it, I said oh, my goodness.  This is what I was turning down for?  It was a white congregation that had dwindled to about eighteen people.  They would come in and lock themselves in the basement area because they were terrified of the neighborhood in Frankford, and they hadn't been in the sanctuary for like five or six years.  It was dust this thick (gesture), hadn't baptized anyone in like fifteen years.  So they invited us in.  I remember overhearing one of the deacons saying we were gypsies (laughter).  That was their word for people in church who have loud music and drums and singing and clapping, and, "Yeah, yeah, praise the Lord, yeah, yeah."  They said, "Well, you know these are gypsy people," and the white pastor came to me and he said to me, "Let me tell you what to do.  You and your members come and join the church because I'm leaving but nobody knows, and when I leave you'll automatically have the church, the property, everything."  That seemed sneaky to me and I didn't do that; and looking back, I wish I had done that.  But, I didn't.  So, when the pastor left, the church just--congregation died.  They offered it to us and I purchased it and I thought okay, I'm gonna be here twenty years.  The church exploded.  People--we'd have to lock the doors.  People were waiting around the corner to get in because one reason why I got so much attention was because I was very well known around the country because of that book ['Don't Die in the Winter: Your Season is Coming,' Millicent Hunter] and being on television; and there were some major women's conferences.  That was a new thing in the United States, (air quotes) women's conference, where there would be two thousand, three thousand women; and I would be on the platform with the top seven.  Sometimes I'd be the one getting the water, bringing in the Bibles or teaching a workshop, but I was visible; and when people found out, "Oh, that lady's in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  Where's her church?"  And, people just came and my being female they knew that coming through the door--who I am, what I look like, and how I am--so I didn't have a problem with men saying, "I don't want a woman pastor."  Or, you know coming in the door who was in this pulpit.  So people often used to ask me, "How do you deal with the men in your church?"  I said, "Well they're kind of not surprised that I'm the pastor.  They kind of know that, and when they get here--," sometimes people think that men in general have such a problem with that.  Some do, but a lot don't.  I haven't found an issue.  Some people have this perhaps fantasy that maybe I am bossy with the men, or, "You tell 'em what to do and do they do what you tell 'em to do?"  Yeah, because I'm their pastor and it's not an issue.  I respect them and they respect me as their pastor, and the gender thing just kind of doesn't come into play.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  We're gonna pause (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It just doesn't.
Story_ID: 658717
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 1993, now are you still teaching at this point?  Are you, had you returned (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on sabbatical--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and preparing to retire--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they warned me.  They said, "Oh you're gonna lose your pension.  You are making a big mistake."  But I knew I had heard from God, and I said, Lord, I don't know how you're gonna do this, but that's your responsibility to work this out for me.  It's my responsibility to be obedient and committed.  I signed those papers and retired; and that, within a week or two, is when I got the call from the television station in Chicago [Illinois], and I went worldwide, and I just was all over the world preaching.  Sometimes I took my kids [Jason Thompson and Melissa Thompson] with me and I was at home and it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: The Lord worked that out.
Speaker 1: --so this has happened around the same time, so you--the TV series in Chicago was aired in the early '90s [1990s], was it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, had to be.
Speaker 1: On Channel 38 [WCPX-TV], you said.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, so, did they dramatize some of the precepts in the book ['Don't Die in the Winter: Your Season is Coming,' Millicent Hunter]?
Speaker 2: Yes, the person that worked on the series--the serie- series was called 'What To Do When You Don't Know What To Do' [ph.] (laughter), and he encouraged the viewers as they watched the series to purchase my book.  Well, that was just wonderful; and so the book got into a lot of foreign bookstores, and I went to a lot of foreign countries to lecture or to preach about subjects in the book.
Speaker 1: So, the Channel 38 then is part of a network of stations around the country, or is that what?
Speaker 2: I think may- it's probably, I think, one of the cable stations in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I wasn't familiar with it at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a cable sta- it is, and they do Christian broadcasting--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so do they syndicate out to the other stations or another?
Speaker 2: I don't think they did that.
Speaker 1: Is there--I know there's a Christian Broadcasting Network, Pat Robertson had--there are probably several of them now in the country, but I don't know how it really works, but they produce this in Chicago.  Was it shown in other cities?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I really don't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I really don't know.  But many people were aware of the show and became aware and familiar with me because of that television exposure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess it does not hurt to have a distinctive look--you've mentioned the hair--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --being a genetic--
Speaker 2: Marker, yeah.
Speaker 1: --marker in your family.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, so.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I was young looking and articulate; and the old (air quotes) we don't approve of women preachers because they're not prepared, not educated, not articulate--I remember my pastor [James S. Allen, Sr.] who licensed me said one time, he said to me, "You know, it's not that so many men are against women preachers.  They are against the lack of education that they have."  I said, "I don't think that's it.  A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church--that's an excuse.  That's an excuse."  So, I was one of the one and onlys out there and very visible; and there were about five of us who were doing these conferences of two and three thousand people, and I was the only one of that group of five that had an education.  I won't mention the names, but some of those women pastors and preachers, sometimes their nouns and verbs didn't agree, and people would kind of turn a deaf ear because of that, but I had the educational background and the preparation, so I got less criticism, and I--
Speaker 1: Well, to be fair, too, there're plenty of male pastors in the A.M.E. church and the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] and some of the others who can clash some verbs together, they, they're not well educated, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Sure, sure.  Yeah, exactly.  But you know that was that--when you have gender issues you have to point to something so they invented that, you know, but I kind of didn't care.  God was opening doors for me that were just phenomenal.  So, you know, with the criticism and all that, I did not allow that to be a distraction, because I knew that I was on a track that God had me on that was unusual; and I wasn't gonna miss out on what I knew God had for me because of the rumblings of people who were not going where I knew I was going.
Story_ID: 658718
Speaker 1: You were telling us off camera about how you spotted this place--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that we're in right now and--as you were shopping, I think?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  While I was on my way to little Sunday afternoon activity at the mall with my children [Jason Thompson and Melissa Thompson], and we passed this place and there was a sale sign and the Lord said, look over, and I looked over, and yeah, well, so what, you know.  And the Lord said, no.  Look, look at that.  And tell your sister [Iva Hall Fitch] who's in real estate to call and enquire about this property; and I'm thinking for what?  This great big huge place?  And I had a wonderful congregation of about two, about three hundred people [in the Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; and we filled the church where I was, about five minutes from here in Frankford [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And, she called and enquired and so what, you know, million dollars, (makes sound) please; and I met the Jewish man who was an owner and the building was for sale, but we didn't have millions of dollars for it.  He says, "Well, you know I think I'm supposed to have a church in here."  I don't know if he said that because there were no other takers.  He said, "I'll consider leasing it to you."  I said, "Well, I don't think so," because, leasing it to us for what?  And the Lord just said move the congregation there.  I went to my people, same as I did when I was in Southwest Philly [Southwest Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], because when I said to them we're forced out of the place we're in now [Sanctuary Church of the Open Door, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], we have to, and we- there's a church in Frankford that's been offered to me.  My congregation said, "We love you.  We think you're nice, but we're not going up there.  It's too far.  We don't know that neighborhood.  There are no black people there."  I said, "Well then, it will probably just be me and my two kids, but we're going," and we came up here and most of them stayed in Southwest Philly.  They stayed.  Little did I know there were a whole lot of African American people up here.  I'd never been to this area of the city, wasn't familiar with it; didn't know how to get here--I had to have someone bring me when I first came up.  And there were people just waiting for this church to come, and the churches up here, but God had them waiting and when I acquired one thing just happened, one thing after another and the Jewish man that owned the property, he just did all kinds of things for u- help us get in here, it was a supermarket and a drugstore.  We came in and renovated in three months, and the rest is history.  And, we have two services every Sunday and about three thousand people, and it's been a stable, thriving congregation of some of the most wonderful people I could ever hope to have as congregants.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, some have been with you from the very beginning (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From day one.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: From day one, yeah.  Yeah.  I knew them as college students; and they are, many of them are in the leadership of the church to this day, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, as college students were they you know looking for bible study or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because the church where I was situated, it was on the campus of the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So, a lot of the African American students walked down the street to come to church on Sundays.  You know, and some of them just--when they would see me on television or hear about my book ['Don't Die in the Winter: Your Season is Coming,' Millicent Hunter], they would say, "Oh, I know her.  I'm going up there," and many of them came and stayed and remained here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 658719
Speaker 1: Well the growth of [the Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--you moved into this building in, what, 19--?
Speaker 2: About ninety- oh, I, I do know that, 2000.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000].  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause it was Mother's Day, yes, 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We've been here for fourteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was there ever a time when you thought that, I mean was there ever a wintertime here where you thought you weren't gonna make it here?
Speaker 2: No.  We've had challenges, because this is a prime, prime property, because we're right off 95 [Interstate 95].  (Clears throat) In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], there are so many churches, but because it used to be a basically parish type city, very few churches have adequate parking.  Well, a supermarket, small shopping center--parking is all over the place; so there are people, we have members who live in New York, Delaware, North Jersey, who pass 150 churches on the way to this church on Sunday, which I find extraordinary as well.  There is a train line right here, bus stop right there, and parking for everybody.  So, you know, people are very transient these days.  People don't usually join grandma's church and stay there for life.  They go where they feel they're being fed, yeah, and nurtured (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right, so, what is your, I guess, what kind of activities does your church include other than--well, let me ask about your ministry first.  How is it different, or what is, what distinguishes what you do here in your church?
Speaker 2: Well, we're holistic and I guess I use that word because that's been the bu- buzzword for the last ten years.  I (clears throat) I often think that we don't do anything different than other churches, but when I travel and go to different churches and get involved in different things, I am acutely aware of how different we really are.  We have groups that work with families; we have very large youth activities; we have activities for men.  The three major prisons are located five blocks from this church, so we have a very active prison ministry, where people who--up State Road [New State Road], leave the prison.  This is the first stop because they are familiar with us through television and because we have an active prison ministry, so we have a ministry that really works with people who are newly just out of incarceration and families with incarcerated members; and we just really try to present ministry where we meet people at their point of need.  We're not just an open and have great preaching services on Sunday and great music and a little bible study midweek and then we're shut down.  We're like seven days, open seven days.  So we just have things going on all the time--all the time.  And as I travel around I'm exposed to a lot of things that I am aware that a lot of pastors in the city are not exposed to.  So, when I come back and do things here, my members say, "Oh, you're just great.  How did you come up with that?"  I say, "Well, I was in Chicago [Illinois] and I saw that, and I say, I'm gonna go back and do that at my church."  So, as a result, we just have a lot of things going on all the time; and it, so church is very much a people--a part of people's lives here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so, you have youth a- well I know you have youth activities, well--
Speaker 2: All age activities.
Speaker 1: --are they here like five days a week--
Speaker 2: Not five days a week.
Speaker 1: Seven days a week?
Speaker 2: We used to have a Christian academy [Excell Christian Academy], but I closed it down because we had a waiting list around the corner, and if I couldn't do education the right way, I didn't wanna just pack kids in like sardines. So, I've gone to having teaching and training classes two or three days a week, just for all age groups really.  We al- we have something going on for kids starting at age three up to ninety.  There's something for every- some area where everyone can fit in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now do you do like tutoring here, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, yes.  College prep, touring the colleges in the country--all of those things.  We're very involved with United Way [United Way of Greater Philadelphia and Southern New Jersey, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Girls mentoring program, that's a major thing here; and Boys to Men [Building Boys to Men, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is a male mentoring boys program, because we have so many people in the congregation, as in many churches, who come from single parent family homes; and so the church kind of fills in that gap as well.
Story_ID: 658720
Speaker 1: In '99 [1999], I have a note here that, that the Worship Center Worldwide Fellowship of Churches was officially incorporated--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as an ecclesiastical body--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --established to provide guidance (unclear) leadership to these churches.  So, you're opening more than one church does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, because my book ['Don't Die in the Winter: Your Season is Coming,' Millicent Hunter] kind of went around the world, I got a call from a pastor like in the middle of the night from South Africa, who said to me, "You must come to South Africa."  I thought it was a crank call.  "You must come to South Africa and minister to our congregation, speak with me," et cetera.  So when he sent the plane ticket and hotel reservations for me and a traveling companion, I went and the rest was history.  There were a number of pastors in churches in South Africa that wanted covering; and covering is being in relationship with another pastor, and that's how I became a bishop because a bishop is a pastor over pastors.  And I did that for a number of years before I officially was what we call being consecrated; and when that happened, ooh--but I had been so accustomed to always being the one and only I didn't care.  I just went ahead and did what I had to do, because I'd been doing the work, and I had a number of male bishop friends say to me, "Why aren't you consecrated?"  I said, "Because there's a bishop around every corner.  They're a bunch of fake people trying to do this and do that.  They just want a title.  I don't need the drama."  He says to me, "That has nothing to do with you.  That's them.  This is you."  I said, "Yeah.  You know, I never thought about that."  So, there are some pastors in the United States that I am the bishop over them as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I didn't realize that Baptists had bishops.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--okay.
Speaker 2: And sometimes when people say, "There are no bishops in the Baptist church," my response is: "There are bishops in the Christian church," that shuts them right down.  But, when you really, when you look across the country, there is a Baptist bishop in Baltimore [Maryland], Walter Thomas [Walter S. Thomas]; there is a Baptist bishop in North Jersey [New Jersey], Donald Hilliard [Donald Hilliard, Jr.]; oh I could just--there's the president of the Hampton ministers' conference [Hampton University Ministers' Conference], Bishop Claude Alexander [Claude Richard Alexander, Jr.], which I was there last week.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Bishop Vashti [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well she's A.M.E., she's A.M.E.  But Claude Alexander is a Baptist pastor.  We're out there; so when people say that, they say it because they don't know what a bishop is.  They have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 2: --no idea what a bishop is or what a bishop does.
Story_ID: 658721
Speaker 1: But is it traditionally part of the Baptist ministry to have bishops?
Speaker 2: Not traditionally in this sense.  The Baptist churches are autonomous.  That means there is not a national bishop like the Church of God in Christ who can come in and say, "You can do this, but you can't do this; you can do this, but you can't do that."  A bishop is not called by God.  You're made a bishop by people; and if pastors and church leaders come to me and say, "I want to be under your spiritual covering," there's no one who can come in and say, "Those pastors can't be mentored by you."  I mean, that's kind of crazy.  That makes no sense (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so--yeah.  So that's what it means in a Baptist context that--
Speaker 2: A bishop is elected, yes.  A bishop is elected.
Speaker 1: --that you're elected by other bishops to be--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a leader of a group of bishops.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Of pastors.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I'm Baptist because I believe in the two ordinances of the church: water baptism by full immersion and the Lord's supper as often as you do this; and I am in fellowship with a number of Baptist pastors, but there are numerous Baptist pastors who are duly aligned; and whereas maybe thirty or forty years ago, you had these walls where your Baptist and that's it, you're Church of God in Christ and that's it.  That no longer exists.  I preach in more non-Baptist churches probably than any other church groups of faith communities.  There was a time, maybe twenty-five or thirty years ago, where you never would have a COGIC pastor preaching in a Baptist church.  You would never have a Methodist bishop preaching in a Church of God.  Well, you don't have that today.  You would not have a white pastor preaching in a black Baptist church.  We don't have that today.  We wouldn't have a woman standing in the pulpit in a Baptist church.  So, when you under- because most people who say that, you say to them, "What is a bishop?"  They don't have a clue.  They don't even know what the definition is.  They just see it as, you have a bigger title than I do, because they see it as a power struggle; and it's not that at all.  My goodness, it's not that.  That's the last thing that it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, a bishop is elected.
Speaker 1: So, but, do the pastors that signed on to be bishoped by you, I guess, (laughter) are they--I don't know if I said that right. But are they--
Speaker 2: That's close enough.
Speaker 1: --okay.  Are they--do they recognize a certain--is there a certain style or set of rules that they are guided by to put them in line with you, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, they make out--well, the pastors elected me for me to be consecrated, but after that pastors who come under my covering now apply to be a part of--for example, if you want to be, maybe I shouldn't use the Roman Catholic church, but that's what people are familiar with.  If you want to be a part of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church or the Baptist church, you don't just step into that.  You find out what it's about; and then you make application if you're accepted and received as a part of that faith community, then that's what you do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But in the group that you're a bishop of, there are no--you can't go in their church and tell them what to do or--
Speaker 2: Oh no, it's not, I provide--
Speaker 1: It's advisory rather than--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teaching and training and instruction is what I provide.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are there any financial ties?
Speaker 2: Yes, they're, because we have a yearly convocation where we all gather together; and I have a large number of churches in South Africa, we go there, I used to go two or three times a year, now I go at least once a year and I take a team here with me and the pastors that are in our fellowship here in the states.  They go over as well; and we teach so many pastors it's just amazing, who are not even a part of the fellowship [Worship Center Worldwide Fellowship of Churches] but they're so hungry for instruction because most pastors in South Africa in the churches I work with don't go to seminary and don't have a lot of training, so any thing that we take there, they're hungry for.
Story_ID: 658722
Speaker 1: Now you as a pastor had an Ed.D. [from Nova Southeastern University, Fort Lauderdale, Florida].  You're a doctor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as well as a reverend; but recently I guess in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 2010.
Speaker 1: --twenty ten [2010], yeah, you decide to get a doctorate of--
Speaker 2: Ministry.
Speaker 1: --of ministry.
Speaker 2: A master's of divinity, and then a doctor in ministry, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And because I'm a career student, I was excited about doing that.  I did it because (clears throat) the seminary asked me to be a faculty mentor and I said, "Well, I think I'd rather go through the program and get the degree first."  They said, "Oh, you have a terminal degree.  You don't have to do that."  But, I did it and oh, just enjoyed and loved every minute of it.  So, that's what I'm doing at United seminary now (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  United Theological Seminary in Dayton?
Speaker 2: In Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 1: In Dayton, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did you, we were talking about that earlier when I came in, that I know United has a long history with black pastors it goes--Charles Brown [ph.], George Thomas [ph.]; and then they have some relationship with Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Samuel D. Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Prathia Hall Wynne [Prathia Hall].  I want to call some great women out as well.  There are some of the most prolific and scholarly and excellent pastors in the nation presently are graduates of United because they have the best doctorate in ministry program in the nation--by far, the best.  And that's one reason why I wanted to go too, because you go to class and, oh my goodness, you look around and you say oh, there's So and So, there's So and So.  My goodness, they're students here?  So, I felt like I just really gained so much going through that program.
Speaker 1: Now that's saying something, now, you--because we've got like, there's ITT [sic. Interdenominational Theological Center] in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and (unclear) out in Denver [Colorado]; and a number of different seminaries, but that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm sure they're good schools, but this program is so unique and just a really wonderful experience; and it's just overflowing with some very interesting people, so that says something.  You know, when you throw those names out, "Oh, they graduated from United?"  When I saw the, when I see the--Charles Booth, when I see the whole--Cynthia Hale [Cynthia L. Hale], Elaine Flake [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Elaine Flake], Claudette Copeland [Claudette A. Copeland], Cynthia James--I look at the pictures and I go, my goodness; and I think all of the presidents of Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in the last several years, except the present one who just got elected, graduated from United.  So, that says a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I said let me get in here and see what's going on.
Story_ID: 658723
Speaker 1: (Background noise) Do you write a dissertation--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for this; and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Ministering to the blended family, because in churches you seldom see a family where it is the birth father and birth mother (laughter).  You know, you see a lot of blended families or single families; and I think that that presents a unique dynamic and brings some interesting issues to the church beyond just preaching a sermon on Sunday and having a little bible study on a Wednesday night.  So being aware of that drives a lot of the kind of programming that I have here at the church [Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] because of blended families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of the issues, I guess, with blended families that--that you have, you know, learned to at least help solve?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Fatherlessness and how that impacts boys in the community, how that impacts girls in the community; (clears throat) single parents, whether that is a mother or a father being the only adult in the home and not being there to, perhaps, provide the kind of parenting that youngsters need because that single parent is the breadwinner and everything and all things to the children in the home.  And being this is an inner city basically church, and people bring a lot of issues with that--addiction, incarceration, lack of education, lack of employment, those kinds of things, lifestyle differences, et cetera.  All that comes in to your front door on Sunday and I have to preach to that, to people who struggle with those kind of challenges.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now who was your advisor?
Speaker 2: My advisor?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you have an advisor for your doctorate?
Speaker 2: Harold Hudson--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who is now the associate dean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think the most recent, or at least the famous applicant at United [United Theological Seminary, Dayton, Ohio], or student going through was Omarosa was--
Speaker 2: Yes, she was there for a minute.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, she didn't finish the program?
Speaker 2: No, because she, I li- matter of fact I liked her but she came with cameras and some people didn't--the cameras would follow her around the class and then she'd get in class and tell off the professor, and, oh, it was just strange.  I think she thought she was on a reality show, and they said don't bring this circus in here.  And she was gone, like, you know.  But then--
Speaker 1: I can't think of her last name but she's famous for--
Speaker 2: Omarosa Manigault.
Speaker 1: Manigault, right.  She was of the--
Speaker 2: Trump [Donald John Trump]--the Trump show ['The Apprentice'].
Speaker 1: Trump show, and the boss or--yeah.
Speaker 2: And then that dating show ['The Ultimate Merger']; and now she's assistant pastor at a church in California [Weller Street Missionary Baptist Church, Los Angeles, California].  So, I don't know what that is, but I don't know.  She was all right with me, but they didn't like it.  It was too much.
Speaker 1: So you finished in 2012, right?
Speaker 2: Twenty ten [2010].
Speaker 1: Twenty ten [2010]?  Okay.  All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty- '09 [2009], 2010, yeah.
Story_ID: 658724
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major you would do differently?  You've done so many things, especially within a few years (laughter) that '84 [1984] to '86 [1986] period (unclear) really--but is there anything major you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't think of a thing I'd do differently.  No.
Speaker 1: And, once again, if you look at that period of your career, what do you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy?  Explain that a little better.
Speaker 1: As, as accomplishment for, you know, as a professional--both as an educator and as a pastor, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I introduced and led so many people to a productive life in Christ.  That's my path.  Yeah.  And produced two great kids [Jason Thompson and Melissa Thompson].
Story_ID: 658725
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That we would value and respect one another, especially women; and be supportive of each other.  Yeah.  Very basic and simple, that.
Story_ID: 658726
Speaker 1: What are your future plans?  I know we--there's a framed picture of you and a new church.  I suppose that's part of your future plan, a new place.  But is there more, I mean?
Speaker 2: We hope to, we hope to move and expand to a larger location where I can reopen the Christian academy [Excell Christian Academy].  We have a very thriving Bible institute [Worship Center Bible Training Institute] that trains ministers and laypersons, and I really hope to expand that.  I have a Bible institute in South Africa; and I have brought some of those ministers here for training and I hope to do that more in the future; and a larger space would afford me to fulfill that dream--providing more education and training for church leaders.
Speaker 1: Do you have any cap on how large you want your church [Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to get, or do you see it as a denomination; or, well, it can't be a denom- well, or do you--well do you have a position on how large you think your church ought to be?
Speaker 2: No.  I want it to be as large as it should be.  Whatever that--I don't have a number in mind.  I'm just so focused on doing the work that whatever the fruit of that is in numbers is fine with me.  I mean, I'm not hung up on numbers.  I don't see a church as a success if you have a thousand plus members; I see a church a success if you are producing fruit in people's lives, whatever that number might be.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right now the numbers are about--oh, there are over three thousand members--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you're associated with, under your umbrella as bishop, so many other--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --thousands of people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as well as--you know here and South Africa.
Speaker 2: South Africa.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now do you--I was telling you earlier, the first pastor I interviewed was Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor], and he had a manual for pastors and just a list of accomplishments, the Concord, which was the largest church in the U.S. at one time--
Speaker 2: Concord Baptist?
Speaker 1: --Concord Baptist [Concord Baptist Church] in New York [Brooklyn, New York], the things they were doing, including like credit unions and, you know, just a lot of things to help the community.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you see the church doing that sort of thing for the community in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I certainly hope so.  Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  We're doing a little bit of investigating and getting into that as a result of having to, you know, maintain a mortgage and work with banks.  I'm able to offer opportunities for some things that people might not otherwise be exposed to--as far as job training, life preparation skills and family, just addressing family issues, and help- ha- helping people to just have a better life, not just in the religious area but to have a better life as a person.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what size budget are you working with here?
Speaker 2: Millions [of dollars].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Millions (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said that very quietly (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah.
Story_ID: 658727
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your family.
Speaker 2: I am very happily married to a wonderful man [I. Marino Hunter].  We've been married fifteen years, and he is in the medical profession.  He works with neurosurgeons at Temple hospital here in the city [Temple University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; and he is not a preacher but is by my side as a leader in the church [Baptist Worship Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a partner in ministry.  And my children, my son's [Jason Thompson] in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], he'll be graduating this year; and my daughter [Melissa Thompson] is training to be a dental hygienist.  And I have a wonderful little grandson; and a great family, a great family.
Story_ID: 658728
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You also have a publishing company associated with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And (unclear)?
Speaker 2: And I only publish my own books.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have so many authors and pastors who come to me and say, "I want you to publish my book."  No.  I'm not--you know.  I, in writing my books with other--Whitaker House and with Destiny Image publishing [Destiny Image Publishers]. I observed the process and I said I could do this.  I could write the--I write the book.  I have graphic artists.  I know how to brand something.  Why do I need this middle person and pay them a percentage?  So, I started Hunter House Publishing, and self publish my books; and (clears throat) I know when you're with an established publishing company you have distribution, but I travel so much and speak to such large groups that I'm, I do my own distribution.  So I di- I cut out that middle person, but I only publish my own work.
Story_ID: 658729
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't discussed we probably--I know we're missing something--but is there anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't--I can't--
Speaker 1: --we need to talk about that we haven't before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: --can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different--a little bit more personal: how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who heard the voice of God and was courageous and confident and bold enough to follow the path, and not veer from it. Regardless of what the distractions might have been, I did it, and did it to death--to life.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
