Story_ID: 656787
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Chris Harris [Hughes' son-in-law, Christopher Harris]. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Sandra, S-A-N-D-R-A, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Daye, D-A-Y-E, Hughes, H-U-G-H-E-S [HistoryMaker Sandra Hughes].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born October 18th, 1946 in Durham, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Presently, I am teaching journalism at North Carolina A and T State University [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and, as far as a title is concerned, I'm adjunct, I'm a lecturer, I'm, I'm everything except a full professor (laughter), so, but I did get an honorary doctorate from North Carolina A and T so I am referred to as Dr. Hughes on campus.
Speaker 1: And you were, you were the long time anchor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --talk show host, news reporter for--
Speaker 2: WFMY-TV News 2 [Greensboro, North Carolina], and they are owned by the Gannett broadcasting organization [Gannett Company, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 13th, 19--no, not 19, 2014 (laughter).
Speaker 1: I let people do that to themselves (laughter).
Speaker 2: I know it.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Greensboro, North Carolina, at my home, which is 20 Cape May Point. The zip code is 27455.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This area is referred to as Lake Jeanette because all, most of the houses are built around this eleven hundred square foot lake.
Story_ID: 656788
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer. First one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite food would be tomatoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The beach, any beach (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if anyone has said this before but my favorite is: never give up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you fall, get back up immediately. And I don't know if anyone said that but me, but (laughter), but that's what I teach my children, teach my students, just never, ever let a fall keep you down.
Speaker 1: It sounds like good advice if you're going to continue on, is not to give up because after you give up, you're not (laughter)--
Speaker 2: If you fall down and don't get up, life will roll over you and bury you and you'll never do anything again.
Story_ID: 656789
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but separately, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Alice, A-L-I-C-E, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Amis, A-M-I-S, Daye, D-A-Y-E [Alice Amis Daye].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 20th, 1923, and in Durham [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, Durham. Now, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family or can you trace them back to some other location or, or--
Speaker 2: Not locations but her mother was Evaline Woods Pulley, I'm sorry, Evaline Woods Amis Pulley [Evaline Woods Pulley], and she was born in Granville County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's Granville County?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's exactly right next door to Durham County [North Carolina] and her parents were Alice [Alice Woods] and Clem Woods, C-L-E-M, Clem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't know who their parents were.
Speaker 1: So that takes us back to, so your mother's born in '23 [1923] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty-three [1923].
Speaker 1: Her mother, I'm seeing around the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this was around--
Speaker 2: Somewhere 1908, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: So, by the time we get to great-grandmother, we're back in 1880s--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, so, then they're not, aren't any stories on your mother's side of slavery or emancipation or any of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's always amazing to me that nobody passes down that, those kinds of, there are a few we get, we don't get that many stories passed down from that era but, okay. So, what did your great-grandparents do on your side?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm, I've always thought that they were farmers but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, unfortunately, I haven't traced my family tree so, which is something that I said I was going to do when I retired.
Speaker 1: And what did your grandmother do?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a housekeeper and a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did they, did she and her husband [Charlie Amis] own their own land or did she--
Speaker 2: No, they were sharecroppers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Meaning they farmed for the man.
Speaker 1: All right, so he'd rent them the land in exchange for the produce that they produced?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were given a house, you know, of course, no plumbing, no electricity, no nothing, and they would farm--tobacco farm. They would, would harvest the farm, the tobacco, and then the man who owned the land would give them a little portion of the money that they made when they sold the tobacco. So they lived on, something like three or four thousand dollars a year which is unbelievable nowadays.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is your mother raised in Granville or--
Speaker 2: No, she was in Durham.
Speaker 1: Raised in Durham--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now she was the oldest of five children so she became the mother because her mother was out in the fields priming tobacco and at the barn helping with tobacco. And she said at a very, very young age, my mother was there taking care of her siblings and cooking food and, even when her siblings got old enough, they'd go out in the fields and help but my mother said, she never wanted to be out in the fields (laughter) so she took on the responsibilities of the house.
Speaker 1: Okay, now it sounds as though she was almost like born to that in other words?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That kind, now was she able to finish school?
Speaker 2: Yes, she finished high school, Little River High School in Durham, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two words, Little River.
Speaker 1: Now this is a black high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause in those days, that was the only kind you had and so, in North Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and let me tell you this, Larry [Larry Crowe], I don't know if you need it but, my son-in-law, Chris' [Christopher Harris] father and my mother were best friends. Isn't that interesting?
Speaker 1: That is interesting.
Speaker 2: His name was Benjamin Harris [ph.]. They weren't boyfriend and girlfriend, is my understanding, they were just good buddies.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So when my daughter [Tiffany Hughes Harris] came home and said, "My new boyfriend says his daddy and my grandmother were in school together," I said, "Ah, that's impossible." You know, maybe with me he was, and she said no, so I went to my mother and I said, "Mother, do you know someone named Ben Harris?" And she said, "Sure, I know Benjamin Harris." She said, "We were best buddies at Little River," but I do say (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is something, so, people linked.
Speaker 2: So then that's when I told my daughter, now make sure Chris is not related to you (laughter), you know, if they grew up together like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now did your mother, did she remain a housewife or did she--
Speaker 2: When we moved to Greensboro [North Carolina], when I was five years old, she started doing work as a maid. She was a housewife for a while and then she'd go clean houses for people who lived in the richer parts of town, and then she eventually started working at a motel as a maid. Down the road, she became the supervisor of the maids at Holiday Inn and then the Hilton [Hilton Hotels and Resorts].
Story_ID: 656790
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Alice Amis Daye] have any special talents or, that you know about that--
Speaker 2: Persistence. She was a great cook and was extremely particular about cleaning. In fact, my sister [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] and I never learned to cook through her because she wouldn't let us in the kitchen. She said (laughter), she said we weren't, our little hands were not clean enough to get in her food. She said, "Get out of here with your little doggie hands," you know, because we had dogs that we played with but she, she was a very good housekeeper, very good cook, an extremely giving and caring person and, and persistence. I mean, she insisted that her four children and her husband [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] go out and become something, be something. I laugh when she used to say when we'd go out of the house, wherever we were going, she said, "Now go out there and act like folks." And we weren't (laughter), weren't quite sure what folks were but we, we knew what she meant was, don't go out there and embarrass me.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), that's an interesting sta- statement there.
Story_ID: 656791
Speaker 1: I'm going to go over to your father's side and we'll see how they met (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Ca- can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Now, I have two fathers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, my biological father's name was Alexander McMillian, Millian, M-I-L-L-I-A-N, Cotton, C-O-T-T-O-N [Alexander Cotton], and he was born in Durham [North Carolina], August 20th, I'm sorry, 29th, 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about him and the--his people?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a part of my life, my entire life, which was really great. Even though I didn't live with him, I had vacations with him, visitations with him, he came to our house to visit. He was the son of Oscar [sic. Paul Cotton] and Hannah Cotton, C-O-T-T-O-N, and they were from Stovall, S-T-O-V-A-L-L, North Carolina. They, too, were farmers.
Speaker 1: From Stovall, okay.
Speaker 2: She died when, when my father was about five years old and so he never knew his mother very well but, you know, so his father raised he and, he had three brothers so there were four boys that lived with the father. He said there were times when they were sort of doled out to aunts and uncles but somehow they always would come back and live together.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your biological father grew up in, in Durham?
Speaker 2: He grew up in Durham. He went to North Carolina Central University [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and when he got that degree, then he moved on to Washington [D.C.]. He got a couple of ma- he got an M.B.A. and another master's degree and I, right now can't remember the name of the university. It was not in Washington but then he spent his career working for the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs].
Speaker 1: Okay, but he stayed in touch with you, you know--
Speaker 2: All the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which, which to me was the coolest thing in the world because I had two dads and the two dads liked each other, and so when he would come from Washington to Greensboro [North Carolina] because, like I said, we moved to Greensboro when I was five, he stayed at our house and when my stepdad, who I called, Daddy [Charlie Daye], would take me to Washington to see him, he stayed at his house. So it, it was like the best of all worlds.
Story_ID: 656792
Speaker 1: What about your stepfather. What's his name?
Speaker 2: His names was Charlie Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D, Daye, D-A-Y-E [Charlie Daye].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 10th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Was he born in Durham [North Carolina] too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what do you know about his, his family?
Speaker 2: His, his family, Alfred [Alfred Daye] and Alice Daye, were his parents and they had eleven children. He, I'm not sure where he fell, I can't remember where he fell in the group. He was somewhere in the middle but they lived in Durham and his father did own the land that they lived on and it was farmland. He had horses and, I'm not real sure what crop or anything they used but they did own their land.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what did Mr. Daye do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer and Ms. Alice was a housekeeper.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your stepfather, what did he do?
Speaker 2: He got two degrees from North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], one in auto mechanics and one in industrial arts education and he tried teaching for a few months and did not like it so he went to work at the U.S. Postal Service [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] as an auto mechanic and that's where he spent his thirty year career.
Story_ID: 656793
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met? How your biological father and your mother met?
Speaker 2: It's my understanding they met at school and became great friends (laughter), I guess even boyfriend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this, this would be--
Speaker 2: This is Alexander [Hughes' biological father, Alexander Cotton]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So, what high school were they at?
Speaker 2: Little River [Little River High School, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Little River, okay, Little--okay.
Speaker 2: And, and they became close enough that they had me (laughter). At the time, Charlie Daye, my dad, my daddy, was, had gone off to war, World War II [WWII] and that's when mother and Alexander became close. When Charlie came back from the war, mother turned her attention to him and, and I'm not sure how that worked out, but then Alexander kind of backed off and then mother married Charlie.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. That's interesting, you hardly hear stories like that.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know, and especially back in that time because it's my understanding that when young girls would get pregnant, they'd get sent off out of town somewhere and when they came home with the baby, they'd claim it was the grandmother's baby and, you know, those kind of things, but my parents, obviously, were very open about it. I lived my first five years with my [maternal] grandparents because, you know, well my mother was there too and my dad was there but, but we were all there and even when my daddy decided he was going to A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] to get a degree on his, VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], what do you call it, the VA benefits--
Speaker 1: Yeah, G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].
Speaker 2: G.I. Bill, that's right, mother went with him and I stayed there with my grandparents. And while they were gone, they had my sister Faye [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] and then they had Charles [Hughes' half-brother, Charles Daye], brother Charles, but I still, I was so in love with my grandparents until I called my mother, Ree, her name was Marie [Alice Amis Daye], but I called her Ree and I called my daddy, Charlie. So when it was time for me to go to school, my mother came and said, "Okay, we have to take her now to Greensboro [North Carolina] so she can go to school," because you can imagine the schools in rural Durham County [North Carolina] were not wonderful. She says, "She's going to come to Greensboro with us," and, and I just, it was like somebody had died. I just thought I was going to die 'cause I didn't want to leave Evaline [Evaline Woods Pulley] and, go back, Evaline had married, again, to a man named Leslie Poshia Pulley [Poshia Pulley] 'cause her first husband went off up north trying to find a better way and didn't come back. So, the thought of leaving them just killed me but I went to, but I had no choice. My mother said, "I'm sorry, she has to go." My grand- I can remember my grandmother pleading with her, "Please don't take her from me, please don't," and my grandfather, Leslie Poshia, walked off down in the woods and you could hear him howling like a wolf (makes sound), just, you know, it was, it was the saddest thing, it was just breaking my heart.
Speaker 1: Now this is really amazing.
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, so anyway, they, they made me go to Greensboro and I got there and I was pouting. I was so mad. I mean, I liked them but I wanted to be with my grandmother. And so finally one day my daddy sat me down and he said, "Listen, you're gonna live here with me. I'm not Charlie, I'm daddy, that's not Ree, that's your mother," he said, "so, just get over it," (laughter) and so, you know, that's, that's what happened with me. And so I went to school, we didn't have kindergarten. I went first grade and every year when school was over, by that weekend they'd have me packed up and back in Durham with my grandmother and I would stay there until like the weekend before school started again, they'd come back and get me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had like two households, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --even though related, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and like I said, my grandmother's first husband, Charlie Amis, went off, up to Ohio, looking for a better way and never came back. They--I think he wrote to them a few times, whatever, but he just didn't come back. Then my grandmother fell in love with Leslie Poshia Pulley who was from Spring Lake, North Carolina, and he moved in and became the daddy of the house. She and he never had any children together but he took care of the five that Charlie Amis had left there. And, you know, here's where I thought I was the most special person in the world because I had a grandmother and a grandfather who seemed to adore me, I had a mother and a daddy, who seemed to adore me, I had a father and his brothers, who seemed to, so I was just the queen of the world (laughter) in my opinion.
Story_ID: 656794
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when you think about all these influences and, all these people who did adore you, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Ree [Alice Amis Daye] (laughter). I think I have her caring nature, her nurturing nature. I try to see about everybody, put me last and try to see about everybody else and I also believe in her business of act like folks, that when you go out, don't take what you do at home with you but act like people who are outside acting.
Speaker 1: Act like folks.
Story_ID: 656795
Speaker 1: Now your brothers and sisters, you've got three?
Speaker 2: I have a sister, well, I grew up with a sister and two brothers. My father [Hughes' biological father, Alexander Cotton] had a daughter and two sons, so I'm in the middle of three and three, although I grew up in the house with my sister and two brothers, with mommy [Alice Amis Daye] and daddy [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye].
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you name your siblings beginning with the oldest one, you know, and put, put yourself in order? So you're first?
Speaker 2: I'm first, in both, on both sides--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then, in the Daye household, there was Twyla Faye Daye [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn], Charles Bernard Daye [Hughes' half-brother, Charles Daye] and Michael Gary Daye [Hughes' half-brother, Michael Daye]. On the other side, you had Carlton, Carlton Alexander Cotton [Carlton Cotton], then you had Michael Cotton and then Anita Cotton.
Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about what they're doing now and--
Speaker 2: Well, my sister, Faye, lived and spent her many years, thirty some years in Florida, Tampa, Florida. She was married and had a son [Zachary Kahn]. She's divorced from her husband and her son is grown and out in the world. She just moved back to Greensboro [North Carolina] with me last October because she needed more back surgery. She's had four back surgeries. After her back surgeries, about three or four weeks later, she fell and broke her neck. So now she's got a broken neck and she still wears the, you know, the brace under her neck and now she also needs another surgery on her adrenal glands. So she's really suffering very difficultly, with a lot of illnesses, and she feels alone since she doesn't have her husband anymore, her son, and she talks to her son all the time but he's not here. My brother, Charles, oh, he was the big stuff in the family. He worked for large companies and was always human resources and he just retired from Ceridian [Ceridian HCM, Inc.], which is a, I think, a credit card company where he was a senior vice president for human resources, you know, over three or four thousand people. He retired and he and his wife, Alice [Alice Daye], have moved back to L.A., California [Los Angeles, California]. That's the city they lived in for a while that they just loved and anytime they had to move to Phoenix [Arizona] or Chicago [Illinois] or Florida, they always dreamed about going back to L.A. So they went back to L.A. because their son there just got married and had a son so now they're there doting over that grandson. Charles is one of those kids who always had fancy mansions, at least five or six cars in the garage and I'm talking about cars, Jaguars and Porsche and Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] and, you know, he's the one with the money. And then there's Michael who lives here in Greensboro and he has, he grad- well, let me go back. Faye graduated and has a master's in biology. She worked for Merck pharmaceuticals [Merck and Co., Inc.] until she had a really bad car accident and had to quit. Charles has a degree in political science from North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Michael has a degree in business administration from A and T but he has spent his career working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], like my dad. He started working there when he was sixteen, part time, and, and when he graduated from college, he thought, "Gosh, I've got so much time and benefits put in at the post office, I can't leave," and so he's just stayed there so he's been there now almost forty years. And he was, he was married and divorced and had three children and now he's married again. Now, on the other side, you've got Carlton, who's a car salesman. He has a degree, but I don't know what it's in. Michael has a degree in business and he owns a computer company and they have contracts with the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs]. And Anita graduated, she's been a elementary school teacher. Right now she's not working at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So that's, so, you spent time with your, I know your three brothers and sisters here and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, most of my time is spent with them--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Greensboro.
Speaker 2: --but I am also from what they tell me, I'm extremely well liked by the other three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you did spend time with them too?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so, you know, I've got all these people. It's almost like I've got a, a heavenly chorus of people all around me because I didn't actually meet my biological father's three children until we were grown. I knew about them but his wife was not willing for me to come and be a part of that, that three. So every time I went to spend vacations with them or go places with them, she would send her children off to Norfolk [Virginia], to her mother. And so I grew up knowing all about them and hearing all about them but they didn't know me. And so, finally, one, after their mother died, her name was Jean, Jean Cotton [ph.], she died and my father's new lady friend said, "This is enough of this, let's put these children together." So she arranged a meeting at a hotel in Maryland and my husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] and I drove up and I was so nervous. I mean, I knew them, I knew all about them, I'd seen pictures, I knew what they were doing but they didn't know about me. So, we met at the hotel and I just, I was holding my breath. I thought, dear God, please let them like me, and they just embraced me like God had sent down an angel. So, I keep having these people that like me. I can name very few people who can't stand me (laughter). I'm sure there are plenty of them but, you know, I grew up surrounded by people who liked me.
Story_ID: 656796
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Most of it's on the tobacco farm [in Durham County, North Carolina]. I used to hand leaves, do you know what that means? When the gentleman in the field would prime the tobacco, meaning, breaking it off the stalks and bring it in by mule and a slide and they'd put it on a table and I would take three or four leaves together and hand it to the person who is tying it on a stick. And so I was, I was a leaf handler. I used to love to do that and if we had a great day, my grandmother [Hughes' maternal grandmother, Evaline Woods Pulley] would give my cousin, now he lived there too, my cousin, Wayne [ph.], give us a nickel and we'd go up to the store and get a big, Lotta Cola. Have you ever heard of that? We'd go get a Lotta Cola and, and we--
Speaker 1: Like a bigger twenty ounce--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the twenty ounce, almost like a Coke [Coca-Cola], it tasted like a Coke, but we'd go and get that and that was, it was like Christmas. We thought that was great. I remember one time when I was jumping up to the tobacco bench that they would lay the tobacco leaves on, it was empty and they had gone back to the field to get more and I was jumping up and down on it and went through it and it ripped my side open, just, it was horrible, and my grandmother and grandfather [Hughes' maternal step-grandfather, Poshia Pulley] took me home and, I mean, we didn't have a car or anything, we were nowhere near town, no buses, so they just doctored on that, that big cut on my side for days. You know, I ran fevers, I was sick, I cried and, but they used all of those old remedies to make it better. I've got scars to show you right now (laughter) but I never had any medical treatment for it and I'll never forget that 'cause I just, I was scared to death.
Speaker 1: How old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I had to be about five, four or five.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were saying that you left them, you were about five when you left?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, between five and six (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had, you hadn't started school, started school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, because you had to be six, I think, back then to start school. They didn't start at five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You remember, they didn't have kindergartens or any of that, you'd just start first grade.
Speaker 1: Oh, they didn't have kindergarten? No kindergartens here?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think they might have had private kindergartens but the school systems didn't have kindergartens. When I came here, I was born in October and most schools required you to be six by sometime in September but I'd already learned how to write and spell and count and do all of those things from all of these, these people who adored me, so my mother [Alice Amis Daye] took me off to a public school and they said, "We need to see her birth certificate." And mother says, "I have to get it from Durham [North Carolina]." So I was in that school about two weeks and when the birth certificate came, it showed them that I had missed the deadline. So they said, "Well, we're going to have to put her out," and my mother was just heartbroken. So she brought us home. We lived in public housing [Morningside Homes, Greensboro, North Carolina], which was pretty tough and she said, "I am not going to let her spend a year sitting here, listening to everything that goes on around outside and everything," she said, "so, she's going to school," and she took us down to the Catholic church, had us baptized Catholic, so I went to the Catholic schools, and that's how I started my Catholic education.
Story_ID: 656797
Speaker 1: So you started off at Catholic school. What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Our Lady, O-U-R, L-A-D-Y, of the Miraculous, M-I-R-A-C-U-L-O-U-S, Medal, M-E-D-A-L [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Now try to say that when you're six years old (laughter), so we nicknamed the, my friends and I called it, Rac Rac [ph.] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Rac Rac.
Speaker 2: And we were taught by Sisters of Charity, the nuns, and the priest who were there at the school were Franciscan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1952?
Speaker 2: I would--yeah, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so after this year in Catholic--well, is it, were there all black students in the Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and all the nuns were white, priests were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were from, most of 'em from Boston [Massachusetts], it seems for some reason. One of the things my mother [Alice Amis Daye] liked about that, (background noise) she did not want us to have the same language, the same accents as some--I'm going to have to get Chris [Hughes' son-in-law, Christopher Harris] to go upstairs. And so, you know, we grew up speaking like the nuns more than anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she didn't want you to have a southern accent or a North Carolina accent?
Speaker 2: How do I say this nicely? We lived in public housing [Morningside Homes, Greensboro, North Carolina] and a lot of the families and children around us had substandard language, if you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, well, limited vocabulary, maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and a lot of slang.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's exactly what I'm trying to say and--
Speaker 1: Okay, it's just an everyday language you find in the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. And she always said, "I don't want you to go out and talk and act and think like everybody else out in the yard." So, as a result, we stayed in the house most of the time.
Speaker 1: Language does affect how you think, you know, okay. So, anyway, so, you're going to, you were there like, how long did you stay at Our Lady--
Speaker 2: From first through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went through--okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And all four of us did.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, did you have any, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, Sister Mary Margaret [ph.].
Speaker 1: And why, why was she your favorite?
Speaker 2: She was kind. Despite what some people think, nuns can be tough (laughter), you know. They would crack your knuckles with a ruler in a heartbeat or with a pencil, but Sister Mary Margaret was very sweet.
Speaker 1: I know they're famous for that in Chicago [Illinois]. They have like a play called 'Nunsense' [Dan Goggin] or something. Nuns are whacking people, you know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, it was tough.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, I mean so, and, and did you have a favorite subject matter in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved to write.
Story_ID: 656798
Speaker 1: I liked to write poems and stories and I used to love to tell stories. I mean that was just, I'll never forget coming home at night and we'd all gather in the kitchen because that was the warmest room in the house and my mother [Alice Amis Daye] was cooking and I'd sit there and just tell--I'd entertain the family, telling stories, telling jokes, making up things to tell and my dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] would laugh so hard, tears would run down his face and he said, "This girl, I'll tell you, I'm going to drive her to California so she can be on 'The Ed Sullivan Show'" (laughter).
Speaker 2: When 'Ed Sullivan' was in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he said California and I thought, I believed him.
Speaker 2: What a waste of gas. So, what were some of your stories? (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'd tell stories about things that happened in school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina] that day and I'd always try to make them funny. We had a lot of bullies in school and that wasn't funny but I would try to turn it into a funny story about how one day two of the girls, the head bullies, told my sister, who was about fourteen months younger than I am, they says, "Today, we're going to beat you up and so you meet down in the park," there's a park next to the school, "meet us at the park so you can get your beating this afternoon." Well, I was sort of a timid child and I was just scared to death and I said to my sister, "You're not going." She says, "Oh, yes, I am." She was almost, a lot braver than me. And so, all day long, I kept thinking, gosh, I can't let her go by herself because then mother's going to get me when I get home for letting her do that. So, my best friend, Ann Mitchell [ph.], says, "Why are you so upset?" And I said, "'Cause Faye's [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] getting beat up today down in the park." And I said, "And I don't know what to do." And she says, "Well I don't either but I'll go with you." And so then, Ann's cousin was there and she said to Ann, "What's wrong with you?" And she said, "Well, Sandra's sister, Faye, is going to get beat up at the park today and I've got to go with her 'cause Sandra's [HistoryMaker Sandra Hughes] scared to go." And so then the cousin says, "Well, okay, I'll go with you." And so then the cousin told her best friend, Vicky Adams [ph.], "Faye's getting beat up at the park today, so I'm going to go with Ann and Ann's going to go with Sandra and Sandra's going to think--." And so Vicky said, "Well, I'll go with you." And so, when we showed up at the park that afternoon, we had this big entourage of people and the two girls, who didn't expect that, said to my sister, "Well, we'll just get you another day." So (laughter) (makes sound), thank goodness. And my, my baby brother, the youngest one, was in a nursery school across the street from our school and we'd have to go and pick him up and, and run home with him, run, because, since we lived in the housing projects [Morningside Homes, Greensboro, North Carolina], we wore uniforms. We had a navy blue jumper with a white puff sleeved blouse, white socks and brown tie up shoes, the Buster Brown shoes, and my brothers [Hughes' half-brothers, Charles Daye and Michael Daye] had to wear navy blue trousers, a long sleeve shirt and a blue necktie. Well, if we walked down through public housing in that getup, we'd have rocks thrown at us, sticks, we'd get pushed and, you know, because we were weird. We just looked weird to them. So we got out of school about ten or fifteen minutes before the public schools got out so, I, we'd run across the street, grab my little brother, I'd put him on my hip and we'd take off home as fast as we could to get home to take these uniforms off, and that was tough. And my sister did get in lots of scrapes 'cause she'd get home and her sleeve was torn off and (laughter), and she would drag her toes of her shoes on the sidewalk as we're walking so her shoes were all scuffed up, but I'll tell you, when we woke up the next morning, those shoes would be shined, standing tall, sleeves sewn back onto the shirt and my mother said, "'Cause you're going to that school" (laughter), okay, that was that.
Story_ID: 656799
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Lots of sound, because being in public housing, a lot of people were really loud, you know, whether they were being happy or not happy.
Speaker 1: Now this is low rise public housing, I guess? Is it--
Speaker 2: It was two story.
Speaker 1: Two story, yeah, two story (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, we had a two story house.
Speaker 1: These are brick houses?
Speaker 2: Brick houses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're gone now. It was called Morningside Homes [Greensboro, North Carolina] back then and they were brand new when we moved in them and let me tell you, when we moved in there, we thought we had arrived because having lived in Durham [North Carolina], in a house with no running water, no bathroom, no electricity, no heat, no nothing, when we moved to Morningside Homes, and you could flip a switch and the lights would come on, flush a toilet and see the water swirling around, open a refrigerator and light came in, you know, we couldn't have been any richer than that. We thought, we thought that was just great.
Speaker 1: Well, the housing projects, when they were first initiated, were not bad, they were, they were--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, yeah. And like I said, we moved in them when they were brand new. So (makes sound), we thought we were on top of things. And, but, you know, I heard a lot of, a lot of laughing, a lot of crying, a lot of conversations but a lot of arguments and, from other families all around us. So, so we had to deal with a lot of that. When we'd get to school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina], it's almost like we had gone to another world because then we said the rosary every day so you'd hear a lot of chanting, a lot of prayers, you know, and the nuns' voices sounded really different from what my neighbors voices sounded like. So those were the sounds. And then we had a trolley near our house that rode on tracks down the street with the little poles connected to the lines at the top to go downtown. And, and, we'd, you know, we heard, when we'd hear those, we'd get excited because maybe that meant we were going to go downtown but we never did. My dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye], being a mechanic, always would buy old junk cars from a place called Greasy Gene's [Greensboro, North Carolina]. (Laughter) It was a car junkyard and he'd get a car from Greasy Gene's and bring it home and fix it up and that's what we'd drive, and they were always big cars like Lincolns and Cadillacs and so we, we were on top of things. I remember him bringing one Lincoln home one day, it was light blue, huge car, it looked like a tank, and he told my mother [Alice Amis Daye], he says, "Look, you're gonna love this." He opened the trunk, he said, "This is big enough for us to sleep in when we go out of town" (laughter) because, you know, of course, we had trouble getting into hotels or motels then. He said, "We can sleep here in the trunk." I thought, goodness, gracious. I thought that was pretty cool, actually (laughter).
Speaker 1: Greasy Gene's, huh?
Story_ID: 656800
Speaker 1: What did you think of television at that, at that, when you're in grade school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Not very much at all. Like I said, we had a television but the programming was extremely limited. You know, TV would come on, what, about seven o'clock in the morning and it would sign off at midnight and we could get channel--CBS, NBC and ABC, just the three channels. Very, very little, if any, local programming. It was the news, it was, my favorite show on TV was 'Winky Dink' ['Winky Dink and You']. Do you remember 'Winky Dink'?
Speaker 1: I don't remember 'Winky Dink.'
Speaker 2: Aha, I got you finally.
Speaker 1: I don't think I do.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a little, a little show with a little character that, you know said, "Hello, let me show you how to do this today," and that kind of thing. And so then they finally started selling Winky Dink screens. It was a clear, green plastic looking screen that you would push, you know, paste to your TV set and you could draw on it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you could draw on the other side. I know 'Pinky Lee' ['The Pinky Lee Show'] used to have--
Speaker 2: 'Pinky Lee' was one of the--
Speaker 1: --he used to have the same kind of thing. You'd get, he would have the same kind of thing, he'd sell, and you'd draw along with him.
Speaker 2: Along with him.
Speaker 1: He'd draw on his side of the screen and copy on your side--
Speaker 2: And you'd copy on your side.
Speaker 1: --that you'd re-enforce the idea that somebody was in the set.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and when I had my tonsils taken out, I think I was about, about seven years old, my grandmother [Hughes' maternal grandmother, Evaline Woods Pulley] came from Durham [North Carolina], on the bus, to stay with me and she brought me a Winky Dink screen. Oh, man, that was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: That's something. So, well you were, so now, so you only watched the children's shows or mostly--
Speaker 2: Yes, and then shows like 'Superman' ['Adventures of Superman'], 'Boston Blackie,' 'The Lone Ranger,' those kind of things. You know, they were pretty child friendly back in those days.
Speaker 1: Were there many African Americans on television?
Speaker 2: No, no. I don't, honestly, right now, I can't think of an African American that was on TV.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know, I believe, occasionally, on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' there would be someone.
Speaker 2: Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], somebody like that, somebody big.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, do you remember 'Nat King Cole Show' ['The Nat King Cole Show'], he had a show that lasted about a half a year?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the show, I surely remember him, but I don't remember the show. Another show we used to watch all the time, but don't ask me why, it was 'Hee Haw,' which was sort of a--
Speaker 1: That's, that's later in high school [Notre Dame High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was one of those shows where they were in cornfields and all that stuff and 'The Lawrence Welk Show.' When I think about it now, I think (makes sound) (laughter), but we watched what was on TV. You know, we didn't have a hundred channels to turn to.
Story_ID: 656801
Speaker 1: Now what about church? Was the church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, we went to the Catholic church [Our Lady Of The Miraculous Medal Church; St. Mary's Catholic Church, Greensboro, North Carolina] that was right on the same campus as our school [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina]. And when I said we went to church, we went to church. My mother [Alice Amis Daye] saw to it that we were always, always, at Mass on Sunday morning. And if it was during the time of Lent or any other special time, we always were at church. She didn't go all the time, she'd go occasionally but she would make my dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] get out and drive us to the church and then, you know, bring us back home when the Mass was over. He didn't go in either. He, he was raised Baptist and so he was not interested in going to Catholic schools. But I can say that my mother was the boss in the family so if she told him to drive us to church (laughter), he'd drive us to church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and Catholicism was a huge part of my life all the way until, I want to say '75 [1975], '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 656802
Speaker 1: I guess around 1959 or so, you, you, you graduated from elementary school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: And you went to, went from that to--
Speaker 2: Notre Dame High School [Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Notre Dame High School.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Another Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went there from nine through twelfth [grade].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now do you remember the, in 1960 here in Greens- Greensboro [North Carolina] made, you know, national news with the lunch counter sit-ins--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --by the four North Carolina A and T students [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. Do you remember that happening here?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. I was in, at Notre Dame High School, which was, let me describe. African American people lived in a section of town called, southeast Greensboro, or referred to. White people lived in the northern part of the city. The Catholic school that I went to was in the northern part so we had to catch a city bus, my sister [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] and I to go to school, and, and we'd go there and there were, I would say there were about five African Americans in my grade level and maybe the same in my sister's grade level, she was below me. My brothers [Hughes' half-brothers, Charles Daye and Michael Daye] didn't go there, they just put the foot down, said, "No, we're not going. We're going to a public school so we can play football and basketball and date girls," and all that stuff, but we would go there to school, where did I, I lost my thought there, Larry [Larry Crowe], what was I talking about?
Speaker 1: Well, the lunch counter sit-ins (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, yes, so we came home from school that day and it was on the news that, not very much, just a little bit about how these four guys had sat in at the lunch counter at Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] and asked to be served and, of course, that started a pretty big ruckus.
Speaker 1: How did the news report it? Did they, it wasn't like they were criminals? Did they record it dispassionately (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was just, it was a quick little, little blurb about it because the gentleman that I am best friends with who was working there, he said, "We'd never done anything like that, you know. We didn't know anything about how to handle that story, but," he said, "we recognized by the next day that this was a big deal." It wasn't just something that happened that day because after that, the A and T students would gather together and march downtown and protest that they couldn't be served at the lunch counter. And as many of them as could--as was possible, would sit down at the lunch counter and say, "I'm here for coffee," or, "I'm here for a sandwich." My sister and I then joined the group. We were little high schoolers and we would leave Notre Dame High School and walk to A and T and get with the group and then go hand in hand, in the protest downtown, and my mother [Alice Amis Daye] was furious, furious because she says, "You're asking for trouble." She says, "Everything is okay right now, you know, nobody's getting hung, nobody's, no crosses being burned in yards, why you digging up stuff? Why you creating problems? Leave it alone." And, of course, we believed in her but there was something that had started growing in our minds and in our hearts that said, no, it's not all right, this is the right thing to do. To say to people, we don't like the fact that you don't let us drink out of any water fountain or go to any bathroom or sit down at a lunch counter, so she and I kept going. So we took part in the protest and the sit-ins. We never got to sit inside because that was for A and T students but we would always march outside and we were taught by Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and a lot of the other students at A and T, when people throw things at you, when they poke you and they push you and they hit you and they spit on you, just keep walking, keep singing, and we went two by two, hand in hand, you know, and all of those things happened. You know, we got hit with all of the madness and ugliness that was out there but we kept walking--
Speaker 1: So you got things thrown at you and hit by pedestrians (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, you know, people would throw water on you out of their cups or whatever and they, you know, get right in your face and yell really ugly names, the N word in particular, but we just, I don't know how we composed ourselves but we, we never fought back, we just marched.
Story_ID: 656803
Speaker 1: I didn't mean to cut you off--
Speaker 2: That's okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but what were race relations like in Greensboro [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Greensboro--
Speaker 1: --before, I guess, before this. Would--did you, did you feel that, was the atmosphere tense or did, or was it like your mother [Alice Amis Daye] described, well, you know, everything is working so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was working. I mean, we stayed, we didn't, there's, there's a street going through the middle of Greensboro called Elm Street. We did not cross over Elm Street to that part of town. It was just understood you don't do that. So we had fun over where we were. We had the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. Of course, we had our schools and playgrounds and all that and we were okay with it. It's almost like we had been trained that what's going on is the way it is. My dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] worked at Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and we'd go to pick him up from work and they had water fountains, one said white and one said colored, and my sister [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] was always the one, we'd have to keep jerking her from getting what--she always wanted to drink out of the white fountain (laughter), you know, but we would, and we thought that was, well, it's the way it is. And then they would have bathrooms; men, women, colored, and if you had to go to the bathroom, you'd know to just go in the colored.
Speaker 1: Men, women and colored.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, men, women and colored, but I think we had grown up accepting that's, that's the way it was until that sit-in started, until those protests started and I guess my sister and I were old enough then to say, well, you know what, maybe that isn't right. I mean, why can't we drink out of that white water fountain? It's the same water, isn't it? Why can't we drink out of that water fountain? Why can't we go in the women's bathroom instead of the colored bathroom?
Speaker 1: You know, there was a difference, too, in these, these, not only they were different places but the white water fountain was, was chilled, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And the black one was not?
Speaker 2: The colored one--
Speaker 1: The colored one.
Speaker 2: --you know, was kind of weak, the water, you know, it was kind of a weak flow and--
Speaker 1: Tepid probably?
Speaker 2: Yes, and, and so there were a lot of things, but if you don't, if you never drank out of that white water fountain, you didn't know it's any different than the one you're drinking out of. And so it was--race relations were, I want to say tense--tense maybe, may not be the word, but there's certainly problems, but it's as if we had learned to live with them, learned to escape them, learned to stay on this side of them. Nobody was being hung anymore. I mean, the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] was around. You know, they made their showing occasionally and their marches and with their hoods and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: Now this is something that's hard to imagine, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and my mother just taught us, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that it is something but they actually, the Klan would actually march through?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they had parades and stuff and my mother, "Don't look at them, don't look, no, come on, let's go, look this way, go this way," and I think she was doing that because she wanted us to stay safe. And so we followed what she was telling us to do until that sit-in started.
Story_ID: 656804
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As soon as you found out about it, you and your sister just decided to go on and get involved in it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, we were going to be involved. I'll never forget when the police then warned everyone, "Anyone who comes downtown tonight, who comes marching down," this was like late in the evening, five, six o'clock, "will be arrested. We don't have that much room in the jail but we're going to keep, lock up everybody who comes downtown." Well, my sister, Faye [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn], and I couldn't wait to go. We just could not wait to get locked up. And my mother [Alice Amis Daye] said, "That's it, that--you are not going downtown tonight. You will not be put in jail. No child of mine will be locked up in jail." And we said, "Mom." And she, "No." And so she went in her room and closed the door and that was always end of conversation. Well my dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] came sneaking around the corner. He said, "Look, I don't know why you girls want to do this," he says, "I don't get it but if you all go out back, I'll get the car and come get you and take you down and then I'll have to come back home and deal with your mother." So (laughter), so, and we went and he took us downtown. When we got there, it was pretty much over. They had arrested all of these people and taken them away and Faye and I were so disappointed we didn't get arrested. So--
Speaker 1: But what was the, was most of the black community excited about it? I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --people felt excited rather than--
Speaker 2: Yes, there were lots of people in the black community who were excited about what was being done, had no intention of being a part of it now, you know, not going to come downtown and march but we think this is great that these young people, you know, have enough bravery and enough nerve to go and do that. And then there were, of course, people like my mother who kept saying, "Why in the world are we digging up something, some hateful demon that's going to kill us all? Why are we doing that when everything around is understood. We know where we can go, can't go, why are we messing around with this?"
Speaker 1: So this is a generational push?
Speaker 2: It was, it was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That youth made this push?
Speaker 2: Exactly, because, obviously, my mother's generation was not going to bother. They had been through too much and had no way of controlling it. And so, my mother was saying, you know, right now, "We live in a house with lights, we have a TV set, we have a party line telephone," you know where if somebody's on it, you can't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's quiet, it's kept--somebody had to push for that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --too, at some point.
Speaker 2: She just said, you know, we're doing fine, leave it alone. But we just, I don't, I can't explain why my sister and I bugged my mother on that which, 'cause we never did. Like I said, she was the boss but we just knew that was the right thing to do. All of our friends who were arrested that night ended up in an old place called the old polio hospital [Central Carolina Convalescent Hospital, Greensboro, North Carolina]. I don't remember them having patients in that hospital anymore. It was sort of an empty building but that's where they put all the people who were incarcerated, so to speak. So we would go down and sit in the yard of that hospital and sing. Sing, you know, the freedom songs and, so that those inside could hear us and know that we were out there and police were standing around with all the dogs and stuff and (makes sound), now that idea scared me more than an actual person. And then on Sunday morning, for Mass, I remember a little van bringing my best friend and several other girls to Mass from this polio hospital and we were all standing on the sidewalk and we'd hand them drinks and water and sodas because, I guess, they didn't get all of that stuff being locked up. And, you know, and we cried because we wanted, first of all, we wanted to be with them. Second of all, we wanted them to hurry up and get out. It, it was a tough time. It was really tough.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did the, now how long did it last? This is a little like a protracted struggle, right, although--
Speaker 2: It started in February and by July, Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] had started serving black people. So it didn't, it, because for one thing, A and T students [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] went home in June, May or June, and many of them were from out of state, out of city, and so that's when a lot of the girls from Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina], which is a small private college here, started carrying on the protest and then even young white women from, what was called Woman's College [Woman's College of the University of North Carolina], it's now University of North Carolina at Greensboro [Greensboro, North Carolina], would come and they would sit in at the lunch counters. And I think because they didn't have the big hoards of people coming around, finally the lunch counter people said, "Okay, fine, just, just give 'em coffee or whatever."
Story_ID: 656805
Speaker 1: Now there were sympathetic demonstrations and, I mean, and demonstrations based on real issues going on in the North?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There were some lunch, Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] lunch counters in the North where you couldn't sit--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --in some towns, in some places where you could, you know, they demonstrated anyway outside of Woolworth because Woolworth is a national chain--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, should have had some kind of control over what goes on north and south.
Speaker 2: You know, I want to tell you that the thing that seems to be the most hurtful to me was seeing my parents treated like they were children. I was a child so when an adult tells you, "Go sit down over there," well you just go sit down over there. But to hear my father [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] talked down to, or my mother [Alice Amis Daye], or my grandfather [Hughes' maternal step-grandfather, Poshia Pulley] in particular, he was 6'6", really tall, and to see him stand in front of somebody like this (gesture), you know, "Yes sir, yes sir," that just, it broke my heart, it just, you know, I didn't care about what somebody was saying to me but it just killed me to see them treated like that. We were going to Durham [North Carolina], traveling to Durham from Greensboro [North Carolina] one weekend and you had to take the old Highway 70 [North Carolina Highway 70], there was no interstate, and we'd go through Burlington [North Carolina] and there was a beautiful little carousel and park and all that that we'd go right by and we'd always want to stop and look at it, couldn't get on it 'cause colored people couldn't come in the park. But we'd sit there and watch these kids go up and down on the merry go round and, and my sister [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] would just have a fit, "I want to get on that," and my mother said, "Honey, you can't because you're colored." And she said, "Well, what color am I," you know, "that I can't get on that?" So my dad one time says, "Well I'll go around and get you some ice cream." So he walked around the perimeter of the park, which was a pretty long way, and went to the concession stand, to the back of the concession stand, and got, you know, four cones of ice cream and came walking out and by the time he got back, it had dripped all down his hands and arms 'cause it was hot and that killed me. I just thought, why couldn't he just go straight through, right there where the thing is, get the ice cream and come back? I just couldn't stand seeing him, he and my mother and my father [Hughes' biological father, Alexander Cotton], humiliated like that. That was tough.
Story_ID: 656806
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school. Now, were you, did they have like activities in high school--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --that, that would appeal to you as somebody that liked English, liked telling stories and--
Speaker 2: I liked telling stories and I was in the drama group. I didn't get any major roles of course or anything, but I was in the drama group. I did not like sports, at all, which I'm ashamed to say now because when I tell my grandchildren that they think, are you serious? (Laughter) "You didn't play soccer and you didn't play basketball?" No, I didn't. There were, you know, you had like the English club or the French club that you could participate in which was pretty much a part of the school day, but other than that, no, because when the bell rang, it was time to go home. The--90 percent of the students jumped in their cars or with their parents and went home that way and my sister [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] and, you know, three or four other of us got on the city bus and, and came home. You know, we had to go downtown, change buses and get on another bus to take us to southeast Greensboro [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Now Notre Dame [Notre Dame High School, Greensboro, North Carolina], this is a segregated Catholic school as well [sic.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and were the, I guess the upper middle class black students, the other students?
Speaker 2: Those were the ones that were there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Are they the ones that got the parts in the drama club and was it or was it like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They never got really, never really got any parts. I think a couple of the African American boys got to play basketball. Didn't have a football team. There was a soccer team, way back then, you know, which I laugh now when I think about it 'cause I always, when we practiced soccer in PE [physical education], I always wanted to be the goalie 'cause that meant that I didn't have to run (laughter), just stand there and say, "Whoops, they got one" (laughter). So, I'm not very athletic at all but, but we didn't, we didn't have offices. I mean, nobody got to be the president of the student body or anything like that, you know, and most of the black kids who went there were from professional families. Their fathers were doctors or lawyers or whatever. But my mother [Alice Amis Daye], I told you my mother was a piece of work and she was determined that we were going to be with them, you know, be with these black kids who did things. I can remember times when she would take grocery money to buy me an outfit to wear to the Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] dance or whatever, just so that I wouldn't look a lot different from the other black kids that were there. So, she, she got us all through school, got my dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] through, with two degrees, all four of us and I remember one time she was saying, "I guess I'm sad that I never got to go to college." She said, "I wanted to make sure you all went, but I didn't get to go," and that made us feel sad. So I went over to the chancellor at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and explained the situation to him and so he gave her an honorary degree in the humanities and she, you would have thought someone had given her the moon. She just thought that was wonderful, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you were in drama club, you were in, did you have much of a chance to do any public speaking?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: I was actually pretty shy.
Speaker 1: Did you take speech or debate or anything in--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Participate in Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] speech contests or any of that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Never did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now my best friend, Ann Mitchell [ph.], she was a, she tried to be in everything. She was the leader, she was my leader anyway (laughter), and I just did whatever she wanted to do or took her wherever she wanted to go but I was, I always kind of stayed in the background until I got home and then, you know, I was just, I was Johnny Carson when I walked in my house, you know, entertaining everybody but I didn't do it in public. I didn't start opening my mouth, in front of people, until I went to A and T.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, high school, now you're, how are your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Cs and Bs. I was not much of an A student at all.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't like school. Well, when I said I didn't like school, I was not that happy in school because my sister and I, and I can't speak for the other black kids who went, we felt invisible. You know, we had all of these students and we got along fine with, in school, white kids--
Speaker 1: Oh, so, there were white kids in the school. I didn't realize it.
Speaker 2: Ninety percent of the kids in the school were white.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I didn't know.
Speaker 2: You know, and like I said, five in my grade level were black, five black kids, and the rest of them were all white. So I would say in the whole school, and I'm just guessing, if there were 100 kid, I think there were 164 kids in the school, maybe twenty-five of us were black but at the end of the day, we got along fine during the day, but those kids would go to, home that way, and my sister and I would go home that way. So we didn't belong to the kids we went to school with and we got back to our neighborhood, the black kids who went to Lincoln Junior High [Lincoln Junior High School; The Academy at Lincoln, Greensboro, North Carolina] and Dudley High [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina] didn't want to be around us either because, I mean, you were so weird. Why would you go way across town on a bus to go to school? So it's like she and I were caught in the middle and sort of invisible.
Story_ID: 656807
Speaker 1: Graduation from high school [Notre Dame High School, Greensboro, North Carolina] is 19--
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: --sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, so how did you choose--well, it's right, right there in town, it doesn't seem like it would be that hard of a choice but you could have made another decision to go to another school, so, you could have gone to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], you know--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --you could have decided to go to--
Speaker 2: I couldn't go to Bennett.
Speaker 1: You couldn't?
Speaker 2: I couldn't go to Woman's College [Woman's College of the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --'cause they didn't have any men.
Speaker 1: You wouldn't go there (laughter), that's what you're saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, but, you know, there are other choices in southern--North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes, certainly, I mean, we have what--
Speaker 1: Elizabeth City [Elizabeth City State College; Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], there are other places, so--
Speaker 2: Plenty, and right here in Greensboro [North Carolina], we had Bennett, Guilford College, Woman's College, which is now UNCG [University of North Carolina at Greensboro], Greensboro College and A and T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University]. And so my dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye]--
Speaker 1: There are a lot of black schools [HBCUs] in North Carolina, isn't there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, NC Central [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Livingstone [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Oh, you name, St. Augustine [St. Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina], there's just plenty of 'em. But my dad says, "You know, we don't have any money so you're going to have to pick something right here in the city so you can stay at home and go to school." And so he says, "I'd love to see you go to Woman's College," that was all white pretty much and I thought, I had enough of that. So, and then he said, "Well, you can go to Bennett College." I said, "Unh-uh, unh-uh, I don't want to go there." I said, "I'll go to A and T." "Well, why A and T?" I said, "Because the ratio is seven men to every one woman." (Laughter) I said, "That's where I want to be."
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting because things have completely flipped.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: They have.
Speaker 1: --it's usually seven women to one man.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: But back then, it was, it was great but it was weird because, when I went to school, and remember I'm brought up, I've been brought up Catholic and taught Catholic ways and manners and all of these things, so when I'd walk down a hall in one of the classroom buildings, if an adult's coming this way, I'd stop and turn, you know, step to the side and let the adult go by and the other students were just going on about their business. If I was going up or down a staircase, and an adult started coming, you stop, you know, move aside, let them go. If I was in a classroom and an adult came in, I'd stand up (laughter). Everybody would say, "What is wrong with her? She is so weird." And so, I'll never forget being in a business math class and the professor was at the board and he said, "And you do this, and then you go over here and then, and then, I yelled, amused, all confused," and I thought, what is that? What is that sound teaching me? I was so used to hearing these Boston [Massachusetts] accents until his, although he was a great man, smart, it just didn't sound like a teacher to me. So, I thought, oh well, but I got used to it pretty quick. And when I, at the end of my freshman year, started my sophomore year, I'd walk home and told my mother [Alice Amis Daye] I'm getting married. She went blind, literally, hysterical blindness. She said, "No," she said, "you're ruining everything. I've gotten you through high school, now you're in college and you're nineteen years old, you're going to get married and you're going to end up just like me, cleaning houses and having babies." And oh, she just, she was so upset but my husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] and I got married when I was nineteen.
Speaker 1: So you met him at A and T?
Speaker 2: I met him while I was in high school. He went to Dudley High School [James B. Dudley High School, Greensboro, North Carolina] but he worked at the same hotel where my mother worked. So, I married him forty-eight years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, all right. So, but you, you didn't drop, drop out of school did you?
Speaker 2: No, no, kept going.
Speaker 1: A and T, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, just kept, kept pushing on and that's when my parents said, "Okay, you're on your own now, you know, we were trying to help you pay to go, but if you're so grown that you're going to go and get married, then good luck." And so I became a work study student, working on campus two or three hours a day, going to classes, had to have a full load of classes and then working at Kmart [Kmart Corporation] at night, you know, from five until ten [o'clock] and then on weekends. So I had, I wasn't having a fun life.
Speaker 1: It sounds like pretty tough--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was pretty tough, but I, as I said, the one thing that I got from my mother was persistence. I was just determined to get it done.
Story_ID: 656808
Speaker 1: What was your major?
Speaker 2: At A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], it became English, English education. After listening to those business people, with business math, I thought that is not for me. I, I went there majoring in business because it sounded important but then when I just didn't like it, I went over to the English department and majored in English and got into the drama group, that's when I, my voice came out and so I--
Speaker 1: Who was the drama instructor?
Speaker 2: Dr. John Marshall Kilimanjaro.
Speaker 1: John Marshall Kilimanjaro (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, John Marshall Stevenson at the time.
Speaker 1: Then, all right. This is an interesting man--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that has changed his name to John Marshall Kilimanjaro at the present and he's, he was the, he's been, he was the drama instructor at A and T for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --many, many years.
Speaker 2: Oh, so many years. The Richard B. Harrison Players is what it was called.
Speaker 1: Richard B. Harrison Players, the first African American drama group in Chicago [Illinois], or one of the earliest ones was Richard B. Harrison Players in the 1940s and I knew some of the members of the Richard B. Harrison Players in Chicago, or former members, 'cause it's, yeah, but Richard B. Harrison [Richard Berry Harrison] was a black actor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yes, and we have his, his bust, face, bust and all that stuff in the theatre.
Speaker 1: I think he was, was he in 'Cabin in the Sky' or 'Green Pastures' ['The Green Pastures,' Marc Connelly], one of those--
Speaker 2: I'm thinking it's 'Green Pastures.'
Speaker 1: 'Green Pastures,' I think, you're right, with Canada Lee [sic.], Richard B. Harrison and Canada Lee.
Speaker 2: But I, I switched over to English because I liked to write and remember I was telling you I liked to write and write stories and poems and all that stuff. My best friend, Ann [Ann Mitchell (ph.)], was going one night to try out for a part in 'Picnic' with the Richard B. Harrison Players and, of course, I just went along with her wherever she went and opened my mouth, and I went along. So she, and she was so good. She's beautiful, she was articulate, she was everything and she got up and tried out and so then Dr. Stevenson, at the time, said, "All right, we're--okay, we're all done now, anybody else before we leave want to try out?" And she raised her hand and I thought, why is she raising her hand and she says, "My friend here could really do that part, that, that other girl tried for," and I thought, are you crazy? And I said--just, and I could feel my heart just jump out of my chest and he said, "Okay, come on," and I thought, no, no, that's okay and then he kept, and he said, "Oh, come on, come on." So I went up and tried out and got the part. Well, Larry [Larry Crowe], I haven't stopped talking since. Just, I had such a good time standing on the stage and doing my thing until--
Speaker 1: So is this the lead in 'Picnic'?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, of course, not. My friend, Ann, got the lead in 'Picnic.'
Speaker 1: Oh, she got the lead, okay.
Speaker 2: I played the, the teacher, what was her name [Rosemary Sydney]? She even had a boyfriend [Howard Bevans], see I can't think of it now but she was the teacher in the show. Yes, so it was one of the minor parts.
Speaker 1: Now this is ironic. This is a play, I've seen pictures of this play being done, being performed by the William--I mean the Richard B. Harrison Players in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: 'Picnic' by William Inge, which they made a movie with, who was in, I know--
Speaker 2: Was it, not Clark Gable?
Speaker 1: No, yeah, it was--
Speaker 2: You see, I can't remember anything anymore. My brain's gone.
Speaker 1: You know, I can see his face but I can't see--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can too. Tall guy.
Speaker 1: William Holden.
Speaker 2: William Holden, there you go.
Speaker 1: Right, right, so, I mean--
Speaker 2: But I got into, I got in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a popular show.
Speaker 2: I got into that play and then I tried out for every play after that. Got in to every play after that. I was either in the play or behind the scenes helping do something. It's just, it's like, it's like I caught a disease. It was my passion to be on stage and I've been on stage, so to speak, in my house all my life but never out in front of people and I just loved it. 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry], 'Teahouse of the August Moon' ['The Teahouse of the August Moon,' Vern Sneider], all of those things, just, and then when I finished at A and T, Dr. Kilimanjaro started a repertory group that I was in and we traveled and take these, what do you call 'em, plays about black struggle, blacks against whites, whites against blacks, propaganda plays, I guess you want to call it, and we--
Speaker 1: Black theatre movement, the Black Arts Movement--
Speaker 2: Yes, and we'd go, we traveled to other colleges all over North and South Carolina doing these plays.
Speaker 1: And there's a moment when the black drama people are doing all white plays like William Inge and 'Teahouse of the August Moon,' you know, then they flipped, they started doing a black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then all of a sudden we were doing the other thing.
Speaker 1: --from the black theatre and, you know, New York [New York], so, and other places, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I loved doing that and like I said, I was married the whole time [to Larry Hughes, Sr.]. I was working, I was in school, I just, just a busy bee all the time.
Story_ID: 656809
Speaker 1: Did you have any children at this point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I was going to say, that would really be, you know, (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Makes sound) I know. I remember when I told them at nineteen I was getting married, my daddy [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] said, "Um-hm, uh-huh, I know what's wrong." (Laughter) And so I said, "No." And so six years later he says, "Well, what's wrong with you? Why don't you have any children?" (Laughter) And so, I just, I couldn't do right any way I turned, but I loved those shows and I stopped doing the repertory theatre when my husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] came back from Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Oh, so he went to Vietnam during the time that you were--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well, right when I was finishing my senior year [at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], he went to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: That's, yeah, Vietnam [Vietnam War] was really awful.
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: A devastating war. People in--
Speaker 2: That was one devastating, he was drafted. You know, that was back when you get this letter, you know, that says Uncle Sam wants you and I remember coming home from school and getting this letter out of the mailbox and calling him at work, and told him what it said and he thought, oh, no, he says, "Well, they're not going to take me 'cause I have a bad back and, you know, I was in a car accident and my back's no good." And, so, and he said, "Okay." And they said, "Well you and everybody else we've drafted in the city, get on a Greyhound bus that morning at seven o'clock and we're going to take you to Charlotte [North Carolina] for, I guess, exams and all that stuff." And I took my husband there and so he said, "I'll be back this afternoon." He says, "Just be, you know, near where I can call you, near the phone around five or six o'clock so you can come pick me up." So I went home and thank goodness that wasn't a day I was working and he called and said, "Well, I've got bad news." He says, "I'm on a bus now, on the way to Fort Bragg [North Carolina]." I thought I was going to die just, oh. I said, "What happened? You said they weren't going to take you." And he said, he said, "They're going to take me." He said, "My back is not bad enough." So, it's just, and I can remember being in bed for like two or three days just out of it. You know, couldn't think, couldn't do, couldn't eat. I was just dead 'cause I knew Vietnam was tough stuff. You know, that was at a time when we were getting the list every day in the paper, who got killed yesterday or the next--last week or something. So I just, oh, it was awful.
Story_ID: 656810
Speaker 1: So in the meantime, he's in Vietnam and you're, you're doing black theatre with Mr. Stevenson's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Dr.
Speaker 1: Dr. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dr. Kilimanjaro [John Marshall Kilimanjaro], yeah, he'd become Kilimanjaro by then.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Kilimanjaro, and, now was this, I mean, okay, so, were you doing any broadcast--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --any--none--
Speaker 2: Had no interest in television whatsoever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None. I wanted to be a high school English teacher. When I did my practice teaching, you know, at the end of my school years, I just had the most fun with those students. I just, I mean, I wasn't much older than they were, actually, but I had seniors and I just thought that was so good and I enjoyed it so much and I said, I know, this is what I want to do. When I graduated from A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and started looking for a high school English teaching job, everybody said, "We don't need English teachers, we need science and math teachers." Well, I thought, are you kidding me? And then I, I just really got angry with my professors at A and T who didn't tell me, didn't warn me, that I was going to have a hard time finding a job. And I just could not find a job. Finally, one of the professors said to me, "Well I have a little boy at home and my wife and I both teach and we'd love to have somebody come and be with him during the day." And I thought, don't tell me I'm going to be a nanny. So that's what I became (laughter) and so for close to a year I went to their house every day and stayed with this little boy. Finally, in about September of '69 [1969], I got a job offer at Western Electric [Western Electric Company] in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] as a, get this title now, a technical publication's editor. I thought, oh, I have arrived now, that's for sure. You know, I had to get a secret government clearance and, you know, get myself together and went and got some clothes to wear to work and went to work and I'll tell you, it was the most boring job I've ever had in my life. I would rather have been home, keeping the little boy (laughter), because I worked in a department with all white engineers and they would write training manuals for the Sprint and Spartan missiles [LIM-49A Spartan] and I would have to, after they'd write a manual, then I'd have to take it and dot the I's and cross the Ts and fix the grammatical errors and, and argue with them about how you can't say it like this. "Well that's how it says--," you know, and they would argue back with me, "No, that's, that's the right way to say it. You have to do it that way."
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is a struggle because so many engineers, I know that we've talked to, say that one of the biggest issues is how to translate what a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --engineer or technical person is doing into English where someone can understand what they're talking about (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and so my job was just painful. And the other thing was, I'd have so much time to, to edit a ten page manual, like a month. I thought, dear Lord, take me away now (laughter). So my husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] came home from Vietnam and I, that's when I got pregnant, we had the first daughter [Tiffany Hughes Harris].
Story_ID: 656811
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this. Now this is--in '69 [1969], Greensboro [North Carolina] made national news again with something called the Greensboro uprising--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and this was a attack by the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] on, on protestors, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I was out of school [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time and--
Speaker 1: You had already graduated?
Speaker 2: I had already graduated and that's when, you know, they had the big shootout on campus and bullets were shot into Scott Hall [W. Kerr Scott Hall], the dorm where the, where guys were staying and it was really, really bad. I was in one of the professors' offices one day when it first got started and this student came around the offices and said, "Everybody get out. We want all teachers, professors, adults, off campus." I thought, good grief, what's going on? And then that's when we found out, and all the students were going to meet in this one central area of the campus called Holland Bowl and knowing my brother, Charles [Hughes' half-brother, Charles Daye], the third down, I knew he was out there 'cause he was, he was a Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] from, you know, from the jump street. So my mother [Alice Amis Daye] called and said, "Go down there and tell your brother to come home right now." And I thought, oh, Lord. So, I said, "Okay." So my sister, I said, "Faye [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn], you have to go with me." And then there was this friend of mine, one of my absolute best friends who was white, and she says, "Well, I want to go with you." And I thought, oh, and--, "I don't know about that." And she said, "Well, I want to, I want to see what's going on," and I thought, so then I had to think for a minute, now is she my friend or is she a white person that I like? So I thought, well, she's my friend, "Come on, let's go." So we went down, of course she got jeered, you know, because we were walking through the crowd and my brother was up on the stage. They had this wooden stage thing and he was up there and, "We're going to do this, yeah! And we're going, yeah!" And so, and my brother's very tall, he's like 6'2" or 3". And my sister went up and I went up on the stage and we tugged, "Charles." "What?" 'Cause he had this huge Afro, it looked like a lion's mane, we said, "Mama said, come home right now." He said, "(Makes sounds) I'll be back guys," (laughter) 'cause he knew, got to decide, do I take mother on or do I take this? He went home (laughter) and his car, just, you could just hear it screeching down, he was so angry (laughter). He tells me, that was the most embarrassing time of his life.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well this is a, National Guard was called in and this--
Speaker 2: And, Larry [Hughes' husband, Larry Hughes, Sr.] called me from Fort Bragg [North Carolina] and, yeah, he was at Fort Bragg and said, "Go home and stay home, don't go back on that campus." So I thought, well, okay, but it was, it was pretty tough.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there, anybody shot actually in this?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can't remember who they are now. I mean, I didn't know them, I just know at least one guy was shot and killed, other, a couple of others got shot. My cousin that I grew up with was in Scott Hall and he said they were hiding under beds and closets and everything else trying to keep the shots that, you know, were coming at the building from hitting one of them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the National Guard's sweep of the college, Scott Hall, in particular (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 656812
Speaker 1: So, you're at Western Electric [Western Electric Company] and in kind of a boring job as we were saying and you, you're--so, finally your husband comes back from Vietnam. When did he get back?
Speaker 2: He came--he went in early '69 [1969], he was home by, I think the end of '71 [1971]. It was a two year term.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was in Vietnam, in the jungle, with a rifle and the Agent Orange and everything else when his brother here got killed in a car wreck and so they let him come home for the funeral. It took him like three days to get here and they were trying to hold off the funeral until he got here. He came home and they, he had like a thirty day leave or something and so when he got ready to go back, you know, here again, I think I just lost it, you know, just passed out and thought I was dead. He flew away to New Jersey, Fort Dix, and he was supposed to go from Dix to somewhere in Seattle [Fort Lewis; Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington] and then, you know, and across the water. The night before he was to leave, he said he was shooting pool in the pool hall with some of the guys on base and he was telling them what had happened and this one guy said to him, "Well, if you lost a family member, you can request not to go back to war." And so Larry [Larry Hughes, Sr.] said he dropped the stick and ran down and talked to the, some sergeant or something and he says, "I don't want to go back to Vietnam." He said, "Oh, okay, where do you want to go?" He said, "Fort Bragg [North Carolina]," you know. And he said to him, he said, "If you can show me a death certificate before your plane leaves at seven o'clock in the morning, fine." And so, he called me, just, you know, screaming about that. (Background noise) Should I stop?
Speaker 1: We'll pause here.
Speaker 2: I can take those off the hook. (Background noise) Okay. He called me and said, "I gotta have a death certificate." So his dad and brother jumped in the car like middle of the night and took off and they got there in time, you know, before his plane left.
Speaker 1: They drove all the way to--
Speaker 2: New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, they said just bailing like they were out of their minds. And so they let him come, be stationed at Fort Bragg. And so that's where he spent the rest of his time in service.
Story_ID: 656813
Speaker 1: How did you come to be hired by WFMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, when Larry [Hughes' husband, Larry Hughes, Sr.] came home, I had the first daughter [Tiffany Hughes Harris] and I went back to Western Electric [Western Electric Company] 'cause I had taken a maternity leave, went back and they said, "Well, we've discontinued your department." I don't think they were making the Sprint and Spartan missiles [LIM-49A Spartan] anymore and they said, "Well, we'll try to find you something else in the company." Well months went on, five months and nothing. I thought, I've got to go to work. So I started looking for a teaching job again and still could not find, and I wanted to stay here, so it was not like I was looking in Virginia and South Carolina and, I was looking right here within driving distance of Greensboro [North Carolina]. One day, and I still couldn't get a job, one day I was coming back home from being out putting in interviews everywhere I could think of, and I was driving down the street and the TV station was sitting there on the left hand side and I thought to myself, I wonder who writes stuff that they say. So I--this is like four o'clock in the afternoon, I whipped the car around and went in to the receptionist and I said, "I'd like to apply for a job." And she looked at me and she said, "A job?" And I said, "Yes." And she said, "What kind of job are you looking for?" And I said, "Well what do you have?" (Background noise) I said--doggone it, let me, I'm going to take the phone off the hook, okay?
Story_ID: 656814
Speaker 1: On my way home that afternoon, I was passing by the television station and I thought to myself, I wonder who writes for them, writes things I hear people saying on TV. And I went in and I said to the lady, "I'd like to apply for a job." And she said, she looked at me very suspiciously and said, "A job? What kind of job," and I said, "Well," then I got kind of arrogant and, "well, what do you have?" And so she said, "Well, I don't know." I said, "Well I'd like a job as a writer." So she gave me this one sheet of paper where you put in your name, address and what school you went to and sign it and I sat down in the lobby there and filled out that thing out quickly and took it back to her and she said, "Just a minute." So she called the news director and he came out to the lobby and he looked at the form, he looked at me and he looked at the form, he looked at me and he said, "Have you ever thought about being a reporter?" And I'm thinking, we're hungry, we need more money and I said, "I really have." So he said (laughter), and he said, "Well come back and see me," and we made an appointment and I went back and after meeting with him about two or three more times, he hired me with the understanding that I knew beans about TV but that he would teach me how to be a reporter, and that's how I got the job.
Speaker 2: Now, were you the first African American employee of--
Speaker 1: No, when I got there, there was an African American female, Imogene Jones, who was a reporter and a young man who had gone to A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] with me, Freddie Davis, had been a reporter there but he was gone. He was the first black reporter there and I guess she was the second and I came in the third.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she was there a very short time before she left. I think she was there maybe another year or less and then she moved back to New York [New York], and I was a reporter.
Speaker 2: All right, so what did it, did it, did you get, have the feeling when you started that you would be there a long time?
Speaker 1: I didn't have that feeling. I was so busy trying to learn how to do the job and, of course, the newsroom was full of white males who looked at me like, are you kidding me, come on, please. And so, and I thought to myself, well, I can do it, I can learn to do it. Most of my learning came from photographers, guys who, they would send me out with and they'd say, "Just do what Vander [ph.] tells you to do." Or, "Just do what Eric [ph.] tells you to do," because for the first two weeks I was connected to a reporter who's a brilliant man. Have you ever seen somebody that's so brilliant until they don't really make a lot of sense? It's like they're talking way over there somewhere (laughter). He was wonderful and I just adored him but I just, it's like he wasn't teaching me, I was just having to listen to see what he was doing. So finally one day something had happened downtown, no big deal, but something and they needed somebody to go cover it so the assignment desk manager said, "Here, just, just go with Vander and he'll tell you what to do." And so I went and, you know, of course, he was saying, "Now you go over there and you, interview that police officer and you go over there," and so he really taught me how to do things that I, a lot of what I did, and the same with some other photographers.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you started off immediately doing assignments as a reporter?
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so, so you said there were like three stations in--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, well at the time, there were two. There was WFMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina], which is a CBS affiliate and, well no, I'm sorry, there were three. ABC station [WXLV-TV] and an NBC station [WXII-TV] in Winston [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and then later, after, I don't remember how many years, the Fox station [WGHP-TV] came in to High Point [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But I was a reporter for two years and you know what, I didn't care much for it. It was hard work. You know, you go in at eight o'clock in the morning, you don't get home 'til 6:30, 7:00 at night 'cause they would make us stay and watch the six o'clock news so that they could critique who did what and who didn't do this and who did well and who didn't. It was wearing me out and I had a brand new baby [Tiffany Hughes Harris] at home who was about five or six months old and that was tough. So I thought, I don't know, I don't know about this. But I, but I enjoyed it. I felt that what I was doing was a good thing to do. It was the right thing to do.
Story_ID: 656815
Speaker 1: That's also when I started getting bombarded with threats, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, why? Now, you weren't the first [at WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] but, so what was the--
Speaker 1: Well, I was a woman of color (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't use the other two [Imogene Jones and Freddie Davis] (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I think the other two left quickly (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I was a woman of color and they did not want a woman of color delivering their news, news that was important to them. You remember how TV used to be very important when it came to news. People, they called it appointment TV where people would make sure, "It's six o'clock, I'm sitting in front of that TV set so I can see what's going on." And so they started with nasty phone calls, nasty, nasty hate letters, they also started with confrontations on the street. You know, I'd walk down the street and a couple of guys would drive by and let the window down and they'd say, you know, call me the N word, "You better get off that TV," you know, those kind of things and it was, it was tough but--and I was afraid but not scared and I didn't, I didn't want to hide and I didn't want to run away but I thought, I wonder what's going to happen? I don't know what's going to happen.
Speaker 2: Were there any particular reports that you delivered that, antagonizing them the most or--
Speaker 1: Any time I did something down at city hall [Melvin Municipal Office Building, Greensboro, North Carolina] they didn't like that because that's important business to everybody so don't you tell me about my taxes or about my, my streets and what's going to be happening when the snow comes. So those things I think I got more heat from than anything else. Now, when I went to day care school and nursery schools and played with the kids and showed the groundbreaking and the ribbon cuttings, I didn't get a whole lot of flak about that but when I tried to do something that was so called big news, they didn't want me to be that person to get to deliver that to them.
Speaker 2: Anything serious?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 656816
Speaker 1: So you were a reporter basically for two years [at WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you said it was just kind, it was tough being a mother and a--
Speaker 2: It was, it was tough being a mother and trying to learn what I was doing and the hard, the thing that was the hardest for me was writing. Being an English major, I used to write these long flowing, flowing sentences with phrases and (makes sounds), and they said, "No, we can't have all that, you just got to say it." So, that was tough for me, learning to write.
Speaker 1: Write like a reporter.
Speaker 2: Write like a reporter and write copy that could go on TV which is totally unlike, of course you know, newspaper or anything else.
Speaker 1: So you're like boiling down--
Speaker 2: You have to take--
Speaker 1: --things to their--
Speaker 2: --a two page essay and turn it into thirty seconds worth of copy and tell the whole story right there. So that, that was tough and, like I said, I was, I was young, I was learning, I was getting a lot of flak and, and not just from outside. You know, there were plenty of people in the news, in the news building that thought, she doesn't belong here, she really doesn't belong here, doesn't know what she's doing.
Speaker 1: Did they ever, you know, present themselves as openly hostile or do they--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --play practical jokes on you or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, (laughter) I got plenty of practical jokes but I, I always took it as just as, just a practical joke. I didn't say that's about me because I'm black. But here, again, I had a baby [Tiffany Hughes Harris] at home, my husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] was back home and, bless his heart, he was going through the, "Oh, Mr. Sandra," business, you know, and you know what that's like for an African American male.
Speaker 1: Because all of a sudden, then everybody knows who you are.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not Ms., I'm not Ms. Larry Hughes [HistoryMaker Sandra Hughes] anymore, I'm Ms. Something--he's Mr. Sandra, he is, and that, I felt bad about that. I just hated to see him go through that kind--but he handled it very well, very well.
Speaker 1: Now, what was he doing for a living or was he going to school or--
Speaker 2: At the time, he was at a place called Gilbarco [Gilbarco, Inc.], which is a, they make gas pumps, and when he left Gilbarco, he went to a car dealership selling Cadillacs. So, and he loved that, you know, that was kind of fun for him but like I said, the times were tough. You know, I wasn't making any money, I was making less than half of what I made at Western Electric [Western Electric Company] but, you know, I just, I just kept feeling that what I was doing was the right thing to do. I, I felt that people needed to know that they were going to shut off the water in this particular neighborhood tomorrow for testing. I needed people to know that there's this particular device on your refrigerator that could cause your house to burn down. I just thought that was, people needed to know that and I was enjoying being the one to tell them about that. I started feeling a little smart, you know, getting this kind of information but it was so tough and I'd go home in the afternoon, at 6:00, 6:30 or later and I was so tired and so frustrated and so full of all of the hate letters and hate phone calls and the learning and the yelling and the screaming and, and then I'd come home to this little baby who wants mommy to come out in the yard and play which, I mean, she wasn't that big yet but, and I thought (makes sound), I guess this is not for me.
Story_ID: 656817
Speaker 1: So I went into the TV station [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] after about two years, and I told the general manager, I said, "I, I just don't think I can do this anymore." I said, "I need to have a nine to five [o'clock] kind of job, in an office," da, da, da, da, da, da. And he says, "Well, what do you want to do? If you--we want you to stay here. What do you want to do?" And I said, "I'd like to do a talk show." And he said, "A talk show?" I said, "Yeah." And he said, "What kind of talk show?" He said, "Go, go do one, show me what it looks like." I was so excited. So I went and put together this little thirty minute show. I invited a lady that I know that has a modeling agency and all this kind of stuff and we set up a little set there in the studio and I interviewed her and I was just, I mean, I'll tell you, it was like somebody says, you can have Christmas every day. And I went back and showed it to him and he said, "Okay, we'll do that," and I thought, god, are you serious? And so, every day, from 1:00 to 1:30 'Sandra and Friends' was on the air and that's the most fun I ever had in TV. For one thing, I could do anything I wanted to do. I could interview the mayor, I could interview the homeless guy, I could, anything, it was all up to me. Now I had to do all the work. I had to do the producing and the writing and, but, but I just, I was having a ball and I'd bring my little girl, by that time she was toddling around, you know, and she'd stand and look at the lights and I was saying, "Look at the camera, honey, look," and she'd be looking all over, and--the one whose husband [Christopher Harris] was just here a little bit ago. And that's when the real ugliness started. That's when the bomb threat started, when people would call in and say there is a bomb in that studio and it's going to go off, you know, such and such a time. Well, of course, they'd call the police and here come the police and the bomb squad and the drug sniffing and bomb sniffing dogs and they'd take all of the guests out of the studio, everybody in the whole TV station had to evacuate but I said, you know, doggone it, I've gone this far, I'm not going to leave. So I would sit there, like this in front of the camera and I would say, "Well, today is Wednesday and we're going to be talking, sometime this week, to a lady who's having a community event and that money's going to raise money for children who have, don't have money to buy school supplies." And I would just talk for thirty minutes, until the show was over. So after about a year and a half of that, I think the people who were calling in the threats thought, lord, if we have to sit and listen to her talk again for thirty minutes--let's not call in anymore bomb threats. Then they started threatening my daughter. That got me. They would call and say, and would wait 'til I got on the show at one o'clock, they'd call in and say that, Tiffany [Tiffany Hughes Harris] is her name, that Tiffany had been hurt in a fieldtrip accident and that she was at the hospital and I need to get there right away. And then, you know, it's that she's been in an accident, it was all kind of horrible things that they would call and say about her. Well at that, after me--
Speaker 2: Just trying to disrupt the show, trying to get you to leave (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, trying to get me to get off that TV, and I went the first time, but it was nothing. So after that, when those calls would come in, other people in the TV station now, two or three of 'em in particular, would take, they would take the call, they'd take off to the daycare, which was only about a mile down the street from where we were to see if she was there or find out what was going on and then when I'd get off the air at 1:30, they'd say, "Well, got one of those calls today." I said--you know, but they, they were trying to help me stay, stay on there, but that's when I said, that's it, you know, hurt me, scare me, attack me but not my little baby. So I said, I just won't do this anymore. My husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] and, you know, I was telling you all my family was here, he's from here so his parents and his brothers and sisters, and he had nine of them, and my mother [Alice Amis Daye] and brothers and sisters, everybody came and said, "Do you like what you're doing?" I said, "Yes, I have a--now I have a passion for TV." They said, "Do you want to keep doing it?" "Yes, I want to keep doing it." "Well, this is what we're going to do. We're going to develop a safety net around you so you can't fall. We're going to keep our eyes on the baby, keep our eyes on your house, your car, you, your husband, everybody. So if something happens, really happens, you'll get a call from me, mommy, auntie or whatever, cousin, that says, 'Yeah, you need to come home' or, 'You need to do whatever.'" And they said, "So, go, go do it." And that, it's almost like that put wings on me. Then I just really started enjoying what I was doing because I thought I've got these people who, who've got my back. And the people in the TV station had started rallying too. You know, like I said, they would go run and see about something that they heard and wouldn't, wouldn't tell me about it. When we'd go, let's say if a bunch of us went out to lunch or out to dinner or something, it's, the guys almost treated me like they were bodyguards, you know, watching (laughter) and making sure nobody did anything. So from that point on, you know, I just, I just, I fell more and more and more in love with television.
Story_ID: 656818
Speaker 1: I did 'Sandra and Friends' for, about four and a half years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so from '74 [1974] to--
Speaker 1: About '78 [1978] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: --into '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Who were the, you know, what, what guests stand out or what are your favorite shows?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, I've always been a soap opera fan and so I always had guests from New York [New York]. CBS would send soap opera people to come and be on the show and I, I, for me they were stars and I was so excited and I'd have a, I'd invite an audience in and we'd set up, you know, chairs in the studio and people would come in and these stars would come in. "Eileen Fulton is here today." Do you remember who she is? She was from 'As the World Turns,' but anyway, she was a big star. They had been there for a million years and so they'd come and, you know, and we'd get to interview these people and, and guests in the studio would ask questions. It was just, I was just, I was having a ball. And then CBS would have, what they call a star junket every year where they had 'em in Atlanta [Georgia], L.A. [Los Angeles, California], New York, where I, along with one of my other, well, Lee Kinard [Lee W. Kinard, Jr.], who did the 'Good Morning Show' and I would go and we'd be in a hotel room and we'd set up lights and everything, just like this, with our WFMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] logo in the middle, and CBS would parade, one after another, these people who were going to be on their CBS shows for that fall in and we'd get to interview them. And then, you know, then I'd go back and play them on the show. He, Lee, would play them on the 'Good Morning Show' and I'd play 'em on, on 'Sandra and Friends.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So that, that was so cool.
Speaker 2: So, so in those days, WFMY had a 'Good Morning Show'--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --it was locally produced and then your show--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --at one o'clock--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then--
Speaker 1: And then the six o'clock news.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And The Manhattans. Do you remember The Manhattans?
Speaker 2: The singers?
Speaker 1: The singing group, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: They live, I can't remember where exactly they lived in North Carolina but they'd go out on the road and when they were coming back, if it was something, anywhere between 1:00, 1:30, they'd call and say, "We're passing through, you want us?" And I said, "Yeah, come on," and whoever was coming up next, I'd say, "We'll get you tomorrow." And they'd come in and they'd sing and dance and do their thing. Oh, it just, it was the most fun I ever had in TV.
Speaker 2: Saying The Manhattan- The Manhattans were from North Carolina? I didn't know--
Speaker 1: No, they, I don't think they were from North--but they had, they were here for some reason all the time. I'm not sure why.
Speaker 2: They had North Carolina roots.
Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe so, but they would come and sing.
Speaker 2: Manhattans, they were, were top notch.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow, it was, it was great.
Speaker 2: So, so you did the show until about 1978, I guess, and then--
Speaker 1: A little past seven--getting close to '79 [1979], and then that's when CBS, you know, planned all of these soap operas, for all afternoon, from what, twelve o'clock or one o'clock all the way up to four. There were several of them and my show was not making any money. So, and I was going up against soap operas on the other networks so they thought well, we've got to let this go. So let's, let's just stop that.
Story_ID: 656819
Speaker 1: And that's when I moved on to 'PM Magazine.' Remember that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'PM Magazine.' It was 'Evening Magazine' in some cities.
Speaker 2: Now you were the f- this is the, so is this locally produced? 'PM Magazine' I thought was a national--
Speaker 1: 'PM Magazine' was started in San Francisco [California]. KPI- KPIX [KPIX-TV, San Francisco, California], is that it? KP something, anyway, they were doing it, they called it 'Evening Magazine' and one of their sister stations started doing 'Evening Magazine.' Then when stations like us said, "Hey, we'd like to have that," then they said, "Okay, fine," and they wrote some kind of contract where stations all across the country could do 'PM Magazine.' We couldn't be called 'Evening' like they were but we could do 'PM Magazine.' It had two hosts, a male and a female, and most of the stories that we showed every night came from San Francisco. We, the size of our station [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina], we had to produce one or two stories a week to send in to, to the barrel of stories. Bigger stations would do three or four, five a week and then the main people with 'Evening Magazine' would select, "Okay, these are the ones that are going to run the week of August 11th," and they would send us those shows and what we had to do here was go to places in our area to introduce these stories. Let's say, if we had a story about a bakery in Idaho that was doing something really different and interesting, or--we needed to find a place here in our area to say, "We're at John Jones' bakery [ph.] on Monticello Road [sic. Monticello Street] and they have the best cupcakes you've ever had. There's also a place in Idaho that has some," da, da, da, you know, so we would use local venues to introduce national stories.
Speaker 2: You'd tie in the local people into the story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes, and so we did that, we'd have about three stories a night. And so then, we started traveling. We'd go on cruises two or three times a year and, you know, "We're on the SS Norway," and, or, "and so tonight we're going to tell you about some people who are doing something really neat in Tennessee, but while we do we'll sit back and relax under the sun." You know, so, we did cruises, we went to Switzerland and Germany and Austria and Mexico and the Caribbean and Virgin Islands and just everywhere. We were just, just went everywhere doing, and doing, using these places to introduce our stories.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and it was fun and it was tough because we worked really hard and I found that I was gone a lot, especially when we started the travel thing. I was away from home a lot and I can remember crying all the way to the airport, leaving, 'cause by then, I had another little boy, and I had three children then [Tiffany Hughes Harris, Allan Hughes and Larry Hughes, Jr.] and I would just boohoo. I mean, I wanted to go, I loved, I wanted to go to Germany. I wanted to go to the Swiss Alps, but I just didn't want to leave my babies. The good thing about that, though, was, they were here with their grandmothers and granddaddies, their aunts and uncles and cousins and their daddy [Larry Hughes, Sr.] and all these people who loved them and not just babysitting them. So that--after doing that for eight years, I thought, that's enough of that.
Story_ID: 656820
Speaker 1: You just mentioned Europe but you were a part of the European Community Visitors Program [European Union Visitors Program]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm
Speaker 1: --in '76 [1976] I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that was before 'PM Magazine.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you were able to go to--
Speaker 2: I went to six countries, um-hm, in the common--it was called the common market [European Economic Community] then. And I'll tell you how that happened quickly. There was a Robert, Ambassador Robert Schaetzel [J. Robert Schaetzel], who was the American ambassador to the common market, came to do a lecture at Guilford College [Greensboro, North Carolina] and the PR [public relations] guy out there called and say, "Hey, can we get him on your noon talk show, your one o'clock talk show ['Sandra and Friends']?" Sure. And he came out, you know, was just very stiff and talking. He talked about what he did and so as I was walking him back to the lobby, I said, "You know, I really admire what you do, number one, because I'd love to go to Europe and I've never been and don't have any idea that I'll ever get to go." And he says, "Ole girl, you take care of yourself." The next thing I know, a month later, I get a letter from the common market saying the Ambassador Schaetzel has nominated you for one of the visitor--to be one of the visitors in our visitors program. And I thought, oh, no he didn't. (Laughter) So, I threw the letter down. In about six, oh, about three weeks later, I got a phone call from my friend at Guilford College, the PR guy, and he said, "Why haven't you answered Robert Schaetzel's letter?" And I said, "Is that real?" He said, "Yeah." And so sure enough, they said you can go to any of the common market countries you want to go to. You can stay as long as you want to go and all expenses on us. I thought, man. So I went and I went to six countries and the TV station [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] was, didn't care about that because they said, "Well, what are we doing with this show," 'cause I was still doing the talk show. "What are we supposed to do about this show all day, every day, for the next few weeks?" But they let me go, you know, and it was great. It was really great.
Speaker 1: Okay, did the trip inform shows that you, would subsequently do?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can, I mean, it was just me, for me, and I had to come back and write, I want to call it a report, it was pretty long, about where I went, what I saw, what I thought. I was there to take a look at television in the common market, to go look at women's issues and those are the things, when I got to those places, I had a, I had a host at each place that would take me around to see what kind of television they were doing, if any, and to meet women who were heads of companies or starting their own businesses. So it was, it was very interesting. Very interesting.
Story_ID: 656821
Speaker 1: In '79 [1979], this is about a year after you got with 'PM Magazine,' there's another national story here with--that has a lot of racial tension in it, that's the--
Speaker 2: The shootout (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the Greensboro massacre, yeah, '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this pitted the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] and the American Nazi Party against--
Speaker 2: Yes, that was unbelievable. That particular day I had my children at the mall and when I came home, my husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] was--no cell phones, but he was just panicking trying to find, "Where are you?" And there was a Channel 2 [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] photographer out there when it happened 'cause he was shooting the, the Nazi Party having their rally or whatever and so he shot the whole thing. When the guy, when the Klansmen drove up, jumped out of their cars with guns blazing, he got it all. It was just unbelievable. Totally unbelievable.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what I understand, they, after, after a trial, no one was--
Speaker 2: Nobody was convicted.
Speaker 1: --convicted, and you would think that because it was shot on the television film that, I mean, film in those days, I guess, or tape--
Speaker 2: Yeah, film, I was pretty sure it was film.
Speaker 1: --and they would know who did it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you see it. I mean, I can, I can see it in my mind right now with these guys jumping out of their cars, shooting.
Speaker 1: There were five people killed in those days--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: One was an M.D., maybe in, two, let's see, two, well, at least, two M.D.'s were shot but, you know, it's not, but these are all black people from the area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there were some white people in that group too.
Speaker 1: There were white too, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, the Nazi Party was mixed and, in fact, one of the guys that died was white.
Speaker 1: Okay, so somebody in the Nazi Party was actually killed.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And Nelson Johnson who was the leader of the group and I went to Israel together, way later.
Speaker 1: Okay. This was at a march called Death to the Klan, which seemed like it invites, 'cause you're kind of inviting trouble on some level?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: And there was a lot of controversies saying that, when they advertised, they kept promoting that we're having Death to the Klan rally, Death to the Klan, and that people, well somebody said, well the Klan's planning to respond to that and the Greensboro police [Greensboro Police Department] got accused of kind of sitting back, you know, let them come through, down the highway and into the city. You know, know, you know, I don't know this for sure but knowing that they were threatening to come but didn't, seem to stop them.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, as I said, the trial resulted in not much. I think somebody, Marty, Marty Nathan did receive some kind of a payment from the city but no one else.
Speaker 2: No, and, is that the most unbelievable thing you've ever heard of? Well, just, what does that say about race relations in Greensboro [North Carolina]?
Story_ID: 656822
Speaker 1: Okay, so 'PM Magazine,' you lasted how long? How did, how long did you--
Speaker 2: I was on for about eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, in '84 [1984], your son [Larry Hughes, Jr.] drowned?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Correct? This is a, got to be a really rough period of time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was so unbelievable. I was doing 'PM Magazine' and he was three and a half years old and we were, as a family, planning to go on a cruise that afternoon. So that morning we were getting all packed up and we were going to go to, I think it was going out of Daytona Beach [Florida], but I got a phone call from the TV station [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] saying, we need you to come cut another hour's worth of audio before you leave, 'cause I was going to be gone for a couple of weeks. And I went and while I was gone, everybody was packing and we believe that he went out to the pool, we had a pool in the back, to get his float that he wanted 'cause he always talked about taking his float on the cruise, and we think that's what, he went there and when they found him, he was under water. So, that, I can't tell you, I can't think of anything else in my life that was more devastating than that. In fact, I just, I didn't want to live. I just wanted to just close my eyes and go away because that was, how do you, how do you live with that? The only thing that saved me was the two other children [Tiffany Hughes Harris and Allan Hughes] that I had. They were older than him and I remember one night, stretched out on the sofa, I don't know if I was asleep or just out of it, and my daughter came in, she was the oldest and she was, I think she was about twelve at the time, she whispered, she said, "Mommy, it's getting dark outside, can we turn the lights on?" Oh, so, I said, I've got to get up. I've got to get out of this coma that I'm in and take care of these other two kids. But it was, I cannot tell you how bad it was.
Speaker 1: That's really sad (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I got ugly letters about that. Oh, gosh. People, I got a couple of letters that said, "Serves you right. You had no business trying to be Ms. Thing on TV anyway, so that's why God took your son from you."
Speaker 1: So they got God involved in it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was just, 'cause I was pregnant the whole time with this baby, on TV, on 'PM Magazine.' And so everybody called it the PM baby, you know, and, but I could not believe I got ugly letters saying (background noise), yeah, that, you know, "Serves you right that, that God took that child from you."
Story_ID: 656823
Speaker 1: So this is, this is a tough period of time. This is in 1984 did, did you take--I'm sure you took time off.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: I took a lot of time off because, here again, I was totally, totally devastated. I was angry, I was sad, I was disappointed, I was, I was all of the emotions that you can imagine and I'd look out the window and see people walking down the street or walking their dog or driving, I would say, "Don't they know, Larry Jr. [Larry Hughes, Jr.] is dead? Why are they out, just acting like nothing's going on?" So, I was, I went through more emotions than I can even describe at this point but something said to me, "You got to get up and you got to cook food for your children [Tiffany Hughes Harris and Allan Hughes]." You know, you gotta get, help 'em get ready for school. So, I say they saved me, you know, because if not, I think I would have just laid on that couch until I did just go away. The ugly letters were bad. I just thought, how can people be that mean? I got letters from people saying, "God took that child from you because we know that he is really one of the TV 2 [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] managers' sons." You know, "Your poor husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.], having to put up with all this." Here's something that's kind of funny. When he was born, he had six digits on each hand and six digits on each foot and my husband, he and all of his eight brothers and sisters, all had six digits (laughter). So it's like, see (laughter). Oh, my, and the, and the second little boy wanted to take him to show and tell at school and I said, "I don't think so," (laughter) 'cause they had to be surgically removed, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know somebody with that and--
Speaker 2: Tough, tough time. I went back to work when school started that fall and the kids went to school, my husband went back to work and there I was wandering around that house, by myself, and I thought, okay, I've got to go to work. I've gotta, I've gotta live. I've gotta get up and live and when I went to work, it's almost like it scared everybody in the TV station. They'd see me coming and go, "Oh," because they didn't know what to say to me. They didn't know if I was going to cry or what and they, they then too, really became very protective of me because if we went out on the street shooting something, people would say, "Well tell us what happened," you know, and one of my co-workers would jump in front and say, "Excuse me, ma'am," or, "Excuse me sir, she's busy right now, she can't talk about that." So, anyways, it was one of those things where I cried for years. You know, not every day but, you know, every time I'd think about it. And right now, he rides on this shoulder. He's over here, all the time. He's sitting right there now. So he's with me all the time. And now I can talk about him and smile, you know, because he was, he was one of those kids that was just adored by everybody, you know, one of those last chance--the doctor said, "You're not going to have any more children." Well (makes sound) here he is, you know, and so, my parents [Alice Amis Daye and Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye], my husband's parents, aunts, uncles, everybody, just adored that child.
Story_ID: 656824
Speaker 1: In '84 [1984], one of the helicopters crashed at Channel 2 [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, we--
Speaker 1: Did you know the pilot that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did. We- I used to, in fact, ride on that helicopter to schools. It was like a PR [public relations] kind of thing and if I were going to appear at a school in Alamance County [North Carolina], the helicopter would pick me up and we'd go and the helicopter would sit down on the ball fields, something, and all the kids would be out in the yard waving and, so that was real good. And once, we went up in the mountains, Mount Airy [North Carolina], up in the Andy country, and--
Speaker 1: Andy Griffith's country?
Speaker 2: Andy Griffith's country.
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Yes, and so we went there and the photographer, I mean the pilot said to me, "We need to, we need to hurry and get out of here before we start losing light." He says, "I don't like flying through those mountains in the dark," and I thought, really? So I thought after that, okay, that's enough of me and the helicopter (laughter). And so, after that, I kind of found reasons not to go anymore. And one night, he was busy trying to help rescue a man that had fallen off a water tower. The man was up on the water tower doing something and he fell but his rope or something was holding him there, he was dangling, and they couldn't get to him. So he was going to use a chopper to go up and try to reach out and get the man but they think the man was already dead but the blade of the chopper hit the water tower, (makes sound) crashed and killed him.
Speaker 1: This is Tom Haroski?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Haroski, we called him.
Speaker 1: Haroski.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 656825
Speaker 1: All right, the 'Good Morning Show'--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --tell us about that.
Speaker 2: The 'Good Morning Show' was with my dear friend Lee Kinard [Lee W. Kinard, Jr.]. He started the 'Good Morning Show' when he came to WFMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] in '50s [1950s] and I was one of his co-host, co-anchors or whatever you want to call it and it was just a fun show. You know, we did news, weather, some sports, had guests in. It was a fun show. It was hard because I had to go to bed at 6:30, 7:00 at night and I had these kids running around the house, you know, and then get up at two and put on makeup and all this stuff and do my hair and then be there by 3:30, 4:00 and try to act like I had sense (laughter), you know, so that's, it was--
Speaker 1: The show would come on the air around then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the show was on at five, it started at five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Five to eight, but I would go up there and, and try to get ready to go and do all of those things and it was tough and then I'd stay at the station because I was also the community affairs manager. And I would stay at the station until about two or three o'clock in the afternoon, then go pick up my son [Allan Hughes] from school and come home, exhausted and hungry. I gained twenty-five pounds in the two years that I did that show from having odd eating times and habits.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they say that losing sleep can make you gain weight.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so did you have like special guests on that show?
Speaker 2: Mostly local people but Lee and I did go to those junkets I was telling you about and bring back stories from stars, Barnaby Jones [Buddy Ebsen] and some of the other people who were on CBS shows, we would have those on. We didn't have that many that actually came because, I don't think a lot of people liked to come on the show at five o'clock in the morning or six o'clock in the morning and so, so a lot of the stuff we had we taped it, like going to, we'd go to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida] and tape Disney World and come back and show it on the show.
Speaker 1: So, so you're doing the 'Good Morning Show' and you're manager of community affairs at the same time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --beginning in 1985 and then going on to, through I guess 1990?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay, now in '89 [1989], you started something called, '2 Those Who Care'?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was that about?
Speaker 2: It's where we recognized outstanding volunteers in the community and we'd recognize ten a year, one each month for ten months, and then we'd put it all together for one big huge formal gala that was live on the air at night where we would show the stories, you know, the video stories of these people and then have them come up and receive their trophy and, and walk away. It was beautiful, just, but it was a big deal because we had to hire big trucks of, of, production trucks to come and run cable throughout the hotel, to fill up the ballroom and it was a lot of fun, a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the two was the numeral two?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For Channel 2?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) '2 Those Who Care' (laughter).
Story_ID: 656826
Speaker 1: So, in 1990, you become WFMY- MY's [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] evening news anchor?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now why did you make that switch?
Speaker 2: I was asked to. The general manager called me in and he says, "We've been doing focus groups with people in our community and when we asked them, 'Do you know who Lee Kinard [Lee W. Kinard, Jr.] is? Do you know who this person, this person, this person?' And we'd ask them if they know you. Oh, yeah, they know you but they don't know--they know you better than they know the lady who's doing the evening news, so we got to put you on the evening news." And I go, "Uh-oh," because I was buddies with this young lady and they were not letting her in on the fact that she was getting ready to be a reporter again. So, but, you know, I liked the idea I was going to finally get some money and, and, here again, you know, in my head, I was thinking, doing the news is an important thing to do. People need news.
Speaker 1: Is that the position that pays the most?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well for me, back at that time, it did.
Speaker 1: And do you think, just reflecting on this, do you think that you were, because you might actually know, if you were being paid as well as other people?
Speaker 2: I was not.
Speaker 1: And that's, this is on two levels, two fronts now, as much as white people doing the same job and as much as white men (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Men, yes.
Speaker 1: --or men, period, doing the same thing.
Speaker 2: I found out after about the third co-anchor that he came in, he was there like three or four years, he was making more money than me and I went to the general manager and I said, "This can never happen again." I said, "I cannot continue to be the underdog. I'm not trying to be the top dog but please don't hire somebody off the street or off from another station and give them more money than you're giving me." So, the general manager promised that that wouldn't happen again. So, I don't know--
Speaker 1: You don't know if he kept his promise?
Speaker 2: I don't know. It was a female. So, you know, I didn't, it's one of those things you don't talk about, how much do you make? But I said to them, I'm aware of what you're doing and I really can't continue to do this. And so, I got a nice raise but I don't know if that meant (laughter) that the next guy that came here got a bigger raise.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I had multiple anchor, co-anchors. So then, the community said, "Well she's a, she's a man eater, they can't work with her. You know, they come, work here, and she runs 'em off" (laughter). I can't, I can't do anything right, can I, good grief. I thought, well they're all getting bigger jobs in bigger markets, I just want to stay here in this market. I don't think they bought it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that is the nature of this business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People do move on to a bigger market.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, they take the steps.
Speaker 1: It's rare that somebody stays in the same place, you know.
Speaker 2: I don't know many of--Lee Kinard, the man I just mentioned, stayed at WFMY for forty-three years and I was there for forty years and I don't, I don't know that anybody who is there now will say, "I'm going to be here for thirty more years or thirty-five years." They always, there's so many other things going on in media now.
Speaker 1: People do, though, I mean they do but it's not, you know, the typical pattern, a few years and then they're off to another, a bigger market.
Story_ID: 656827
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-one [1991], you were presented with the Edward R. Murrow Award for news reporting. Tell us about this award and, and what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, it was from the Greensboro Chamber of Commerce. It was not from CBS. It was from the chamber of commerce and they had a program where they recognize people in media, in industry, in business, schools or education and I was the one they recognized in media with the Edward R. Murrow Award.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was, was Ed, did they have any particular connection to Edward R. Murrow?
Speaker 2: He's from here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or, I don't know that he was from here but he lived here. We have a Murrow Boulevard, there's a bust of him down at, downtown and the whole thing so I know he spent many years here. I can't say that he was born here.
Speaker 1: Okay, Murrow was born, Egbert Roscoe Murrow, at Polecat Creek near Greensboro [North Carolina]. That's what it says here. Interesting, I didn't know it until I just looked down here and saw this note, okay. So, in '91 [1991], you're also recognized by Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] for outstanding work on a documentary about the Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] sit-ins.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was wonderful. In fact, I got a, I have a number of Gannett awards and the one that I did on the Woolworth sit-in was just special, you know, and it was special to me personally so I think I probably put a little more oomph to it than I might have if it had been something else.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't all just making a documentary about history, you were actually in it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes. So I felt that, you know, instead of giving it to somebody who just moved here from Illinois, let me do it 'cause I was there, you know, I saw it.
Story_ID: 656828
Speaker 1: In 1992 you created the Minority Broadcast Development Program. Now, what was that about?
Speaker 2: That's where I invited one to two African Americans students from all the area colleges to come, one day a month, to learn what goes on in a TV station, not just news, but they'd come and they'd do this for the whole semester. They come one time and they're in accounting. Another time they're in production. Another time in news. So I was trying to get them familiar with all of the opportunities in television. You know, everybody wants to be an anchor but there are plenty of other, you know, nice jobs in the business.
Speaker 1: So was this a first time your knowledge of this had been done where a major local station opened its doors to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I've never heard of anyone else doing that before and I was thrilled that our general manager and news director agreed to let me do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you know, have you, what kind of feedback did you get from this program?
Speaker 2: Great feedback, especially from the Gannett corporation [Gannett Company, Inc.] and other people because they said, this is an excellent way to keep young up and coming broadcasters from thinking all they can do is report or anchor. You know, they can be the news director, they can be, they can run camera, they can be the accountant, the bookkeeper and all of those things. So, I was very pleased with it. When I, I think I did that for two or three years and after that, it kind of petered away. A girl who was in community affairs took it over and then she started inviting any students that wanted to come. So, and it just sort of went away.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask a question if the station had opened its doors to white students at any juncture in its past? Had it ever done that?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of. Lots of tours, of course, and many, many of them were white students and I noticed when I started doing news that a lot of the interns that came from colleges, people who were majoring in broadcasting, were coming from the white schools or schools that were predominantly white. And one of the things I want to do right now, at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], is work on students who are looking for internships. Let's say if they get an internship at FMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina], I want to sit down with them for a little quick hour or so and say, let me tell you what's expected of you when you get there so you don't just go in and sit there like, you know, you don't know what you're there for because a lot of those people get, end up getting jobs. You know, if you've got an intern that comes in and they are just a ball of fire, (makes sound) when they graduate and bring, you know, come and apply for a job, you say, "Yeah, I remember he was great."
Story_ID: 656829
Speaker 1: What are the highlights of y- of your days as a news anchor? Now you did this all the way through the end of your career at FMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, '90 [1990] 'til 2010 and then for 2011 and '12 [2012], I continued to do '2 Those Who Care.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I was not, I had retired in December, 2010, but I'd come back every month and do '2 Those Who Care'--
Speaker 1: So you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for two years.
Speaker 1: --you were anchor during the run of John, I'm getting a senior--John Edwards, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, and during 9/11 [September 11, 2001], and all of those kinds of things. One thing that I thank my family for was that they understood that when something like this happens, I go to work and I don't know when I'll be back. You know, I don't care if it's nights, weekends, Christmas, Thanksgiving, I'm there, and thank God I've had a family, those people who developed the safety net who have said, "Sure, just do what you've got to do."
Speaker 1: Okay, now you say this over and over again, without that kind of support--
Speaker 2: Yeah, nothing, nothing I've done, I think, was I able to do it by myself. I had to have people picking up the slack so that I could go out and do things.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you look back on your career in this business, is there anything major that you would do differently if you can go back and change something?
Speaker 2: I think I would try harder to spend more time with my children [Tiffany Hughes Harris, Allan Hughes and Larry Hughes, Jr.]. I, if, now they're grown now and gone but I missed so many things with them. You know, dance recitals, Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] adventures, all of those things and I had so many people say, "Don't worry, we've got 'em, we've got 'em," until I would just go on. I mean, I would cry, I was telling you I'd cry about it, but I think now if I had to do it all over again, I would say to the station, "Okay, I'll do Christmas Day but Thanksgiving, I really need to be home with my family." May not work (laughter), especially since Thanksgivings and ratings (laughter).
Story_ID: 656830
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your pro- professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Say that again. What--
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your professional legacy in--
Speaker 2: I want to be thought of as a woman who took chances, who stepped out on a limb to get things done, with the help of others, who wanted to be considered a smart person, an intelligent person, a nice person, a kind person, a compassionate person. I, I just want to be somebody that people trust and like and so far, I think it's working.
Story_ID: 656831
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in Greensboro [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you're still here today and you're in a pivotal position. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in Greensboro?
Speaker 2: I would hope that some of the young people in our community, whether they're broadcasters, lawyers or whatever, would really take a chance and step out there and do some things that they've heard about, things they thought about and yes, it's going to be scary, it's going to be frightening, but you can still get it done if you have enough persistence, you can get it done.
Story_ID: 656832
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite story of all the stories that you reported on [for WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite story was riding on a nuclear submarine. Wow, that was so cool. It was the, the USS Tecumseh [USS Tecumseh SSBN-628] and my 'PM Magazine' crew and I went down to Cape Canaveral [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida], got on the ship, it went out into the ocean, went under for a day and they simulated a nuclear attack for us, you know, with all the red lights flashing and the sailors running and us shoot- it's, I think about that, it's like a dream come true. To me it's just as important as like going on a spaceship to Mars.
Speaker 1: Now, now were you on a, did you report on the election of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]?
Speaker 2: No, I was gone then.
Speaker 1: You were, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: No wait, no, no, no, I was not, I did. I did.
Speaker 1: That's 2008.
Speaker 2: I did, what am I thinking? Yes, of course, I did 'cause that night when we were waiting for him to show up at that park in Chicago [Grant Park, Chicago, Illinois], we were sitting there and my, you know, we're trying to fill time, fill time, waiting for him to come, talking about everything, going over, over the same thing, and then he turned to me and said, "So Sandra [HistoryMaker Sandra Hughes], how do you feel about Barack Obama becoming president?" I thought, uh-oh, just be very careful on what we say now. And I said, "Well, I'm very happy that he's there because I think this is an opportunity for every person in this country and the world to realize what potential they have and how it doesn't matter who you are or where you came from, you can lead people in the, one of the biggest countries in the world," and so I went along that line. Well the phones rang off the hook for days (laughter) and the newspapers wrote about it because they said I had no business giving my personal opinion, that wasn't the station's opinion. I thought, I can't win, can I?
Speaker 1: Well, well he carried North Carolina that year.
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: He did carry North Carolina so regardless of the opinions to the contrary--
Speaker 2: But I was trying to make it not just black but this is an opportunity for everybody, you know, I thought.
Speaker 1: I mean, I don't see, I don't, I didn't hear anything wrong with what you said. It did sound like kind of a--
Speaker 2: Well, and yeah, but some people did. I guess people were just waiting for an opportunity to (makes sound), let's jump on her again.
Speaker 1: It's like one of the, you were discussing, we were discussing off camera, that's one of the issues that you have to face with young people in media classes at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is how to report the news without putting your own personal bias in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's not about me. It's not about me and I tell them that all the time and hopefully they'll get it. Don't know. One day we had a story about a law had been changed so people could carry their weapons into public parks. So, I read this story and I'm trying to just keep a straight face and read the story. So the weatherman, who was just my best buddy, and we used to laugh all the time about things, he was sitting beside me so I could finish the story, tossed to him to do the weather. And so, when I finished the story, I said, "Well, there goes my trips to the park." Well, the audience ate me alive again (laughter) because like I said, it's not about you. And see, I broke my own rule there so, I don't know. But I can tell you that in my last days, last few years, I did get a little more open about how I felt about things, without being blatant, you know, but, you know, I'd read the story about some woman who had done something that I thought was despicable and at the end I'd go (makes sounds), okay next story. So, so I better be careful with my students, you know, like I'm telling them to do something that I have done.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear) is, do you think anybody's ever, even Walter Cronkite, I don't think he was completely dispassionate, you know.
Speaker 2: No. I remember when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot. I remember him sitting there talking about it and do you remember he pulled off his glasses, you know, and wiped his eyes like he was crying or something. Well, you can't cry on TV. So, you know, but I can remember them doing things like that and I think that's just human, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have a journalistic philosophy even though you weren't trained as a journalist, necessarily, but, except for on the job, you know, which is--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I guess, the best training.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Just that a person, I think that any person can be a journalist, black, white, green, yellow, blue, whatever you are, whatever your race, religion or whatever is, as long as you consider yourself a person for the people, not how I feel, not what I think about the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] or what I think about Democrats, Republicans or anybody else, but you can be a good journalist if you are willing to put yourself behind. I remember a manager telling me one time when I started doing that talk show ['Sandra and Friends'], he said, "This show is not about you, it's about the people you interview, so you always, always shine the light on them, you always turn the camera on them, and if you'll do that, and keep yourself out of it, people will respect you for it."
Story_ID: 656833
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your family today. What they're doing?
Speaker 2: My husband [Larry Hughes, Sr.] is home, he retired in '07 [2007] and he, he stays around the house pretty much. He's back in the bedroom now, in fact. He stays around the house. You know, he does the grass and all the things and cooks food occasionally, so he's here. My son drives an eighteen wheeler, Allan [Allan Hughes], and he's all over the country and loves it. I said, "Allan, why would you want to be--?" He said, "I just like being by myself and I like driving and this is a perfect way for me to see the country." My daughter, Tiffany [Tiffany Hughes Harris], works at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] in the athletic department and she's married to Chris Harris [Christopher Harris] who works at the post office [U.S. Postal Service] and they have two gorgeous little girls, Noelle [Alexandra Harris (ph.)] and Alia [Alia Harris (ph.)], who are the lights of my life. I've got them so spoiled until Tiffany says, "I'm going to have to stop letting them come to your house," (laughter), "because you keep buying stuff for 'em and doing things," but they are just wonderful. And then, of course, I've got my brothers and sisters. I don't have parents anymore.
Story_ID: 656834
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Uh--
Speaker 1: Oh, I did, there is something I didn't mention, that was, what's been your relationship to the International Civil Rights Center and Museum [Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I'm its first ambassador.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When it opened, they named me the ambassador so I say good things about it and I go and when I'm speaking at groups, I do a lot of speaking, motivational, inspiration in media and I'm always trying to make sure that I let people know that this is a wonderful place for you to go and see, even if you were there, if you were there when those things were happening, that's one thing. If your children don't know anything about it, you've got to tell them the stories. That's what Franklin McCain told me once. He said, "Our generation made a mistake in not telling our children about the struggles. We were so glad that they were in integrated schools and, you know, doing, going to cafes and hotels," he says, "but we, you don't know where you're going if you don't know where you've been."
Speaker 1: Now this, the museum, is housed in a special place, right?
Speaker 2: Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company], in the store. The museum is in, in fact, when they got ready to tear the old Woolworth store down, a couple of gentlemen in our community, said, "No, no, no, this is so important, let's turn it into a museum," and gosh, it took years and years and years to raise enough money to turn it into a museum and now it's just absolutely wonderful. It has all the lunch counter stools and all of the things that were there. I mean, even the old salt shakers and cake dishes and everything that people saw when they were there back then and it has lots of exhibits. It's got really nice things and then it's got some ugly stuff where you see people being beaten or sprayed with water hoses and, no, these are pictures, murals on walls. They call it the Wall of Shame. So, it's, it's a wonderful museum and they have meeting space if you wanted to have a meeting there with some of your business leaders and friends, you can rent out a space there. They have gift shops where you can buy things that commemorate the Civil Rights Movement. So it's a wonderful place and I especially like the fact that it's in the old Woolworth building where I used to shop as a child to get pencils and pens and paper for school. I never asked for a cup of coffee but (laughter), but I was able to buy things there.
Story_ID: 656835
Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you about we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so. We talked about family and schooling and--my teaching at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] is not nearly as much fun as I thought it was going to be (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, why not (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because students, students are different. I think I wanted to find students who had the same hunger that I had for things and students who my mother [Alice Amis Daye] would say, "Now, go out and act like folks. You know, don't go out and embarrass me." And these students with the way, sometimes the way they dress and the things they say and their attention to electronics, disappoints me in a way because I say to them, "You've got to learn to communicate with me, not by texting me but you've got to talk to me." So, that's, that's one of the things that I, I don't think I can change at this point. I can't go in there and change the journalism department [Department of Journalism and Mass Communication] and make it be like that. So I just have to deal with it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you think that, do you have any advice for students that do have a zeal for journalism today?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would like to say to them, pull everything you possibly can out of your professor. For example, I spent forty years doing what they said they want to do now, but they rarely eat me up about it. And I say, "Do you watch local news?" "No." "Well, where do you get your news?" "On my iPad or my phone or whatever." And I said, well, you know, I want these students to be hungry enough that they'll go, really go the extra mile to find out more about what actually happens in the job, about the politics of being in a newsroom, but they're busy texting somebody and if they come in the room with their pants down, I say, "You go home and when you put your clothes on, come back because I don't want to see your underwear in the back" (laughter).
Story_ID: 656836
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. How--ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Pretty much as I explained a few minutes ago. I want to be remembered as a person who tried very, very hard to do the right thing. I, I want people to remember me as having a passion for broadcasting in TV news and not being willing to give it up because somebody didn't like the color of my skin. I want people to remember me as a nice person, somebody who talks to people at the grocery store or in the malls and everywhere else without turning my nose up at them. I want them to remember me as a person who was just like them. I just had a different job.
Story_ID: 656837
Speaker 1: Oh and just one last--you were recently recognized by NABJ, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: National Association of Black Journalists.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the recognition?
Speaker 2: Chuck Stone Lifetime Achievement Award. They say it's their highest honor that they give out and when I was there last weekend, in fact, a lot of the young students and young broadcasters were there said, "Thank you for making it possible for me to do the job I'm doing without as much heat as you had to take when you were doing yours." That was cool.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well thank you for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you so much.
Story_ID: 656838
Speaker 1: This is a picture when I was in, between elementary school and junior high school when they were having a contest run by the Carolina Peacemaker, a weekly magazine in Greensboro [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was a time in my life when I was so shy. That's when I was a baby and they said I was such a fat little baby until mother could not lace up my high top shoes at the top (laughter).
Speaker 2: That picture is when I had my First Holy Communion in the Catholic church, Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal [Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal Church; St. Mary's Catholic Church, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you hold on one second?
Speaker 2: Did you get the baby picture?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: A program at Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School [Greensboro, North Carolina] when I was in elementary school, was for Halloween and I got all dressed up as a ghost.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on one second. Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's my dad, Alexander Cotton. He's my biological father and one of the most wonderful people I have ever known in my entire life. He would do anything for me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay next.
Speaker 2: And that's my granddaddy, Poshia Pulley. He was 6'6" tall, lived in the country as a sharecropper, tobacco farmer and he, I adored him and I think he adored me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: We did a telethon at the civil rights museum [International Civil Rights Center and Museum, Greensboro, North Carolina] where Fantasia [Fantasia Barrino] was our special guest and, man, did people come out to see her. Also in the picture is Skip Alston [Melvin "Skip" Alston] who was one of the guys who helped establish the museum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I was doing a show called 'Sandra and Friends' and the two guys in the picture worked there at the TV station and we were just joking around one day on the set.
Speaker 1: This is in the 19--
Speaker 2: That's in nineteen eight- early '80s [1980s], late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Sandra and Friends' started in 1974 with Loretta Swit who was called "Hot Lips" [Margaret "Hot Lips" Houlihan] from the show of 'M*A*S*H' who was one of the first guests that week on my show.
Speaker 1: This is recent. I was asked to speak at the North Carolina A and T State University [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] athletic banquet.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, let me take another crack at that 'Sandra and Friends,' the last one. I think it was a little soft.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry these pictures haven't been kept well.
Speaker 2: Oh, they're fine.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good.
Speaker 2: Graduation pictures. The top picture I was graduating from Our Lady of the Miraculous Medal School. The bottom picture, I was graduating from Notre Dame High School, both Catholic schools in Greensboro [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my precious little boy. His name was Larry James Hughes, Jr. [Larry Hughes, Jr.], born in 1980, he drowned in 1984.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: My family. My mom and dad [Hughes' stepfather, Charlie Daye] are seated. Starting on the other side is my brother, Charles Bernard Daye [Hughes' half-brother, Charles Day], then there I am, Sandra Daye Hughes [HistoryMaker Sandra Hughes], Faye, who is Twyla Faye Daye Kahn [Hughes' half-sister, Faye Daye Kahn] and then the youngest brother is Michael, Michael Gary Daye [Hughes' half-brother, Michael Daye].
Speaker 1: That's my beautiful mother, long time ago. I actually don't know when that picture was made but she was a beautiful, wonderful woman.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Alice Marie Daye, Alice Marie Amis Daye [Alice Amis Daye].
Speaker 2: Oh, once the anchors, the major anchors at WFMY News 2 [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] had their pictures on buses in Greensboro, on city public buses, and I'll tell you, that's frightening when that drives up beside you (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: Lee Kinard [Lee W. Kinard, Jr.], one of my absolute best friends in the whole world taught me a majority of what I knew about broadcasting. We were at a program that night called '2 Those Who Care.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: In the year 2013, I received the National Conference on Community and Justice [sic. National Conference for Community and Justice of the Piedmont Triad, Inc.] honor for being a trailblazer. It was the Brotherhood/Sisterhood award [Brotherhood/Sisterhood Citation Award]. In the picture with me, you see, Lee Kinard, who I worked with forever and a new young reporter or anchor at WFMY, Frank Mickens, who he calls me his mother 'cause I mentor him.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Okay. They curl so fast.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm getting glare on that one. Description please.
Speaker 2: As a young reporter in the early '70s [1970s], I was out with photographers quite often filming things that were happening in the community. And as you can see, that's that old film camera.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: That, I would say, that's 1973.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I did a show called 'Sandra and Friends' and we would visit various communities around Greensboro with a program we called Speak Out [ph.] where people could come and just talk about anything on their minds that I came back and played on the show.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I started doing a show called 'Sandra and Friends' in 1974 and we had lots of publicity or promotion for the show and this is a sheet that we put out once a week talking about what had been on the show and what else was coming on the show. This was done in 1974, late '74 [1974].
Story_ID: 656839
Speaker 1: I'm in a picture here with James Garner who had come to Greensboro [North Carolina] for what we called the Greater Greensboro Open [Wyndham Championship], a part of the PGA Tour [Professional Golfers' Association].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Deputy Barney Fife.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Who is also dead, right?
Speaker 1: It'll pop up in a minute 'cause it tends to go the other way.
Speaker 2: That was at the Greater Greensboro Open with Barney Fife who had come to Greensboro for that PGA Tour and I interviewed him for the 'Sandra and Friends' show. This was in 1975, I think.
Speaker 1: Don Knotts, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Don Knotts. I'm sorry, Barney Fife (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): K-N-O-T-T-S for those of you who are too young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And don't want to Google it. Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a show that I did, 'Sandra and Friends' where we would invite a viewing audience to come into the studio when I had a soap opera guest. I honestly can't remember what his name was, unless it's written on the back of the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's when my whole family was together, me, my husband. Standing below me is Tiffany Marie [Tiffany Hughes Harris], then Allan Justin [Allan Hughes] and then the little baby, Larry James, Jr. [Larry Hughes, Jr.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was in 1980.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, very good.
Speaker 2: This is where Lee Kinard [Lee W. Kinard, Jr.] and I went to Atlanta [Georgia] for a CBS junket. It was, oh I want to say, it was 1976, '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right.
Speaker 2: And those are the people we were interviewed, the people we were expecting to come in for interviews.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: An artist rendition?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's, I can't see the name on that, Jennifer Parker [ph.], does that say?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see. This is important as soon as you get this out. There, now you can see the full name.
Speaker 1: What's that say? But this, when I'd visit schools, the children in the classrooms, mostly elementary schools, would draw pictures of me and write thank you notes and this is one done from, by a little girl named Jennifer. I honestly don't remember the school.
Speaker 2: That's me at Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida] with John Pattison [ph.]. I don't know the lady driver but we were the grand marshals of the Disney parade and this was like 1982.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 2: This is the USS Tecumseh [USS Tecumseh SSBN-628], a submarine that I was able to ride on for a day and watch them perform a nuclear attack, or simulate a nuclear attack.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: That is, oh god, his name is suddenly escaping me. That's, we were out shooting again for 'Sandra and Friends' and I can't remember this man's name. Is it on there like up under the--
Speaker 1: I think it's under there.
Speaker 2: It says her cameraman and I wonder if his name is--
Speaker 1: It can be seen under the (unclear), you know, it's all right.
Speaker 2: And that's me with Esther Rolle from 'Good Times' at one of the CBS junkets and that was about 1980.
Speaker 1: That was last year. That's my husband, Larry James Hughes, Sr. [Larry Hughes, Sr.] and me at the NCCJ Brotherhood/Sisterhood awards dinner [National Conference for Community and Justice of the Piedmont Triad, Inc.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good.
Speaker 1: That was done in 2012 when I was asked to speak to a group of corporate leaders at Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] to talk about how they can help with athletics at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]. That was done in nine- 2012.
Speaker 2: That was one of the early pictures from 1974 when they started doing promotion for the talk show I was going to do, 'Sandra and Friends.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture from, I would say, about 1985, '86 [1986], when I was doing the 'Good Morning Show.'
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This was 'PM Magazine' where I had a co-host, his name was Rod Davis and the photographer there is David Fields [ph.] and this was done in, I want to say it was like 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's another one of those early reporter photos where they asked me not to smile, which is hard for me (laughter). I can't stop smiling.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold that a minute. Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This was done in 2010 when I was about ready to leave WFMY [WFMY-TV, Greensboro, North Carolina] for retirement and a photographer took this picture of me with a montage of pictures from the back that had been put together by my co-anchors, co-hosts and co-anchors and friends.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my beloved family, taken in 2013. Starting on the end is my daughter, Tiffany, Tiffany Marie, her husband Christopher O'Dell [Christopher Harris], me and my husband, Larry James Hughes. Below him is my granddaughter, Noelle, Alexandra Noelle Harris [Alexandra Harris (ph.)] and the little one down there is Alia Santana Harris [Alia Harris (ph.)].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great.
Speaker 2: I think this is it. I think we can, this is a pretty good sample.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: In 2010, I retired from WFMY and this is an article that the Greensboro News and Record did on my leaving.
