Story_ID: 27842
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  William Anthony Hawkins, Jr., W-I-L-L-I-A-M, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, H-A-W-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 15, 1947, Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm Associate Professor of Mathematics, University of District of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm Director of the Office of Minority Participation at the Mathematical Association of America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 17, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the Churchill Room at the Mathematical Association headquarters in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia]. Do you need the address?
Speaker 1: No, not necessarily.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Story_ID: 27843
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warmup, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably curried rice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I can think of offhand.  Maybe I can come back to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 27844
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side separately.  And then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Amanda.  A--Amanda Lawyuna Bowman, A-M-A-N-D-A, Lawyuna, L-A-W-Y-U-N-A, Bowman, B-O-W-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now is there a story behind Lawyuna?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of, just that that was her name, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean, is there--
Speaker 2: A lot of her friends called her Bowman, you know.  But I don't know of any story behind the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  What is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in T-O-C-C-O-A, Georgia.  I think it's, T-O-C-C-O-A.  And it was August 24, 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and what are the stories about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I know I knew her father, but I did not know her mother.  Her mother had died early on.  I'm not sure if it was--I don't know if it was necessarily in childbirth, but, that died when she was a young girl.  And so my grandfather had immigrated here from Toccoa.  I don't really know why, but in any case, the wife he had at that time left him.  And after seven years, he filed, you know, I guess, abandonment papers, a Notice of Abandonment, and was granted a divorce.  And he married Adelaide Bowman (ph.), who was my mother's stepmother, I guess, maybe her second stepmom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, his name--what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was Lindsey, I believe with an "e".  L-I-N-D-S-E-Y, Joyce (ph.)--and I'm not sure of the real spelling of that--Bowman, B-O-W-M-A-N.  Looking at his death certificate, I recently put up a tombstone for my mother and grandfather, and I wasn't convinced of the spelling of his middle name, so I just used "J" rather than, you know, put his full name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was Adelaide your grandmother?
Speaker 2: That was my mother's stepmother.
Speaker 1: Oh, stepmother.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) (unclear) I don't really--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)--So your mother's biological mother--
Speaker 2: Had died long before, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I believe all of her siblings were dead by time I was--came along too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--but your grandfather divorced her before (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: He--not Adelaide.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Adelaide was his--
Speaker 1: Not Adelaide.  I mean the other--
Speaker 2: This other lady, I'm not sure of her name, but he had divorced her after seven years that he was here, after he moved here.  She abandoned, you know, I guess, you know, left.  And after seven years, I guess it was possible to get a divorce on the basis of abandonment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, can you give us the name of your grandmother, the one who passed away?
Speaker 2: Well, you're talking my mother's stepmother, that's Adelaide.  That's the only name I know.
Speaker 1: Oh, so she is--you don't know them, biological--
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know my mother's mother.
Speaker 1: --or her name at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So your mother was raised in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: I would say maybe as--she came here maybe as a teenager, perhaps.  Not quite sure.  I know she went to high school here.  So, I'm not sure quite how old she was when she came, but she did go to high school here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how she knew my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So are there any stories on your mother's side of the family that go back to the nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of, you know.  She had an uncle, who lived, actually, next to her father.  And so I knew him, but all I knew was his initials, Uncle G.P. That's what he was called.  I don't really know what his name was.  You know, genealogy wasn't that big of a thing, you know, when I was a kid, and as an only child also, I guess, as a son, you know, you just didn't, you know, it wasn't that--or didn't care or didn't inquire that much, so.  You know, so I don't really know that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27845
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] say about growing up in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]?  What part of town did she grow up in?
Speaker 2: Well, okay.  So, my understanding, she lived in what's called Deanwood (ph.), which is far northeast, probably a predominantly black section of town.  You know, I knew her probably in context of her church and some of her friends, but, you know, just--and it didn't really--I can't recall any particular stories.  I mean, I guess, it was--certainly was a close-knit community; I mean, the circles in which she moved everybody sort of knew everybody very well.  They had all gone to high school together, like, when my kids were young and they were going to her church for Sunday school, the Sundays that my mother went to adult Sunday school, and the kids, of course, had their own teacher.  But the person teaching her Sunday school was one of her high school classmates.  You know, so.  It was that kind of sort of small town.  Washington is very much, in some ways, a small town, even though it's a pretty good size.  But people, you know, I guess, people who stayed, stayed in certain areas or at least know people.  I see people from my childhood, I used to be friends with them.  But see them, you know, people I knew fifty-something years ago, if not more, you know, every now and then.
Speaker 1: Is Northeast D.C. like the original black community in D.C. or (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Ironically, south--or was it, Georgetown was a black section of town before my time.  And I used to hear about it when P.D. Greene would talk about it, kind of shocked because it's very upscale, predominantly white area now.  And so, it was kind of a surprise that there had been--you know, a lot of small houses, real, kind of close together.  But, you know, it's now--it's very upscale.  So Far Northeast, as it was called, Deanwood, of family homes.  I would say, you know, a mixture of family homes, apartments, what have you.  When my mother first came here, she stayed with some of her classmates, I guess, some--they were--you know, she had a lot of close friends, and I know she had lived with some of these people, you know; don't quite know necessarily why.  I know that my grandfather and stepmother had adopted two girls.  So, you know, and they were, you know, they were young, I mean, so, much younger than my mother.  And so my impression was my mother had stayed with friends of hers or--and had stayed with some families part of the time when she first came here.  And, you know, I say, maybe before she got married to my father.
Story_ID: 27846
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your mother's [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Tabernacle Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You need the spelling of that or?
Speaker 1: I think that's pretty much--it's pretty much the same way that Tabernacle is spelled.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's located on Division Avenue, Northeast.  It's still there.  And they only had about two pastors there, the founding pastor and Reverend Washington; and then they have--the second pastor is Reverend Stroeman (ph); he's still alive, he's probably in his nineties now, but.
Speaker 1: Is he still pastor of the church?
Speaker 2: He is.  You know, maybe he sort of, you know, sort of, stepped back.  I mean I'm not a member there, but I see--he lives in my neighborhood and he's a walker.  So I see him maybe once every six months or so walking.  And, you know, it takes--I mean, he's up in age.  His wife just passed and stuff, but I mean, he's pretty robust.  I mean, you see aging on him now, but--but in terms of him getting out and walking, he's a--it was a big thing with him.  You know, he does a lot of that, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Unlike some of us 'cause I don't do much of that.
Speaker 1: Now, your mother went to high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Armstrong.
Speaker 1: --went to Armstrong.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Went to Armstrong High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father did too.  I think, maybe the class of '36 [1936]; 1936, something like that.  That might have been.  That might be a little late, but I know she got--she got an associate's degree--she got a Dental Hygienist Certificate in 1938 from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So, you know, when--well, I mean, I'll say when we were kids coming up, you know, you just--you just didn't know these details.  We never sat around talking about them, but I do know, I guess I probably maybe even have their yearbook.  But they were, you know, they were classmates.  And '36 [1936] is about the time.  And that would be kind of--since she was born in '09 [1909], that would be kind of late.  So it might have been earlier than, maybe it was somewhat earlier.  But I kind of got the impression, I don't know--yeah, '38 [1938] is probably--that's when she got her Dental Hygienist Certificate, I'm pretty sure.   And I might have the dates wrong or something, but in the '30s [1930s] or in the sort of the mid-thirties or so.  And I'm not sure if she finished high--I kind of got the--I mean, I know they knew each from high school.  I don't know, my father, I'm not aware of him having delayed his high school, so I assume my mother's, you know, was about the same timeframe.  I never really thought about the dates.
Speaker 1: She was born in '09 [1909]?
Speaker 2: In '09 [1909].  Yes, she was born in '09 [1909].
Speaker 1: So 1938--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: So '38 [1938], yeah, eighteen would have been her--was--
Speaker 1: 1927.
Speaker 2: '27 [1927].  So maybe, you know, maybe--maybe it was--maybe it was 1930 or something, maybe.  So I'd have to look, you know, at it, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm not that knowledgeable of it, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But she did get her degree from Howard in '38 [1938]?
Speaker 2: She got the Dental Hygienist Certificate in 1938.
Speaker 1: So maybe she worked before she went back to school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She might very well have because she was--she worked as a nurse.  Now, and this might have been after she had her certificate.  She worked as a nurse for a Dr. Theodore Pinkney (ph.), whose son still lives in his father's house on Division, Division Avenue.
Speaker 1: Now, seems like I've heard that name before.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Teddy Pinkney is an undertaker.  He has a funeral home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure of the name of it, but he had a funeral home.  And so my mother worked for his father, even though she wasn't--she didn't have a nursing background, but she did actually work as his nurse, you know, for a while.  She worked as a--and I assume Dr. Pinkney went to Tabernacle, I mean, because that everybody kind of lived over there, lived on Division Avenue went to Tabernacle.  She also worked as a Dental Hygienist for Dr. Mavritte.  Trying to think of Dr. Mavritte's--M-A-V-R-I-T-T-E, whose son still lives--was a school teacher, a D.C. Public School Teacher, Bernard.  And was actually--you ever heard of the Tabernacle Echos?  He was one of the founders of the Tabernacle Echols.
Speaker 1: What was the Tabernacle Echols?
Speaker 2: A gospel group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Probably (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I'm not from the D.C. area, so I'm (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.  I know.  (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I know some things, but not a lot, but (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I thought they were nationally--I think they were nationally known.  So, Bernard, I think, Dr. Mavritte had three children; Bernard, Harold, and I can't--I don't know--I can't think of the name of the third one.  But mother worked as his dental hygienist 'cuz she was very close to the Mavritte family.  Yeah, very close.
Speaker 1: That's Maybritt?
Speaker 2: Mavritte.  M-A-V as in Victor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --R-I-T-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mavritte.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --T-E.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a somewhat of a well-known local dentist.  She would--like I say, she was a dental hygienist.  Most of her life she worked for the D.C. government.  D.C. government actually had a dental hygiene program.  They sent dental hygienists to the schools, and they inspected children's teeth.  So mother knew kids all over the city.  She was the "tooth lady," you know, they would call her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you would get either a white card if your dental either your hygiene was, I guess, your teeth were in pretty good shape; a blue--a pink or a blue--I guess pink.  I'm not sure--I'm not sure the second was pink and the third was blue, vice-versa, but, and--but they inspected the children's teeth.  And then you could get free dental care.  They had clinics that were funded by the city.  And she worked--she did that until her retirement, I mean, you know, as a dental hygienist.  So, you know, that was--that was her area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27847
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full--it's the same as yours, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Senior.  You know, William Anthony Hawkins, Senior.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December--let's see.  December 14th, 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: I believe he was born in Fairmount Heights, Maryland.  Might have that.  Actually, I should have looked.  My--one of my aunts did a sort of a biographical information with no dates.  And she passed before I actually ever got a chance to ask her to put the dates in.  And, but anyway, so.  But either he was--he might have been born in Upper Marlboro, Maryland, but I'm not sure about that.  I know he lived--the family home was in Fairmount Heights, which is, F-A-R--F-A-I-R-M-O-U-N-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Heights, Maryland.  And it's just right across the D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] line.  In fact, it used to have a D.C. zip code, you know.  It's just that close.  Going back to my mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman], I was aware of--I think she had a sister named Hazel, who had died before I was born.  She had a brother, Lindsey, Junior.  So he was called Sonny Boy.  And he was a World War II--in World War II he was a soldier.  But he wasn't killed there.  He died sort of, I guess, in that timeframe, but he wasn't killed in action, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he passed in the [U.S.] Army or did he--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: He was in the Navy?
Speaker 2: I believe he was in the Navy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he out when he passed?
Speaker 2: No.  He was here.  It was in--in this area.
Speaker 1: So he was out of the Navy?
Speaker 2: I don't think he was out.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I think that maybe he was on leave or something.  I don't really know.  He, you know, he liked to taste and got rolled.  And so asphyxiated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know how much of that needs to go in, you know.  But anyway, that's what I was told.  I mean, you know, I don't know, but--so anyway, but so I knew that she had a sister named Hazel, and she had a brother--she may have had other siblings, but I just don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, in terms of your father's side of the family, how far back can you trace his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, once again, now my aunt gave me information about her mother and her father; so that would be my father's mother and father.  And that's about as far as I know.  His father was just William Hawkins.  And my--my paternal grandmother was Ivy Lee Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had actually, like you say, I should have thought about bringing those papers.  But so the only note--because my aunt wrote it out.  I never knew anything specifically.  My grandfather had died before I was born.  My grandmother I knew.  She died when I was about five [years old].  So, you know, my father's mother.
Story_ID: 27848
Speaker 1: So, now, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.], of course, worked for the [U.S.] Post Office.  I really don't know.  You know, my grandfather was dead before I was born, and my grandmother, I guess, was a homemaker.  I don't really know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But then, you said the family homestead was sort of in Fairmount Heights?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was.  It was--
Speaker 1: And so was this a substantial amount of land or small (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It had a couple of lots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A couple of lots.  A house and it was a good size house and a nice lot.  I can go into what happened to it, but, you know, but, anyway.  We don't have it any more.  I mean, it's, you know, anyway, I can go into that if you want, but--
Speaker 1: Well, go ahead.  It seems like it's a story here.
Speaker 2: Well, it's not that elaborate.  I mean, the--at one point, one of my cousins lived in the house after pretty much when my father had died.  My aunt--there was only one--I only had one aunt left.  And one cousin was allowed to live there under the assump--under the agreement that he would pay rent to his sister, and when he sort of didn't, you know, missed, I guess, missed some payments, she had him put out.  Then it was vacant.  And so, naturally, people went in and, you know, trashed it, and eventually, it was torn down by Fairmount Heights as a danger.  Yes.  So you know, I guess, and the property, I guess, it was a lien against it, and so, you know.
Speaker 1: So it was--was it just a house or did they (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was--it was just really just a--it might have been a garage, but I don't know--I don't know what the situation with that had been.  But my father was the one who took care of it, and once he had a stroke and was no one able to not really help take care of it.  It wasn't in particular--it wasn't in best of shape after that.  But, at any rate, once all the siblings died except for my aunt, then it was, you know, just the next generation who was there, and once they were no longer there, there was nobody there, so you know, you can't leave something vacant and, you know.  They'll get in it.  You know, they had partially, you know, partially burned it down, I guess, and so the city tore it down.
Speaker 1: Why, I take it your father grew up in D.C., he really didn't (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, and he grew up--he went to Armstrong High School, but I mean, the home, the family home was in Fairmount Heights.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was close to--
Speaker 2: I mean, it's right--I mean, it was a block--it's less than a block from the line.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That house was 613 61st Avenue, Fairmount Heights, Maryland.  And I actually looked up the history of the mayors--I looked up Fairmount Heights not too long ago, and one of the former mayors lived around the corner from them.  Doswell E. Brooks, D-O-S-W-E-L-L, E. Brooks
Speaker 1: Now, would he be white or black?
Speaker 2: He was black.
Speaker 1: Black?  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a black--incorporated black township.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Goes back--
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is some history here--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Goes back to the '30s [1930s], I think.  I looked it up.  It was--you know, it's not a particular--it's so many--it's so many acres, you know, 1500 acres or something.  I just happen--I was curious about the spelling of it and not so much in this context, just in general; and looked it up around a couple of weeks ago, you know.  And so--but, anyway, and it was, you know, kind of a close-knit community.  The Elks were right across--Elks Hall was right across the street from their house.  I had a--one of his brothers, one of my father's brothers, at one time lived a couple of doors across--from the Elks, across the street, you know.  So it was a, you know, typical situation like that.  He had--he had a number of siblings.  I had an Aunt Mur--I had a Aunt Murray, who died in either '69 [1969] or--1969, 1970.  I had Uncle Jimmy, who died around 19--let's see when Uncle Jimmy died, 'cuz I was in graduate school.  (pause)  It was sixty--it was '69 [1969].  Uncle Jimmy died in '69 [1969].  Uncle Charlie, I'm sure when he died, but had a brother, Charles; he had a brother, Joe; he was the last brother to die, Joseph.  Yeah.  He was a cab driver.  Uncle Charlie worked at the--a printing office; U.S. Printing Office.  Uncle Jimmy was a truck driver.  Aunt Murray had been a public school teacher in Hagerstown, Maryland, which is about forty--is about forty miles north of D.C.  And Sierra (ph.), she went--you know, she taught there, I guess--she'd come home about--come home about every two weeks and just visit.  They had sort of--you know, they all sort of centered around the homestead.  The last one to die was my aunt Sara Bray, B-R-A-Y.  Oh, I had another aunt, Ethel.  I had an Aunt Ethel, too; Ethel Walker.  She was married to John Walker, and she lived in Portsmouth, Virginia.  That was Aunt Ethel.  Aunt Murray was unmarried.  Aunt Sara was married to Marvin Bray Senior, B-R-A-Y.  So she was Sara--Sara C. Bray.  And I was closest to her, and so I'm closest to her children.  So on my first--I don't have any siblings.  So, first cousin--a fair--I guess, a fair number of first cousins, but the ones I'm closest to would be her.  She had one who died, but her two children, Uncle Charlie's oldest daughter, Ivy; and Uncle Charlie's, I guess, oldest son, Terry.  So, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 27849
Speaker 1: So your parents [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman and William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] met in high school [Armstrong High School, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: That's my impression, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Because he was Catholic, and she was Baptist.  So they didn't meet at church.  That I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And he wouldn't have to the same grade school (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't really know.  I just--I don't think she was here at that time.  I think--I kind of got the impression that, you know, she came here--I mean they were, you know, they were about the same age; so I just assumed that, you know, that, she was in high school about the same time he was, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, is there a story about--did they tell a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: You know, that just wasn't something that, you know, came up.  I didn't--I don't think I even knew what their anniversary was until, maybe, one of them--until my mother died, looking at her papers and stuff.  I don't think I even necessarily knew when they got married.  I mean, I do now.  I just--I can sort of count back, you know.  So she was thirty-eight [years old] and--'cuz I was born in '47 [1947], so she was thirty-eight when I was born.  And they got married, I think, around '45 [1945], you know.  Maybe '46 [1946].  I don't remember exactly.  But either '45 [1945] or '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: So even though they met in high school, they didn't get married right out of high school or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't particularly think so, because--yeah, I mean, I think it was '46 [1946], you know.  So, don't quite know why, you know.  I know that my mother wasn't the most popular with some of his siblings.  I won't name the ones or anything.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: But--and I actually learned that from talking to one of my cousins, you know, kinda learned that.  You know, you don't necessarily--these things just never come up, you know, especially when you're an only child.  And--but in talking to my first cousin, one of my first cousins, who is now deceased, she sort of--you know, she--for instance, I have a nickname I call one of my cousins, and I'm the only one that uses it.  And that was because they didn't want him called by his father's name, because they didn't approve of his father, so, you know, that's-well--they omit some of that, you know.  But in any case, so, you know, it's just things you don't--you don't come to know about.
Story_ID: 27850
Speaker 1: So, now, when you consider your parents' [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman and William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] personalities, and dispositions--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --their sense of humor--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how they walk, how they talk, how they look--
Speaker 2: Well, my father was--
Speaker 1: --who do you--wait a minute.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: The rest of the question is:  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably both.  My father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] was--was--actually, my father was really shy around anybody who wasn't a member of his family.  He was just a real family person.  My mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] was just very outgoing; so, much more social.  So in that sense, you know, and so I probably take after both of them in that regard, 'cuz I'm certainly very much a family person, probably closest to, you know, my wife and children.  But--and I'm pretty social, you know, in some ways.  And so that there--I sort of got that from my mother, 'cuz my father was just very--I concluded he was shy, you know.  I mean, he wouldn't have said that, but I didn't--I wouldn't have--I didn't understand it as such, but in recent--you know, once I got older I sort of looked back and said, "You know, I think he was just a shy person."
Story_ID: 27851
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] serve in the military?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a World War II soldier.  He was--and looking at--I think he was discharged--might have been discharged in Texas.  I think he was inducted in Baltimore [Maryland].  He had--he had a brother who worked at the [U.S.] Navy yard.  I mean, I should say in Portsmouth [Virginia], the Portsmouth Navy yard; not here, but Portsmouth Navy yard.  And, but, you know, he was drafted.  I'm not sure exactly when, but I guess, maybe in 1941 or maybe early '42 [1942].  I got the impression he was stationed, after he did basic training, he was stationed in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Now, is he in the [U.S.] Army or the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: He was in the Army.
Speaker 1: In the Army.
Speaker 2: He was in the Quartermaster Corp.  He was a cook in the Quartermaster Corp.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there's a story associated with that.  Because he was never sent overseas, because I understand his superior officer liked his cooking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he kept him here.  So he actually never saw combat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And he was a big lover of the military.  You know, just the--when I was in R.O.T.C. [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], which was a very short period of time, he was tickled, and--but that wasn't enough to keep me in it, but he was tickled that I was in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So his experience being a cook for this person that kept--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, just in the Quartermaster Corp.  Just he was part of the--you know, but that's what--but was my understanding that because--I mean, there were plenty of other people from his unit that were shipped overseas, but he was not for that reason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So cooked--he could cook very large batches, even though that's not how he cooked at the house, at the home base--but he was a--he liked to cook.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's something he liked to do.
Story_ID: 27852
Speaker 1: All right. So before he [Hawkins' father, William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] went in the military [U.S. Army], what was he doing?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I know.  I mean, so in forty--like I say, his brother worked at the [U.S.] Navy yard.  I don't believe my father worked--this is Portsmouth Navy yard.  I don't believe he worked down there, but that's where my aunt's husband worked, you know.  So--and maybe he got my uncle Joe a job down there.  I'm not quite sure.  Oh, my father was in the Civilian Conservation Corp.  Now that--that was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -that I do remember.  As they call the CCC.  And that was, I guess, in the thirties.  Maybe late thirties.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  The depression was going full till until the (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, his father--my understanding was that he might have gone on to college had his father not died.  I'm not completely clear.  I don't know if he fell off a ladder or something, but, you know, I think he would gone--as my mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] did go on, you know, get a dental hygiene certificate at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  I don't know if I mentioned that, but she went to Howard.  And I think he would have gone on to college had it not been for the death of his father.
Speaker 1: Now, did he ever share an aspiration that he had with you?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  I'm not so much aware of that.  I mean, they were all supportive of education, that's for sure, the both of them.  But he and I didn't--father was on the quiet side, so you know, he wasn't--he wasn't giving to talking about things like that.  I mean, we might--we would talk, but it wasn't like that.  You know, I had wanted to be such and such; no, it wasn't anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that was--that's much more of a modern phenomenon.   That wasn't the case back then.
Speaker 1: You know, I often hear people say that.  You're certainly not the only (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that people would say.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They just, you know, you had aspirations for your children, maybe had aspirations for yourself, but you didn't--you didn't tell your children what they were, you know.  I mean, as an only child I was pretty close to my parents, you know.  But lots of--but things about them I didn't know, you know.  Like I say, I didn't--I don't--they may have celebrated their anniversary, which I think is January 29th.  It never--I didn't know about it until one of, I think, when my mother died, you know.  And so, you know, it's--you just weren't aware.  Now, a girl would have might have known.  But, you know, I mean, they're married, but, you know.  Anniversaries, that type of thing, you know, that just--like I say, I don't know that they--I don't--they might have celebrated.  I remember they celebrated my birthday.  I remember that.  I knew what their birthdays were, and I guess, you know, that was, I guess we celebrated those.  I remember much more the celebrations of my birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27853
Speaker 1: So, you take more after your father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr].  And you're the only child?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the only child.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you were close to your cousins?
Speaker 2: Well, I was close to the cousins of the aunt I was close to, and that was Sarah Bray.  So I was real close to Aunt Sarah.  That was my--that was my favorite aunt.  And mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman], it was close--she was a very close friend of mother.  And so, you know, I was closest to her and her children, you know.  Like, my mother had a kidney removed.  I guess, it was infected or something, and I stayed with Aunt Sarah, you know.  It never would have occurred for me to stay with somebody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 27854
Speaker 1: So do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know, I was never--I was never much of a retrospective person.  I was always--and I was never much for looking back.  I was never much for memory in sense, you know.  I remember things.  I remember, you know, being in elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's pretty big (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But-
Speaker 2: But you know--in other words I remember I used to--I mean, I know, for instance, where we--I know some of the places we lived and some of the things, you know, we did as children.  I know there's--but I mean, so I remember being in, you know, sort of remember being in third grade, you know.  You know, we lived right across the street.  I mean, not even across the street.  I mean, you walk out my front door and I walk up a hill and I'm on the playground of the school, which was Richardson Elementary.  And it's in--it's on Blaine (ph.) Street, 54th and Blaine Streets, Northeast.  And I stayed--since my mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman]--since both my parents--well, my father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] worked at night, but obviously, he can't keep a, you know, you can't keep a kid during the day, he got to be in the school.
Story_ID: 27855
Speaker 1: On that score, I failed to ask you about his [Hawkins' father, William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] subsequent, you know, job at the [U.S.] Post Office.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  So he was--he had been a letter carrier for a while.  I don't know how many years, but by time I was aware, he was a clerk who worked at night--
Speaker 1: So this is a--
Speaker 2: --at the main [U.S.] Post Office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is a--did he start working after the war [World War II], for the Post Office?
Speaker 2: I guess.  Yes, I think he used his veterans' preference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think so.
Speaker 1: All right.  So that--
Speaker 2: He might--I'm not really sure.  I heard him mention this Civilian Conservation Corp, so it may--I don't really know the sequence of events.  But, you know, he may have been in that up until the war, and then he came out the war.  But I know--but, you know--
Speaker 1: But then did have a veterans preference (simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: Right.  And I know he, like I say, he was a letter carrier originally and, but it paid more to be a clerk, and it paid more to work at night.  So he worked at night.  My uncle Melvin, who was Aunt Sarah's [Bray] husband, worked on the railroad, and, you know, he was like, you know, he was like mail for the--what is it--you know, the railroads used to carry the mail, and so he worked in that capacity at Union Station [Washington, District of Columbia].  And that was Uncle Melvin.  And, so, you know--so, I mean, they--and like I say, my uncle Charlie worked at the government printing office.  The--my uncle Joe and my father actually worked at the Post Office together, 'cuz he got me a job there, and I worked with my uncle Joe, and I could see my father--you know, I mean, I didn't work with my father.  I could see him in passing.  But I actually worked the line with my uncle Joe.
Speaker 1: So this is a pretty decent income for those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Especially one child.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A Post Office and your mother's a dental--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a dental hygienist.
Speaker 1: --hygienist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Working for the city.  So both basically government workers.  And which is very--to me, I would say that's typical, but those are always considered--always were considered good jobs.  Maybe that's why the Republicans don't like them.  But anyway, I'll save that kind of commentary.
Speaker 1: (laughs)  Okay.  All right.  That's all right.
Story_ID: 27856
Speaker 1: Now did the family move around a lot, or did you stay (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, really over in Deanwood [neighborhood of Washington, District of Columbia], north--far northeast--
Speaker 1: But you moved, but it was in the same area there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We--she lived with--she lived with a couple of different families.  She lived with the McCotries (ph.), who were well-known black doc--family of doctors here.  Or at least, now I wouldn't say well-known, but a family of doctors.
Speaker 1: You're talking about your mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] now?
Speaker 2: That's my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, my father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] probably lived--you know, he lived at his parents' house, 'cuz, I mean, even when I was a child he was taking care of them when my uncle Joe lived there.  But--
Speaker 1: Now, when you came along, did the family move or stay in the same place (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, the first place I remember us living was 251 54th Street in an apartment, right across from Richardson Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we--I'm not sure--I mean I can give you--I don't know the timing.  But so, that was my, I guess, kindergarten.  Actually I was skipped--I was skipped to kindergarten.  I went to nursery school, and so when it came time to go to school, I was skipped.  And one thing, since I was--my birthday is real close to the beginning of the school year, and so I ended up skipping kindergarten, and they placed me in the first grade.  So first, second, and third I was at Richardson Elementary [School, Washington, Disrict of Columbia].  I stayed with Juanita Hamilton; lived up at the corner, basically.  Blaine Street intersects 54th Street, and she lived sort of right at the intersection there.  And I stayed with them, then I would go up--I would, I guess, maybe one of my parents would either walk up, or you could walk up yourself, or your parents would take you up there.  I stayed with her 'til the time to go to school.  So her son and I were classmates; Washington Henry Hamilton, was--that was his name.  And--
Speaker 1: Oh, so you're saying your mother went to school or work?
Speaker 2: My mother worked.
Speaker 1: Early?  Early (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, time I had to be at school, she was long gone.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.  So I think she had to be work at eight o'clock, something like that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So they dropped me up at the Hamilton's.  I stayed with them.  And then they would--then--and then we would to school, you know, walk--it's right--it's still right across the street, just a different angle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, first, second, and third, I was at Richardson.  My--when my mother's stepmother died, we moved in with her father, who was my, you know, grandfather, you know, Grandmama Bowman.  And we lived there two years.  The city, it actually had--he had a very nice brick house, plus he had a huge lot--had two huge lots.  The house was on one lot, good size lot; next to it was a big lot that my father turned into a garden.  My grandfather had had a stroke.  I don't really know when.  But he had had stroke, so you know, he couldn't live there by himself.  So we moved in with him.  And he died, and--let's see.  I should know, 'cuz, like I said, I did his tombstone not that long ago.  Might have been '59 [959] or so, maybe a little earlier than that.  But, anyway, it became a moot point because the city took all that land to build an elementary school.  So we were--we were moved out by imminent domain.  Because it was--I had probably--we would have stayed there, you know, left--and left the house to her.  But anyway, and so--and we got a house in Southeast, in an area that was changing, you might say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cuz my parents bought from a white owner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Southeast D.C.?
Speaker 2: Southeast, yes.
Speaker 1: So you were there from fourth grade?
Speaker 2: I was at--I was at George Washington Carver Elementary, fourth and fifth grade, which is off of Sherve (ph.) Road, Northeast.  And then, sixth grade--sixth through eighth, I as in a Catholic School; Catholic elementary school, Holy Redeemer, on New Jersey Avenue and New York Avenue, Northwest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there I went to Archbishop Carol High School (ph.).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27857
Speaker 1: Now, did--did you have a favorite subject in school--in grade school?  Let's start with that.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I did.  I mean, I always liked math.  I don't know that--I'll just make this editorial comment.  We were tested so frequently, these are standardized tests, when I was in Holy Redeemer [school], that taking standardized tests was not that much of a challenge when I was in high school, which also gave us lots of standardized tests; but, especially I remember sort of--first, and I can recall having these standardized tests.  We might have had them in, you know, one through five.  But, I know that in Holy Redeemer [school] we were taking these standardized tests.  There was this one girl I could never beat, you know, until she left, I was never the top student until that girl left the school.  She was always just--however many points.  You know, maybe even some little small differential, but she was always better.  Can't remember her name, but she was always better.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is at Holy--
Speaker 2: This is at Holy Redeemer.  So when she left, I think she left in--when I was in eighth grade, so I became the top student.  But as long as she was there, I was never a top student.  And, you know.  But the--so the exposure of the standardized tests, you know, in the national norms and so on and so forth, you know, gave--and then this was taught by the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament.  And they were founded by Katherine Drexel.  And it's an order of nuns dedicated to educating and, you know, I guess, proselytizing African-Americans and American Indians.  Not so--not only prosily--I mean, I shouldn't say proselytizing, but, in any case, serving.  And so, and they were--I still have a relationship with my--I had--those three years I had two different teachers, and one of them is still alive.  The older of the two has died, and one of them is still alive.
Speaker 1: That's same order of nuns that founded Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: (unclear) Yeah, Xavier, right.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: --out in New Orleans.
Speaker 2: And Catherine Drexel's father founded Drexel University, or maybe the grandfather; I don't know.  But it's the Drexel fortune that funded Drexel University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And just as an aside, as long as she was alive, she had access to her inheritance.  But I heard at her death, you know, there was--nothing came to the Order after her death, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you liked math.  What else did you like to do growing up besides (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Read.  I liked to read a lot.  I was an avid reader.  You know, I was much friendlier as a child than I turned out to be as an adult.  I mean, I'm much more (unclear) as an adult.  As a child, I had lots of friends.  We just had lots of friends--I mean I know lots of people, but I'm not close to that many people as an adult.  But I had a lot of friends as a child.  But, in any case, I liked math, I liked to read, and, you know, just usual--usual kid stuff, I would say.  I can say, in my old neighborhood we had--so you had semi-detached family houses on Blaine Street.  My street, which was about two blocks long, 200 block, maybe the 100 block of--maybe 200 or 300 block of 54th Street were apartments; like, four apartments, you know, two down, two up; and then the projects.  And all these kids mixed together.  It was very typical, you know.  As you've heard it said, and it was true, that in the black community in those days everybody knew everybody, all right.  So, Dr. Pinkney lived in a house on Division Avenue, you know, in the middle of the neighborhood.  Everybody knew Dr. Pinkney, you know.  And so those models, you know, that--that were perhaps forced upon us, you know.  It's sort of not the case now.  People, you know, move out and so on and so forth.  But in terms of our neighborhood, like, the kids, you know, we knew all kinds of kids.  And, in fact, I knew the biggest thugs because they the ones the most protection so, you know.  So, I mean--and that was--and there wasn't the kind of--it wasn't that kind of class consciousness that people, you know, have much more now.  And, you know, somebody who was--got into trouble could be a good friend to provide protection, you know.  Also, we threw rocks at people.  You know, anybody that bothered you, you hit them with a rock.  So that was, you know--we weren't angels, that's for sure.  You know, in our apartment complex, if an apartment became vacant, first thing we did was break out all the windows, you know.
Speaker 1: And that's the--that's the bane of all the neighborhood organizations on earth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: The kids will bust out your windows.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, and as soon as, you know, we knew something was vacant.  And we loved to throw rocks at stuff.  And I mean, we'd break all the windows, you know.  And we rejoiced in doing it.  I mean, that was, you know, that was how kids thought.  You know, something you could do and get away with.  Nobody could really catch you at it.  They could run (unclear).  I mean, you know, we certainly weren't angels.
Story_ID: 27858
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In [Washington] D.C. [District if Columbia]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, certainly, we weren't aware that the town was segregated because we lived in a black section.  So, didn't go Downtown that much.  You know, I remember my--I wore, because I have flat feet, my got me orthopedic shoes.  And I remember, you know, an incident or two associated with that.
Speaker 1: What, where you were teased or something or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  Not teased.  No.  Not that.  I'm talking about, you go downtown to buy stuff.
Speaker 1: Downtown.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Go downtown to buy stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was, you know, it wasn't the most positive experiences.
Speaker 1: Now what was it?  I mean D.C. didn't have any signs up or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I mean, I wouldn't have known.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: But there were attitudes.
Speaker 1: --that mean that you couldn't do certain things downtown or what?
Speaker 2: I would--I think, well, you know, your parents protect you from stuff.  So, I mean, you know, you wouldn't necessarily have known that you couldn't.  But when we went Downtown to buy things, you know, occasionally; not always, but, you know, you might run into some sort of situation.  I mean, I don't think it was overt.  I mean, I was born in forty-seven, so this is the fifties coming up, and what have you.
Speaker 1: Did you ever witness that kind of a situation?
Speaker 2: I did.  I mean, I remember, maybe--I know you hear stuff, and you know of things, and that's not always clear if you were to experience it yourself.  But, you know, I remember something in terms of maybe trying on shoes or something, and some little incident, you know, some little--some little mood or what have you.
Speaker 1: I mean, what did they say to you?
Speaker 2: I'll just say--thing--I mean, because, like, so my mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] bought these orthopedic shoes for me, and I had had them for, you know, it was an ongoing thing, you know, because of my feet.  And, I'll just mention, because she had always wore very tight shoes, and her toes were real twisted.  So she was determined I would not wear tight shoes, you know, and so on.  So she was very, you know, intense about my feet being taken care.  So I would get these orthopedic shoes, and I remember just sort vaguely one incident.  I mean, you know, it was something about trying it on or something, you know.  And I mean, you know, these things sort of morph into things that you know go on elsewhere, and you know, it's not always clear what transpired for you as an individual.  But, I mean, it was, you know, we just didn't frequently other parts of town.  You know, you could sort of do everything you wanted.  I used to go to the theater.  You know, they had the black theaters.  My--I mean, there was--my mother's church is on Division Avenue, well, block and--half a block away was a theater.  That's the theater we went to most often, you know.  And then there were other theaters around town, other black theaters that we went to.  I mean, that was the case.  Out of that, I don't think--I don't know about even the possibility of going to some of the other theaters.
Speaker 1: Now, the D.C. that you grew up in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --though the home of the federal government, which was mostly white--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: Still is.
Speaker 1: --was mostly--yeah (laughs).  That's true.  Even with a black president [President Barack Obama].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, it was--the population in those days, more so than now, is black, right?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, actually, I think we had the impression because of where we lived that the population--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was predominantly black.  But the population in the city was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: So it had not grown to that, because I know at certain points in the '80s [1980s], D.C. (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  You had these--
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, that's true.  You had this--you had this exodus.  Like I said, this [unclear] man that we--my parents bought their house from, was moving out of the city.
Speaker 1: So the whites were moving to the suburbs?
Speaker 2: Suburbs.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, like I say, there were parts of the city--like, I would never had thought that Georgetown had been a black area in the city, because it was all white.  I mean, as I drive through the city now, the city is sort of regentrified.  So, yeah, I mean, you have these ebbs and flows in term of population.  But, you know, it's not like Baltimore [Maryland], which has ethnic neighborhoods.  I would say it's more of a financial thing here.  But everybody knows there's areas that are black, predominantly black; there's areas that are predominantly white.  Adams Morgan, it's sort of a trans--you know, sort of a much more mixed area.  Petworth, which is probably mixed area.  But where I lived as a child, even where I live--well, certainly where I lived as a child, and it's remained predominantly black.  Even though, for instance, now, I had a white neighbor--the neighborhood my parents--excuse me.  The neighborhood I moved into was once predominantly white neighborhood, but not by time I got there.  It was one lady who was still left--a couple of people were still left in the neighborhood, were actually very, very nice.  First person that actually welcomed us to the neighborhood was a white lady, who lived sort of diagonally across the street from us.  And turned out, she had been--which the church I later attended--she had been the organist there fifty years.  But she was very nice, you know.  And my next door neighbor, and I won't go into--where I live now, he's deceased, but the first person welcomed him to the neighborhood was a white neighbor from down the street, you know.  So, there were some, but there weren't, I mean, primarily, you know, certain areas of the city--like, Southeast was a predominantly white area, but not anymore, you know.  So they transitioned.  And now people are moving back and so on.  So.  Yes, so I mean as a child, you know, you weren't all that aware, you know, 'cuz, your parents, you know.  It wasn't talked about on television.  You know, television didn't have any--it had very few black shows.  There's "Amos and Andy," you know, maybe a few black characters, you know; Jack Benny, you know, but--you know, butler, and so on and so forth.  So they weren't doing that many black characters on television.  But, anyway, in terms of the city, you know, it was a predominantly white city, but you just weren't out there; you didn't go to those areas that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, and where my parents lived, you know, lots of things that you would have wanted were in the neighborhood; not everything, but lots of things were.  And it wasn't in me--it wasn't--it was unusual to, I would say, for me to have gone downtown.  That was not the most common thing, not for me, you know, and didn't do it all that often, you know.  I mean, we didn't--I mean, we did shop downtown, but we didn't always, you know, a lot of things you would--most things you would buy, you buy in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 27859
Speaker 1: Now, back to the school.  Were there any particular teachers who were mentors to you?  In grade school first, and then we'll (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well--well, in--like I say, I only had two teachers.  You know, these are nuns.  And I had a Sister Ruth Catherine Spain, who was my sixth-grade teacher; and then Sister--I mean, Mother Virgila V-I-R-G-I-L-A.  She was the--she was the--what did I say.  She was head of the--she was head of the convent.  It was, you know, it was just nuns.  And so--so those are the only two teachers I had.  So I had Sister Ruth Catherine for sixth grade, Mother Virgila for seventh and eighth.  And, you know, they were tough.  I mean, you know, you look back, they didn't play.  I got my share of, you know, I was a talker.  I always been a talker in school.  So I got my share of paddlings, you know.  I mean, a red paddle can make your hand awful red, you know.  And that was typical, you know.  And it was trying to--trying to get you to behave and pay attention and do your--do your--(that didn't get?) on me to do schoolwork, but in terms of not talk, they had to work on me to do that.  And my closest friend was someone I know from there.  And even though he doesn't live here anymore, but he and I have been friends since--since the sixth grade.  And that's the only person I consider--I've kept in touch with over the years.  I was never--never much of keeping in touch with people.
Story_ID: 27860
Speaker 1: Now, so you were the top student in the eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Only after this girl left.
Speaker 1: All right (laughs).
Speaker 2: As long as she was there, no, I never beat her, you know, so.
Speaker 1: But with her safely away (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Once they got rid of her, I was safe, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you were the top student there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so you go to Archbishop Carol High School [Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that in the same neighborhood or is there--?
Speaker 2: That's actually north--was it--Harewood Road, H-A-R-E-W-O-O-D.  I graduated in 1964, so I went there in 1960.  Up until I came there, and no fault of mine, they had--I think they had 59 wins.  This was a well-known basketball team.  They were undefeated, had 59 wins.  And the first game that fall when I came, I wasn't playing, and they lost.  So broke the winning streak.  They had a good year in football, though, that year, 1960.
Speaker 1: Now who were there?  Were there certain basketball stars we would know today?
Speaker 2: George Leftwich (ph.), Monk Malloy, who was, at one time, president of [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana].  Let's see.  I don't know--I mean, I didn't know them 'cuz they left.  I mean, you know, but I know of them.  Just, you know, it's just part of the school lore.
Speaker 1: So the dynasty ended when you started school (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Not because of me.  But, yeah, that was the end--that was the end of the undefeated team, and all of them graduated.  They were all seniors that year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So they were gone by time I came.
Speaker 1: (unclear) a 59 straight wins.
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine wins, if I remember correctly, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's got to be like three or four years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They were very good.  And, like I say, Monk Malloy became a priest, and he was president of Notre Dame at one point.
Speaker 1: This was a predominately white school when you started (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It was.  Now, this is an interesting story.  It was founded in 1951.  It was founded by, I guess, Archbishop Patrick O'Boyle, who became Cardinal Patrick O'Boyle, and it was founded as an integrated school.  And, which was rare (laughs), you know.  And so, but that was--and he actually desegregated--I'm told he desegregated 'Knights of Columbus' here in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But any case, so by time I--in 1960, it was still predominantly white.  Now, it's predominantly black and Hispanic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27861
Speaker 1: So 1960 is the year of the election--presidential election?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I guess that's when [President John F.] Kennedy was--
Speaker 1: Ran.
Speaker 2: --elected, right.  And, of course, naturally, as Catholics, you know, people were pretty interested in that.
Speaker 1: Now, this is one of the last elections where there was the significant black vote for Republican.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, you know, my--I would think my parents [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr. and Amanda Lawyuna Bowman]--I didn't know--I didn't really talk to my parents about this.  I remember "I Like Ike" [Dwight Eisenhower] buttons, but I assume my parents voted Republican.  I don't really know.  But assume they did.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  There was substantial numbers of black folks.
Speaker 2: I don't know--I don't know if they voted.  I think, they might have voted for Kennedy, but in any case, I think, historically they had voted Republican.  I don't even know that they voted.  You know, like I say, you just--you didn't know your parents' business.  You know, you didn't know what your parents did.
Speaker 1: So they didn't discuss politics around your house?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.
Speaker 1: Now, was the Civil Rights Movement discussed around the house?
Speaker 2: Well, I can come to that.  And, I mean, that was more--that was more my college years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, by then.  Certainly--
Speaker 1: Things were on television, though?
Speaker 2: Well, that's true, and I certainly was aware of them, you know, and changed my perspective on things quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Dr. [Martin Luther] King (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No.  I was a follower.  Yeah, yeah, and very much interested in that.  And I had an involvement--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --subsequent.
Story_ID: 27862
Speaker 1: And, I mean, were you--how much of a minority were you at Archbishop Carol [High School, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: In my class, you know, now, this was where you still had--I guess you had tracking, so, you know, I think some--in my freshman year, I was listed in eight sections; pretty size.  All boys' school by the way.  I was in the top academic section, but, you know, as you moved away from top academic section, I guess, you got more and more color.  I wasn't--I don't think I was the only black student.  There were, you know, a handful.  I mean, a section was probably about thirty kids.  It wasn't that many kids, but it was about thirty or so.  And probably you had maybe three.  I don't know if I can remember everybody who was in the freshman--you know, we had sort of--I mean, we were the top section all four years, but, you know, the population of the section changed.  So.  I know in my senior year, I mean, we had--had a guy was Filipino.  Most of the kids were white.  I mean, we got along well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, we got along well.  Didn't agree on everything, but we got along well.  So.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, were you involved in high school activities, social clubs--I mean, clubs (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I certainly was.  I was in the band.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was on the track team.  I actually--since the band went to all the football games, I like football way more than basketball.  And, you know, we had, I guess, let's see; I was in--you know, they had plays; I as into plays.  You know, what they had to do, of course, you had to import girls (laughs).  It was an all boys' school.  And they still have, you know, that type of thing now, you know.  But ours was all students.  They have sort of, I guess, more faculty stuff, put on some things last couple of years, were mostly faculty, but--or brought back people with kids when, you know, it--they were sort of returnees.  They had--they were once kids, you know, but they're all adults now by far, way, I mean, you know, they're probably thirties, fifties and sixties, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, I was pretty active, you know.  I didn't--I want to make this straight.  This is actually, I guess, peers--I didn't do that well as--in a--as freshman in algebra.  We were coming into the new math, and I had difficulty with it.  I ended up--I know it is--we're on a quarter system, I got a "D" one quarter.  And I felt lucky to have gotten a "C" for the year.  I struggled, kind of, the whole year.  The second year, I had--it was, you know, Catholic School was kind of no frills education, you know.  So, and my impression is, to a very large extend, what they would--what they were teaching by subject at least fifty years ago, they're still kind of teaching them some of the same subjects now here with some changes.  But, you know, naturally religion, but we had algebra, we had general science, we had history, you know; took English IV.  You know, we really took English four years, History four--you know, that type of stuff.  Foreign language when you're a junior or senior; that type of thing.  So anyway, but--so I struggled in algebra.  I'd like to make that clear.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  Did you--you apparently overcame it, but, you know (simultaneous) (unclear)--So what happened then (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, it just, you know, just I was just having--just had difficulties with it.  The second year was geometry, and, you know, it's my guess, it little--probably a little more traditional course; anyway, just--it was just--it was just easier, you know, doing--and we had a very good geometry teacher.  He was the one that really, I would say, developed my liking for math.  I can't remember his name.  I could look it up.  But I can't remember his name.  But he was all of our--almost all of our teachers were priests; Augustinian priests were at St. Augusta, 'cuz Augustinian High School, and it just seemed I did well and I got a "B."  I mean, so that was--I mean, I wasn't an "A" student, but I got a "B."  And, but it was very enjoyable.  It was very enjoyable.  And I came away feeling that this is a person that knew an awful lot, and I kinda wanted to be like him.  I thought if you knew math, you'd know a whole lot.  So I was very impressed by him.  And I'd say my geometry teacher.  Junior year, we had Intermediate Algebra, which was--it was more--a lot more traditional, and so it wasn't as hard as I had found early on.  And I did much better there.  And I did well in my senior year.  I liked science.  I liked chemistry a lot.  I worked for my chemistry teacher.  My first job was working at Catholic University in his lab the summer between my junior and senior years, so 1963, that summer.  I worked for him for about six weeks.  And we were doing--what's it called?  He was doing some sort of chemical separation, and--but anyway, so I worked--that was my first job, so in 1963.  I looked at my social security there.  That's why it starts in 1963, 'cuz I worked for him.  And so, and then senior year--
Speaker 1: What was--
Speaker 2: Excuse--
Speaker 1: Can you remember his name?
Speaker 2: I could look it up, but I don't remember name.
Speaker 1: No problem.  That's okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He was a nice guy, though.  And he was strict, though.  I mean, they didn't play.  No, you know, they definitely didn't play.  They were very, you know, very serious about discipline and, you know, getting your work done and so on and so forth.
Speaker 1: These are summer jobs while you're in high school, right?
Speaker 2: This is just--this that summer of 19--of my junior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I finished my junior.  So I took chemistry as a junior.  So I worked for him that summer for six weeks--Then I spent the best days of my life, almost was when we spent three days at the beach with--my mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] had friends who owned a beach house.  It was an all-black beach called Columbia Beach.  And they had a house there, and I stayed there three days in the summer.  That was--I never had anything quite as enjoyable as that.  It was always good to be around the water.  It was just really, really nice.  Very relaxing.  And I since--and that was the first time I worked.  So anyway, I hadn't had any real vacations, so that was--that really was my vacation and stuff.  So, then senior year I took physics, and I took Introduction to Calculus and stuff.  And so I went to--I did well, so I wasn't valedictorian, but I was--I think it was fourth or fifth in the class, something like that.  But about, I think it was 700 students all together, so the class had about a hundred something.  I forget what it was; 140 or somewhere.
Story_ID: 27863
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any idea when you were in high school that you were going to be a mathematician?
Speaker 2: I knew I liked math.  I mean when I was a math major by time I--so I went to Merrimack College in North Andover, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you make that decision?  I mean, what (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I got a scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got a scholarship there.  It was an Augustinian school, and I got a scholarship.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I did my freshman year there.  And, now this school was all-white except for four black students.  And my guy who went to my high school a year ahead of me, he was my roommate, and there were two black women.  And that was all the black students.  And this--
Speaker 1: Merrimack is where?
Speaker 2: North Andover, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's--it was about 1600 in those days.  So, you know, it was predominantly white, you know.  And--but we got--at the time of the, you might say, that the bridge massacre in Selma, the march on Selma.
Speaker 1: This is 1965?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah.  So that spring, we got students to sign a petition, you know, after that had happened.
Speaker 1: So you were at Merrimack?
Speaker 2: I was at Merrimack when that happened.  Yeah.  And so I came back, and I didn't want to go back.  So I made that clear to my parents [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman and Anthony Hawkins, Sr.].
Story_ID: 27864
Speaker 1: So, came back and then, I don't know what I did that summer.  I don't think, I know if I had a job or anything.  Got hurt in a car accident in--just before school started in 19--fall of 1965.  So I had fell asleep at the wheel and hit the windshield.  Luckily, right in front of the hospital on Georgia Avenue.  So it's Howard [University] Hospital now.  It used to be Freedman's Hospital [Washington, District of Columbia], which is where I was born, and my aunt Sarah worked as a pediatric nurse there.  So, and I was always very comfortable at Howard, Howard Hospital.  And--
Speaker 2: So is that why you decided to finish school at Howard?
Speaker 1: I just, you know, I just, I just wanted to be back home, I guess.  You know, I know I didn't want to go back to Merrimack [College, North Andover, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Did you get a scholarship at Howard?
Speaker 1: I didn't get a scholarship to start.  I can get into that a little bit.  But then I started transferring all my credits, including religion.  They took that as philosophy.
Speaker 2: So this is '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: This is January '66 [1966].  I couldn't go in the fall in '65 [1965] because I was in this car accident?
Speaker 2: Sixty-six.  Oh.
Speaker 1: So my head went through the windshield.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, that's a pretty tough--and so did you have--
Speaker 1: I had plastic surgery, yeah, my forehead.  But anyway, so, yeah, I fell asleep on a Sunday morning and ran into some parked cars in front of a church; guy came out.  One of the people of the car I hit was the one put a towel around my head.  Anyway, I was right across the street, so they got me there, you know.  So I was lucky.  I was very lucky.  And so I started at Howard in January of '66.  And I was already a mathematician because I majored in math at Merrimack.  And so then and I minored--I guess I was a physics minor.  I really wanted to do a physics--two majors, double major.  But I didn't want to do certain labs, and so I just decided to--I ended up with forty-two credits in physics, and then I had, you know, my math credits.
Speaker 2: At Howard.
Speaker 1: At Howard.
Story_ID: 27865
Speaker 1: So I graduated--
Speaker 2: Well, we're not going to graduate you.  I want to talk about some of these teachers first.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Sum up the atmosphere at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So when you got there in '65 [1965], now you--
Speaker 1: No.  January of '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six.  I'm sorry, '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Right.  And so my first, I had Calculus III from Horace Komm, K-O-M-M, and Louise Rafael (ph.) was, probably, I guess, (unclear), because since I coming in the middle of the year, it was hard to get courses, you know.  Everything--most things were a two-year--well, like a year sequence.  And so there wasn't a lot that you could take.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, but I couldn't take calculus 'cuz I had had a year of calculus.  I took Calculus III from Komm, and I just tell--I mean, I don't know if--whether he was a big one for fresh air.  He'll come into the--a little short guy, come into the room, first thing he would do is throw the window (makes sound), throw the window all the way up, you know.  We always got a kick out of that.
Speaker 2: Was this a white man?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Little short--real short guy.  I mean, he was just a little hilarious guy.  He was a good teacher though.  Good teacher.  And Louise Rafael was white as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.  And then--
Speaker 1: And I took linear algebra from her, and I took Calculus III from Komm.  And I was taking physics, you know.  I took physics--and as a transfer student, you know, it was--it was--I was always a little different because, you know, I had sort of a different program from other students.  You know, and actually, when it--so anyway, so Komm, James Joseph was a real influence on me when I was at the senior--upper level student, not early on.
Speaker 2: Now, Joseph taught--
Speaker 1: Well, he taught me Advanced Calculus I and II.  He taught topology.  Those are the courses I took with him.  I don't think I took anything that I can recall.  He was a big influence.  I--so I was taking courses in physics, lots and lots of physics.
Speaker 2: Now is that--(simultaneous) (uncertain)--
Speaker 1: Some from Ms.--well, Thorpe was the part of the first physics course I took.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Thorpe influenced me in this way:  Thorpe's idea was this:  you just do all of the problems.  He'll give you half the problems this week, give you the rest of the problems next week.  And that was the class I always kept up in.  So as a teacher, I've always given students homework to make them--try to make them stay, and, of course, they refuse, but anyway.  But I always give them homework for that reason, 'cuz I noticed those are the classes, you know, I always had to stay up in that class.  I couldn't get far behind in that class as I would when I didn't have to do the homework, I would just, you know, let it slide.  But, and that was Thorpe.  And Thorpe, he was just--he was--the story--there're lots of stories about Thorpe, which I didn't know about because, once again, as an undergraduate coming in, you just didn't know about things.  Herman Branson was around at that time, 'cuz he's deceased now.
Speaker 2: You mean Dr. Branson?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Herman Branson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He became a university president a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I wasn't around.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) (unclear) Central State, and then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I don't know, a (South Florida?) place.
Speaker 1: His grand--I understand his children are--were M.D.s, his granddaughter Danielle Carr (ph.), she has a married now.  That was her maiden name.  She worked for the Mellon Foundation (ph.).  She was--she got a Ph.D. in math.  And that was one of the things that we did, we got a lot of information.  Now, Scott Williams, really, I'd say, has the quintessential pool of information.  But we collected a lot of information on minority Ph.D.s in the more of generic sense.  He was interested mostly in Africans and African Americans.  But he's--he is very effective, you know.  Very--I mean, really, it's amazing what he accomplished, you know.  And that's all.
Story_ID: 27866
Speaker 1: So, now you went Down South to participate in the (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  So that's my mother and I (unclear).  Since she's from the South, she is really not too keen on that.
Speaker 1: Now, were you a part of a campus organization?
Speaker 2: I was--I don't know if my--I took German.  My--Stokely Carmichael's [Trinidadian-American Civil Rights leader] roommate was one of my classmates.  So he was the one who got me in the summer of 1966.  Well, I guess there's--that was the first summer I was--first year I was there.  I went down--I went with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] down South.
Speaker 1: Now, was this the--
Speaker 2: This is not Mississippi that summer, that was earlier.  So this was a couple of years after that.  I was in Mississippi, but it wasn't that summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was the march where they coined "Black Power?"
Speaker 2: No.  That was--
Speaker 1: That was the year before, I guess, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: It might have been, yeah.  But anyway (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear)--They went to Selma, Montgomery.
Speaker 2: --but Stokely was kinda in and out of the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His roommate, whose name I can't remember, but he and I, you know, did a lot of talking.  And that's how I was able to hook up, you know with SNCC.
Speaker 1: So that's the summer of 1966.
Speaker 2: 1966.  Yeah, I was in, I think it was--I'm trying to think.  'Cuz I actually went back thirty years to the day.  In 1996, I went back, I think it was--was it--I don't know Greenwood [Grenada, Mississippi].  It wasn't a famous location.  It was just sort of off the road, but I went back thirty years (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: This is the summer where they worked on (unclear) County?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were--well, what happened was, you know, they--I was in Rust [ph.], Mississippi, for a while and, 'cuz I rode over with Stokely and some other people.
Speaker 1: So you actually rode in the car with them?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was in the car with Stokely.  You know, it's just--I was--I've always been a person who--I don't want to say slip in and out, but in any case, you know, I just, you know, just knew a lot of people like that.  And so, you know, and they were much more articulate than I ever was.  And, you know, they were able to talk themselves out of the military.  I didn't believe I could.  That's why I went on back to school that fall.  You know, they said, "Well, you can just--you know, you can just stay out--you can just object."  You know, but anyway, so I just didn't believe that I could talk my way out, and I didn't try to.  I went on back that fall.  My mother, though, had, you know, tried to pressure me by saying that she would cut off money for school if I went South.  And so--and my mother was not one that made idle threats.  So since I went, I presume--I know she cut if off.  She cut off the money.  So I told Dr. Thorpe, I said, "Well, I don't think I'll be back, you know.  I won't be back."  You know, I went to see him.  I said, "I'm not going to be able to come back.  My mother, you know, cut me off."  So he said, "I'll get you some money."  And he did.  The rest of the time I was at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], Dr. Arthur N. Thorpe got me money to go to school.  He got me money--I graded papers, taught labs; in one form or another, he got me the money to go to school.  So I don't believe my mother paid in there.  I stayed at home with my parents, but I don't believe she paid any tuition after that.  I don't believe so.  She might have, but I don't think so, 'cuz she just was not a person to give way, you know.  So Thorpe really kept me in school.  And, like I say, I didn't know you called that mentoring in those days, you know.  He just--it was just something he just did.  And--
Speaker 1: But you also, you were like a scholarship-level student (simultaneous) (unclear)-- scholarship.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, I was a good student.  But, I mean, I knew Thorpe from having been in his class.  And--but, he didn't have to do it.  You know, he just did it. And he continued to do it.  Like I said, he got me something every semester.
Story_ID: 27867
Speaker 1: In fact, when I graduated [from Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia], I was--I wanted to go to work.  I didn't want to do any more school.  I wanted to go to work.  And [Professor Arthur] Thorpe held a scholarship for me.  Day after school started, he gave me the scholarship to go to graduate school in physics.  And I was really more interested in physics, but then I was kind of wavering back and forth.  I always liked math, but I was really kind of interested in physics.  When I went to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor], I really intended to switch to physics, but concluded I didn't want to stay, and so, therefore, I said let me get this master's and get out of here.
Speaker 2: Let's go back to Howard.  See, you graduated from Howard in sixty--
Speaker 1: '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: '68.
Speaker 1: Now, I want to clarify some things.  Howard was so strict.  You know, you had to have everything in line.  I didn't think I'd graduated, 'cuz I had missed--I hadn't taken, what they call it--Humanities I and II.  So the summer of 1968, I signed up for Humanities I and II.  And so they had graduated me.  My diploma was in the secretary's office, secretary of the university's office.  But I didn't go for it 'cuz I--
Speaker 2: (unclear)?
Speaker 1: --if you were missing in any courses, you couldn't graduate.
Speaker 2: So you thought that they were just trying to get you to go there to try to get it so they could--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I assumed that I hadn't graduated--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --because I hadn't completed those two courses.
Speaker 2: What, your family didn't come to the graduation or anything?
Speaker 1: Well, no, 'cuz I didn't graduate.  I thought I hadn't graduated, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you didn't tell your parents [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman and William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.], "I'm getting ready to graduate," because you didn't?
Speaker 1: No.  I mean I still had courses to take.  So that summer of 1968 I took Humanities I and Humanities II.  And those courses do not appear on my transcript because I had graduated, and I had entered graduate school.  So those courses don't actually appear anywhere.  But (simultaneous) (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: So you really didn't know you--
Speaker 1: I didn't know I had graduated.
Speaker 2: But the fall--the spring that you graduated was the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King.
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: Now, that was a big (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was.  Yeah.  I was very angry.  I'll just leave it at that.  I won't go into all of the details, but, you know, I was very angry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did any of the rioting touch where you (simultaneous) (unclear)--?
Speaker 1: It didn't touch--I went seeking it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So.  You know.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 27868
Speaker 1: But, so, at any rate--so in '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: So the summer you take those courses [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 1: I'm taking those two courses, and the great irony was--so I couldn't get my draft notice until I was out of school, because I had a student deferment.  And so I didn't come out of school until August.  And I went back to school, and they didn't classify me 1A until--well, I got my notice the day I went--the day I went to the mailbox to get my grades was the day I got my classification as 1A.  And the strategy was you would appeal 29 days.  You know, you had 30 days to appeal.  So you go on the 29th day.  This is when the mail was fast.  On the 29th day you mail in your appeal.  And that--and they didn't call me before the Draft Board until December.  And so by then, I was back in school at Howard, and I was considering going to graduate school.  So the Draft Board--so you go into this smoke-filled room and they look up.  You know, you're standing and they say--they say, "Okay.  What do you have to say," basically.  I said, "Well, I'm thinking about going to graduate school.  I'm also thinking about teaching."  Say, "You make your decision, and then we'll make ours," you know, as to whether or not I was drafted.  So, I decided--I was--so I started teaching.  So that's when I taught public school, taught high school.  So I taught--December 18, 1968, that was when I started working at Cardozo Senior High School [Washington, District of Columbia].  And they were so desperate to get a math teacher, they paid me over the holiday so I could start.  So I mean, school was over in, you know, a couple of days.  They brought me in.  And later on--I can't think of this.  Let's see, what is Joe's last name.  But a guy who was the chair of the math department there later on worked in my school in my department.  But anyway, so they hired me, and I got a deferment as a teacher.  And I taught 'til the end of that school year.  I would go on back when I finished.  So I went to [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor] in the fall of '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: How is that--did Professor [Arthur] Thorpe [at Howard University] know somebody at the University of Michigan or did you have (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No.  That was--I talked to Joseph, James Joseph.  And he gave me a list of good schools to apply to, you know, and Michigan was just one of them.  Some places I didn't hear from.  And I heard from Michigan, and I think they had a reputation of writing very good letters to keep you out of the draft.  And they were recruiting black students.  They recruited a large core of black students.  Over the years that I was associated with them, I think they had at least a hundred black students come in the graduate school--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --over a period, yeah.
Story_ID: 27869
Speaker 1: Now, NAM, National Association of Mathematicians--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --is a black organization (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Predominantly.  Right.  And--
Speaker 1: --in 1969.
Speaker 2: 1969--
Speaker 1: The same year that you started [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it--I wasn't--didn't have any awareness of it.  It was designed to address--to begin looking at the issue of underrepresentation of minorities in mathematics, primarily African Americans, but minorities in general.  And they were meeting at the Joint Meetings, which I, of course, wasn't attending as a student; didn't know anything about them.  National Technical Association, I became aware of them because I was involved with the--prior to my going back to graduate school, because I was at Michigan twice.  I went in '69 (1969) to '70 (1970) and got a master's [degree] in math.  Essentially I was enrolled at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] 'cuz I was finishing up my degree from Howard, because I had been in Howard fall of '68 [1968], and then all I had left when the school year started in '69 [1969], I just had to write a thesis.  So I worked on that while I was away.  I might have taken some courses too.  I forget.  But that was primarily what I had to do, was the thesis.  And so I kind of worked on that while I was at Michigan.  And, but at any rate, so the National Technical Association were people I got to know when I came back from Michigan in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I started teaching at Federal City College, which was the predecessor of--one of the predecessor institutions of the university [University of the District of Columbia (UDC), Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Now, the NTA, National Technical Association--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that's another African American (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.  And that was mostly--that was my awareness of it was here in D.C.  It might--you know, it spread.  I won't say it started here.  But I knew of it here.  And it was people who were engineers, and I knew people who were, you know, blacks, scientists and engineers.  And so that's how I got involved with the National Technical Association.  So I'm trying to think of the lady who worked for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] who was involved with that.  Valerie--can't think of Valerie's last name right now.  But I might come up with it.  But at any rate, so I was involved with the National Technical Association--
Speaker 1: Is there--
Speaker 2: --in between my two times at Michigan.
Speaker 1: What is the difference between the two?
Speaker 2: So the National Association of Mathematicians was focused entirely on mathematics.  National Technical Association was people in various--civil engineers, physicists, chemists, you know; physicists, chemists; just interested in trying to get kids interested in math and science.  So National Association of Mathematicians more focused, professional association, focused, I would say a little more to collegiate level, you know; whereas, the National Technical Association was interested in getting kids into, you know, mostly, involved in math and science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were working in public schools or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That type of thing.  Yeah.  That type of thing.  Been a long time since I was involved with National Technical Association, but you know, they had a--I would say they had a focus on getting young people involved.  That was, I think, that was at least my awareness of them; career fairs and things like that, you know, got involved there at one point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: And so I didn't become aware of NAM really 'til after I came to the MAA [Mathematical Association of America], which was around 1990.  I don't think I--I mean, I might have had some awareness, but, you know, I didn't have a lot of awareness of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 27870
Speaker 1: In 1970 you got your master's [degree] from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a master's of physics from Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], 'cuz I was already in school at Howard--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from the fall of '68 (1968), and then so I just went--when I went away, I just had to work on this thesis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in two masters at the same time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but most of it, you know, was just writing this thesis, 'cuz I had already taken up pretty much all of the courses.  I was never good at experiments, so they gave me the theoretical thesis to work in, because, my experiments, I had a history of my experiments didn't always work out very well, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So even though--that's why I didn't work under [Arthur] Thorpe, because Thorpe was really an experimentalist.  And so he--he (unclear) Titus Pankey, P-A-N-K-E-Y, whom I'm sure is deceased now.  I haven't really had any touch with him (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I've heard his name before.
Speaker 2: But Pankey was my advisor.
Speaker 1: And what was your project about?
Speaker 2: It was about, if I remember correctly to it--I have to think back.  But it was the idea of doing some calculations.  I think, if I remember correctly, [Albert] Einstein [physicist] made some predictions about, what we call, procession of--what is it--perihelion.   So, you know, the orbit--I think the orbit of Mercury, you know, gets perturbed as it goes around the sun, and so it doesn't always follow the same orbit.  You know, the orbit, I would say it's--I guess you can say the orbit shifts, right.  And so it's, I think it's called perihelion advance.  And so he wanted me to do some--I ended up doing some calculations using some different coordinates and trying to explain some of this and stuff.  I mean, it wasn't--it was--it wasn't (unclear) unknown or anything like that.  But, anyway, so that was long time ago.  That was 1970.  You know, it was a long time ago for me.
Speaker 1: And the math master's degree, what was that about?
Speaker 2: That was just--that was just you just took courses.  That's all you had to do at Michigan.  You (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's no (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --no.  You just take courses.  So and I mean, now, I didn't have a particularly stellar career when I started at Michigan.  And part of the problem was, I was very--I tend to be an inflexible student.  I always liked--wanting to do things a certain way.  And, you know, that necessarily wasn't the way they wanted things done.  And I didn't adapt that well early on.  So I really got out for the master's by the skin of my teeth.  Someone who was very--I would say very nice to me, a guy named William Jacob, who was at one time the president--or was he the executive director of the American Mathematical Society.  He was a really--just--he was a postdoc at Michigan at the time.  And he was very supportive of me, because I was struggling.  He was very encouraging.
Story_ID: 27871
Speaker 1: And Maxwell Reed was the person who recruited us [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor], and a pretty nice guy.
Speaker 2: I think I've heard his name before.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  You would have, 'cuz a lot of people--a lot of people went through Michigan.  And--but some, and they had a history.  You know, ironically, they had a history going back.  The third black woman to get her Ph.D. in math in 1950, even though we used to think it was 1949; 1950, was Marjorie, J-O-R-I-E, Lee Browne, B-O-R--B-R-O-W-N-E, from the University of Michigan, 1950.  See, she was the third woman.  The second woman to get her degree was Evelyn Boyd Granville.  She's still alive, too, by the way.  She's down in--I think she's in Tyler, Texas.  I don't know if anybody ever told you about her.
Speaker 2: No.  I think Johnny Houston [also a HistoryMaker] talked about her.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he should have.  Yeah, she's still alive.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that she was still alive.
Speaker 1: I'm pretty sure she is.  I haven't heard--
Speaker 2: In Tyler, Texas?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Tyler, Texas.  She retired--she was the second.  She got her degree in '49 [1949].  We used to think she was the first until we found out about Euphemia Lofton Haynes.  If you go to John--not--and go to Scott Williams' website, you'll see Euphemia, E-U-P-H-E-M-I-A, Lofton, L-O-F-T-O-N, Haynes, H-A-Y-N-E-S.  She was 1943.  She's the first African American woman to get a Ph.D. in math.
Speaker 2: Where did she get it?
Speaker 1: Catholic U [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  So she was right here.  The way I found out about it, I had a fraternity brother who was also someone who was studying to be a deacon in the Catholic Church with me, who occupied the chair.  She donated money to Catholic U for a chair for scholarships.  And he occupied the chair.  It was in the School of Education.  And so he said, "Well, I'm occupy--I hold this chair, and then the money was given by this black woman who got a Ph.D. in math."  I said, "Oh, yeah."  So that's how I found out about her.  And I would think I knew before other people, but he and I discussed it, and we weren't going to say anything because we thought it would--we said, we'll let the other person think she's first until she passed, then we'll say something about it.  But anyway, that's not how it turned out.
Speaker 2: (laughing)
Speaker 1: You can leave--you can scratch that part out.  But, at any rate--
Speaker 2: Okay. At Catholic University, now, Euphemia Haynes--
Speaker 1: Lofton Haynes, right.
Speaker 2: Lofton Haynes.  Got her Ph.D. from Catholic University.  There are several women there had Ph.D.s from Catholic University, I think.  (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Not in math, though.
Speaker 2: In math.  There was a group.  In fact, we've interviewed one of the colleagues of Johnny Houston at (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --got a Ph.D. at, what is that, [Linda] Hayden [also a HistoryMaker].  I think the last name was Hayden.
Speaker 1: Haynes.  No, she--now you're talking about--I know her.  She went to American U.  She went to American University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: American University.  Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 1: She went to American.  Yeah, she was a student of Mary Gray.
Speaker 2: Mary Gray.  Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  A whole bunch of women were students of Mary Gray.
Speaker 2: That's--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right.  That was at American University.
Speaker 2: I'm getting American University mixed up with Catholic.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's okay.  Sure.  But anyway, so--so anyway, but Evelyn Boyd Granville--okay.  So Evelyn--so Dr. Haynes got her degree, undergraduate degree, from Smith College.  But she was so early, I mean, so much more--she was separated in time so much from Evelyn Boyd Granville, who got a degree in '45 [1945], I believe she got her degree--I'm trying to think.  She got her Ph.D. in '43 [1943].  She might have got her undergraduate degree, like, in the '30s [1930s].  So there's so much time between them that nobody knew about Dr. Haynes.  But everybody knew about Evelyn, Evelyn Boyd Grandville.  So she's from D.C., she got a degree in--got her bachelor's degree from Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts]; '45 [1945], she got her Ph.D. in '49 [1949] from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], I think.  I think she got her Ph.D. at Yale in '49 [1949].  Now, if you--I just put that editorial comment in--if you were a mathematician and you went four years from your bachelor's to your Ph.D., you were a star.  That's not typical.
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Four years.  So from her bachelor's to her Ph.D., so it was four years.  You would be on a fast track.  But she went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  She ended up at Fisk, because there was a white mathematician, Lee Lorch, L-E-E, L-O-R-C-H.  Lee Lorch.  He lives in Canada now.  He's about ninety-something.  He's way up there.  He hired her.  I think Dr. Browne worked for him too at one point.  The Marjorie [Lee] Browne.  So I think he had both of them working for him.  But, at any rate, so she was allowed to fast track but--because she really couldn't get a job at any schools that weren't historic black colleges.  Nor could David Blackwell [African American mathematician], when he started out, you know.  'Cuz they just had a conference about him at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  Dawson (ph.) could tell you probably a lot about David Blackwell.
Speaker 2: Did you know about him when you were in the University of Michigan(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: When were in (unclear), no.  We didn't know about him then, but we knew about him when we were undergraduates.  I used to know about him from my undergraduates from Howard.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Because he came in 1967.
Story_ID: 27872
Speaker 1: Oh, by the--I would say this.  I was--I helped sit-in to the administration building at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] in 1967.  I was not the leader by any stretch, but I was--always a good follower.  So I was--sat-in, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Get that down.
Speaker 2: And how did things turn out?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, Marion Barry was mayor, so they turned out okay.
Speaker 2: Sixties?
Speaker 1: This is '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: '67 [1967].  Okay.
Speaker 1: And we took over the administration building, and he did not allow the police to come.  We know that--we negotiated with the administration.
Speaker 2: Well, Barry wasn't mayor in '67 [1967]. '67.  You mean--
Speaker 1: '67, yeah.  I think he--
Speaker 2: Barry wasn't mayor then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cuz well--maybe he was on the City Counsel--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but he came, and he actually came--
Speaker 2: So he actually came in on it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He came in and talked to us.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Percy Julian [chemist] was on the board.  He came and spoke to us, you know.  You know, he was in the National Academy as a chemist and developed cortisone and stuff, so he's very well known.  And, at any rate, you know, we were sitting in, but Marion Barry said, you know, it helped us negotiate with [James] Nabrith [president of Howard University] and, of course, in our view, they didn't know anything, but Nabrith was an illustrious civil rights lawyer.  Shows you what--when you're young, you're not as aware as you might be.  You know, we're different era, you know.
Story_ID: 27873
Speaker 1: But, so anyway, while we were at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor], we formed what was called the 'Ishango Society of Mathematics'.  And I'll--did you ever--have you ever interviewed Abdulalim Shabazz?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ishango Society of Mathematics--
Speaker 1: Mathematics, yeah.  Which was named after the Ishango bone, which was found in 19--let me see if I can my time straight.  So we just--we just celebrated 50 years a few, a couple of years ago.  So this is--yeah.  So it was found around 19--discovered in 1969, and--no, that's not--1959; excuse me, 1959, in East Africa, and it had these markings.  If you--but anyway, Abdulalim Shabazz spoke at--whose name used to be Lonnie Cross, but he's one of the early African American mathematicians, a member of the Nation of Islam at one time.  He's a Muslim now, but I don't think he's in the National of Islam any more.
Speaker 2: No.  I've heard of him.  I think I've heard of him in those days.  He was supposed to a math genius, right?  Is that the one?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He's pretty good.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he's way up in age now.  He was actually at Grambling State [University, Grambling, Louisiana].  So Lonnie--excuse me, Abdulalim, it's spelled, A-B-D-U-L-A-L-I-M, Shabazz, S-H-A-B-A-Z-Z.  Abdulalim Abdulla Shabazz.
Speaker 2: Abdulalim Abdulla Shabazz?
Speaker 1: Shabazz, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I got that.
Speaker 1: But he's at Grambling.  And he was--he's very good at encouraging people to do math.  Very good at that.  So, for instance, (unclear) Knight was a student of his.  What's his name--can't think of--works with Shirley McBay.  Can't think of his name right now.  But anyway, Dr. Shabazz has encouraged a lot of people to do math.  But anyway--
Speaker 2: I think I remember something written about him in the 'Ebony' or 'Jet'--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  (unclear).  And, at any rate, so we were--and we try to encourage, you know, ourselves, you know, to compete.
Story_ID: 27874
Speaker 1: I can say someone whom I thought was--what's his name?  What's Ullman's last name?  I mean that's his last name.  What's his first name?  Anyway, the person who was on my committee was someone I found that, underneath a rough, very rough surface exterior was someone who cared about students.  He was actually--let see if I can get the name.  (pause).  I can't think of his name.  He was at--'cuz when you went to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], right, to see Lovenia [DeConge-Watson, also a HistoryMaker], a Rogers Newman was on the faculty.  I don't know if you spoke to him.  He was a student at Michigan.  His advisor was someone on my committee and was someone who was very hard to convince, even though he had had a black student, that things needed to change.  Let's put it like that.  I'll just, you know, he thought.  But he was very--he had a very, very rough exterior, but really helpful to me.  And I would not have finished probably graduate school without him, right.  Even though he didn't teach me or anything, but he made contacts for me that I didn't know I needed to make, you know.  He and I argued for an whole hour one day.  Back and forth, back and forth, in his office; back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.  At the end of that argument, he said, "Okay.  Now, how are things going with you?"  I mean, you know.  I told him what my plans were and the person I had thought about taking on as my--actually to be my advisor.  And he told me, "Well, this person is getting ready to go on sabbatical."  And what he did, he set up a program for me where I could work with someone else on--for my preliminary exam while this other person I wanted to work with is gone.  And I--well, what happened, I would have gone the beginning of the next semester looking for this person, he would have been gone, and I would have been at a total loss.  I wouldn't have known what to do.  And he--so he set it up.  And the person he got for me to work with--not my advisor--is the person who is now in the National Academy and a really good guy, you know.  And let me see if I can get his name.  I can't think of his name right now.  I know who he is.  I'll think of it.  But he would---he supervised me on my prelims.  Very, very helpful.  He wasn't my advisor, but the idea that someone with whom you don't actually agree on things, cared enough to do something like that, that was--he was very--can't think of Ullman's--U-L-L-M-A-N.  That was--that was his last name.  I can't think of his first name.  He's deceased now.  But he was Rogers Newman's--Rogers Newman's, right, advisor.  Right.  And Rogers was on the faculty at Southern [University, Baton Rouge].  And he was a big--he was a very--he was the president of NAM [National Association of Mathematicians] for--executive secretary of NAM or president, I think, for a while.  So, anyway--Dan.  No, that's the guy who's at GW [George Washington University, Washington, District of Columbia] now.
Story_ID: 27875
Speaker 1: So this is the Ullman at University of Michigan--
Speaker 2: University of Michigan, was on the faculty.  You know, he wasn't the smoothest of people to deal with.  His voice used to irritate me.  It was just that bad.  But he was actually a good-hearted guy, and he set up for me to work with Melvin Hochster, who's in the National Academy of Sciences.  Melvin, he's the chair at Michigan right now, you know.  Many of us had a love-hate relationship with Michigan.  I don't know if I want that to be written down.
Speaker 1: Well, I think that's true for a lot of people, especially in those days, even today.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I think it's much--oh, it's different now.  It's very different.
Speaker 1: Is it?  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's different.  It's still--I mean, it's always going to be hard to be in graduate school.  That's--but see, but then, for instance, there was a white female who left because, I remember she told me that--so she met somebody from, what I guess, one of the faculty members in the elevator, and you know, she would have these, I guess, these very negative interactions, and she said--well, she probably--it was not--so they don't really mean it.  And after several years of this, she said, "I guess they do."  And she left.  Okay.  I think she finished at Chap-UNC [University of North Carolina], Chapel Hill.  And, you know, math faculty, they were kind of in their own world.  And you had to be a star to be of interest.  And to a lot of people, I won't say everybody, but to a lot of people you had to be a star to be of interest.  So, if you were a star, then they might overlook who you were, you know.  If you weren't a star, and, of course, most people aren't stars, then who you were made a difference to some people, you know.  But anyway, so, like I say, I can't think of Ullman's first name.  But, anyway, he--so Melvin Hochster--so, M-E-L-V-I-N, Hochster, H-O-C-H-S-T-E-R, is one of the mathematicians in the National Academy of Sciences.  So he is a very good mathematician.  So he supervised me for my prelims, thanks to Dr. Ullman's intervention, 'cuz that was what they set up, to say, "Well, okay.  The person you have as your advisor, Dr. Milne, (ph.) is going on sabbatical." 'Cuz I went to see him in the fall, Milne was leaving that January going on a year's sabbatical.  "He's going on a sabbatical.  So he's going to think about a problem for you while he's gone.  In the meantime, Dr. Hochster is going to work with you on your prelim."  And he set all this up.  I didn't know either one--I mean, I knew Milne because I was taking a class from him.  And I said, well, I'm going to ask him next semester, not this semester, but after I get my grades, you know, I'm going to sit with him and ask him next semester will you take me on as a student.  "Cuz somebody else had turned me down as a student after I--okay, so when I took the qualifying--when I took the--well, there's two sets of exams.  There's a qualifying exam.  So this means all you're going to be allowed to be in the doctoral program, you know, take two exams with three areas; analysis, algebra, or topology.  Those three areas.  You had to pick two.  You had to take two exams.  I failed both the first time, all right.  So most people that fail, fail one.  I failed both, right.  And my wife told me that, "When you go out--when you were going out that day, looked like you were going to your funeral."  And, you know, and I actually, I guess, it was pretty bad.  It was a bad day, right.  So anyway, but I made up my mind I was going to continue.  I was always struggling.  I just said, "I'm just going to--I'm going to try.  I'm going to try again."  So I went back and took both exams.  Normally, people would fail in one.  Anybody who failed two, they usually don't continue.  Nobody--almost nobody that failed two exams there continued in the program.  I mean, they didn't make you leave, but most people left.  So I decided I was--I said I'm going to give up.  I'm just going to try again.  Just made up my mind.  So I went and took it, and I got--so I low pass.  Right.  So I said, well, you know, well, you know, pass is a pass, you know.  And so I started looking around for somebody to work with.  So I asked one guy--I won't name who it was--but I asked him, and he turned me down.  So in any case, I was taking some courses and so on, you know, trying to see where I'm going to go or what I'm going to work on and stuff.  And so I took this class from James Milne, who's my--became my advisor.
Speaker 1: So he was back from his--
Speaker 2: No.  He hadn't gone.  So this is before.  He hadn't gone.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Kinda liked--I mean, I probably wasn't the brightest bulb in the, you know, in the (unclear) but I was, you know, I was--I enjoyed what he was teaching.  And so I asked--so I mean, I'd--that was my intention.  Once I get my grades, I'm going to ask him next semester could I work with him, because, like I said, somebody already turned me down, even though I had passed the qualifying exam.  So you had to take the qualifying exams, then you take prelims, preliminary exams; then, of course, you have your final defense, you know.  And, of course, they actually pat you on the back after your final defense.  That means you become one of the boys or maybe one of the girls, I guess, in another case.  But, you know, and it was amazing to me, just the transformation (laughs), you know, after finishing.  But, you know, it was a very interesting experience.  Like I said, this--I just can't think of Ullman's first name, but he was a really--someone who--that rubbed me the wrong way from the first time I met him, and turned out to be a really, really great, honest person.  That's something I'd like to get.  When he died, his wife, I'd given him a copy of my dissertation.  You know, she sent it back to me.  You know, and said, well, you know these are things in his files, and you know, she doesn't need them, you know.  So, but, he was really good--just so, and really sincerely--and just as (unclear) as you'd ever find. Just really crusty.  But, and that'll teach you that you can't judge a book by its cover, you know.  Either by how it looks or, you know, in race or anything.  You know, you just have to sort--I always--I just--I know truth always comes out.  So you just--I just wait.
Story_ID: 27876
Speaker 1: Is--so what did you focus on for your Ph.D. dissertation?
Speaker 2: So I was interested in algebra and geometry, arithmetic-geometry, as it's called.  And I didn't turn out to be a researcher.  So I got through that.  I wrote--I got that published 'cuz my--you know, I got that published, and then I published another paper, but that was it in terms of the research.
Speaker 1: Now, this paper, if you can break it down for us, it's called the "The Etale--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'The Etale Cohomology of Certain p-Torsion Sheaves'; right.  Yeah.  Nobody can break it down but so much.  But it was a lot of work in algebraic-geometry, so it's was called arithmetic algebraic geometry, 'cuz a lot of time it's not--it's over finite fields.  Okay.  So it's called--you know.  And, sort of related--it's related in some ways in number theory.  You have what's called analytic number theory, which involves, let's say, the complex numbers and so on and so forth.  And this is--finite fields are, you know, it's a little different, different environment.  And specifically doing things, and characteristic-p was not common.  Okay.  So, but it's called arithmetic algebraic geometry.  It was not groundbreaking.  I mean, it's certainly not something people have on their shelves to look up as a reference or anything like that.
Speaker 1: How is it--I mean, what was it used for in terms of--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, for instance, I mean, you mathematics, ironically, invades many, many fields, and certainly has gotten involved in cryptography, you know.  Some of it is involved in image, you know, imaging processing.  I'm not saying that's necessarily what this related to.  But I'm just saying mathematics gets into a lot of stuff.  People find more and more ways to apply it, and you know, and try to convince students of that, that, you know, you don't need to learn it for its own sake, you just need to learn something and exercise your mind, and then, you know, whatever you really want to do is fine, you know, but, you definitely have to learn how to do some math somewhere along the way.
Story_ID: 27877
Speaker 1: Your Ph.D. dissertation [at University of Michigan], like, plunged you deeper into math, even though it was nothing groundbreaking--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Well, I mean--
Speaker 1: --but it really.
Speaker 2: Oh, it certainly.  I mean, because you have to do something original to get your Ph.D.  So, I mean it was a problem that my advisor had thought of, you know.  He said, he would think about something for me to work on.  And if he had came up with something good to me--this was sort of the situation.  If he could come up with something good, then he would, you know, he might take me, 'cuz he didn't promise to take me on as a student.  And anyway, he was gone.  He was going to be gone.  He went to France for a year.  He liked to climb mountains, too.  I was always worried that he wouldn't be able to come back, you know, wouldn't continue.  But anyway.  So, you know, the idea was that--and I liked, you know, what is--I liked algebra.  Some people like analysis, which is sort of calculus and its derivations, you might say.  And I liked that a lot, but I liked algebra more so.  Like, I say, you know, group theory and things like that, I just ended up liking that more, much more than I liked even geometry.  I liked geometry in high school and stuff, but this--.  So, you know, and people, you know, what I guess students don't realize, basically, you are paid to do something you enjoy when you're, especially a graduate faculty member.  I mean, you know, you, if you can get it, you can get it published.  Now, I know things are changing, but if you can get it published, you know, get your peers to say this is something of significance, then you are basically paid to do what you want.  I mean, you know.  I mean, you have to teach classes, but, you know the research institutions, they teach the subjects that they want to teach.  You know, they teach about their own research or things that they're interested in.  So, I mean, nothing like higher education for a job.  I mean, you're just paid to do what you want to do, you know.  So I--that's one thing I've--I mean, I've enjoyed.  I've enjoyed teaching.  I haven't always taught.  I left to go back to graduate school.  So that was five years I was away.  Then I came here full time, five years to the MAA [Mathematics Association of America].  And then I went back, you know.  And I've actually included--took me a long time to realize.  You know, I like teaching an awful lot, you know.  And that's what I've certainly done most of my life.  I've been doing it--so, I mean, I first started teaching, in terms of professionally, in 1969.  That's a long time.  That's 40, you know, 44 years, 45 years, you know.
Story_ID: 27878
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would want to do if you (unclear) math?
Speaker 2: Well, you know.  I the things--the MAA has opened a world to me, I mean, that I really wasn't even aware of.  The great irony was, you know, when you're there or whether it's here, when you're in graduate school, typically, they give you a free membership in the American Mathematical Society, which is the research organization.  And I told one of my colleagues, "Well, I can't afford two memberships.  I'm going to keep up my membership in the AMS, American Mathematical Society."  And so I wasn't even a member of the Mathematical Association of America for a number of years.  Now, I'm only a member of that.  I don't have a membership in the American Mathematical Society, because I think its commitment to, you know, improving undergraduate education is very, very, very significant.
Story_ID: 27879
Speaker 1: So after you achieved your Ph.D. [degree at the University of Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you went--
Speaker 2: So I went back to Federal City College--I mean, University of the District of Columbia [Washington, District of Columbia] by then.  They had merged while I was away.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, D.C. Teachers' College, which was a public four-year teacher education institution here in the District [of Columbia]; Federal City College, which was a four-year public liberal arts college, which was only founded in 1968 though; and Washington Technical Institution, which was a two-year public technical college founded in 1968.  We merged and we became the University of the District of Columbia in 1979.
Speaker 1: In your opinion, what does this mean for the black community in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you, when Federal City College opened, people were able to go--I mean, we just--you couldn't turn me--you couldn't empty the classroom.  I mean, people were just everywhere.  Because of the fact that all we had was public teacher education in the city, you couldn't get an undergraduate degree in anything else.  So there was just this great demand, you know, because I guess no more than the government wanting people to have degrees perhaps.  There was a slew of people that wanted to come to school and get an undergraduate degree.  I mean, they were just--you almost had to beat them back with a stick, it was just people everywhere.  And so, you know, it gave the opportunity.  I mean, you know, you can bring--Marion Barry, essentially helped build the black middle class into a city.  Give credit where credit is due without going into anything else.  And--
Speaker 1: So, what I mean, it's not--this is the time to go into everything if you want to.  But, you know, Marion Barry has a (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, no.  I mean, his business is (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --his--perception of Marion Barry, and correct me if I'm wrong, is much different in the District than it is nationally.
Speaker 2: Yeah, nationally.  Right.  And I was--yeah, all they know about (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: All they know about nationally is that, you know, I mean, literally he was set up.  But, you know, that was another story.
Speaker 1: They know about the crack.
Speaker 2: They know about the drugs.  Right.  Know about the drugs.
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: Now, there's been an HBO movie, which I think gives a pretty fair portrait of him as a talented but flawed person.  And who seemed to care about other people a lot.  You know, I'll just kind of leave it at that.  But, anyway, the--so the Institution serves the public.  The only public--you know, we got lots of universities in the District.  Remember, the only public one is the University of the District of Columbia.  And now we have Howard [University].  And I went to Howard.  Howard does not serve Washington, D.C., residents.  The majority of the students come from all over the world.  It's an international institution.  American University, Catholic University, you know--just had a lot--many.  George Washington University, Georgetown University; you know.  They keep on going.  None of these serve the District of Columbia--just the residents of the District of Columbia primarily.  Most of these are international institutions, you know, and what have you.  So, we need a public institution of higher education, despite the powers that be that seem to feel that that's not appropriate.  Your two-year college is fine for those people, you know.  I think there's a real sentiment of that in the city among the elites in the city; not necessarily city council.  I think the city council is kind of clueless, other than Marion Barry and maybe other people about this.  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, what about your D.C. rep [representative] to the federal government of Eleanor Holmes Norton (ph.)?
Speaker 2: Well, she doesn't have much power.  See, Eleanor--Eleanor, well she's a Howard graduate.  She's helped Howard a lot.  She hasn't done much for UDC, but she's helped Howard a lot.  But in any case, she doesn't have a vote, you know.  I mean, her vote is determined really by the--whoever runs the House of Representatives.  And since the Republicans run the House of Representatives now, she essentially does not have a vote.  She might vote in the committee of the whole, but she essentially has no power.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you saying essentially that the mayor--I mean, the city government has got to really stick by UDC to make it (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And they've shown a real inability--there's not much commitment.  Other than Marion Barry; the late Hilda Mason, a lady who was very, very dedicated to the university.  And I do think, I mean, I can--don't want to editorialize it.  I won't call the former president's name, but I think that prior to this person who is the interim president has a potential to do a very good job.  I'll just leave it at that.  They can call the names up.  They can look the names up.  I'll just say, former president, I have nothing--nothing good to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Most recent former president.
Speaker 1: I see.  I see.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But in any case, I think--
Speaker 1: You know, I think Hilda Mason has been like the primary support?
Speaker 2: Well, Marion Barry, Hilda Mason were two--there was a lot--I think of it had to do with the consensus at the time of the creation of the university, I think, to--there was a lot of support.  I think it has waned.  I can say from the point of view of someone who's lived here all his life, the Washington Post has been an enemy of the University of the District of Columbia for a long time.  I mean, you can barely buy a good story, you know.  I mean, it doesn't matter what the circumstances are, it's always something negative.  But, that's another story to tell.  But any case, I do think that the need to education people--you know, Jessie Jackson, someone I'm sure you're familiar with in Chicago [Illinois], he can turn a phrase.  And one of the things, you know, and maybe a lot of thing are not that significant.  One thing he said, "It costs less to educate a person at Harvard [University] than it does to keep them in jail for a year."  You know that?  Now, of course, the only difference is, we seemed to like to put people away.  Yeah, we don't seem to want to send nobody to Harvard.  We like to put people in jail, you know.  So, I mean, it's just ridiculous, you know.  And, I mean, Marion Berry, without going too far, Marion Barry was well liked by seniors and well liked by young people.  He had a summer jobs program for young people, and he had a lot of--he paid a lot of attention to seniors.  I know my aunt--my late aunt loved him, you know, quite a bit.  You know, be a lot--a lot of elderly people thought very highly of him.  But anyway, you know, that's a local story.
Speaker 1: Well, this is local, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, but, yeah, I mean.  I mean, you know, he's smart.  Everybody--I mean, like I say, the HBO movie, I think, gives a pretty good picture of him, warts and all.  You know, it shows his good points and his bad points.
Story_ID: 27880
Speaker 1: So, you come back for your Ph.D. just as UDC [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia] is being galvanized and formed?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cuz I came back--came back in '70 [1970].  I think they formed the school in '76 [1976].  I came back in '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I joined, you know, I just rejoined the department.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the department like?  Were there many other black faculty members?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean, it was a huge department.  It was great.  It was one of the ironies.  You have, I think you have an institution that's been mismanaged.  Like, I say, this is off the subject.  But the institute's been mismanaged for a long time.  And, we had--back when I became chairman--I didn't become chair right away.  I became chair in '84 [1984].  When I became chair, we had something like fifty-five, really.  And when I resigned as chair, kind of roughly in 1989, not only did we have tons of faculty, we had tons of part-time faculty.  Courses everywhere.  I mean, just--
Speaker 1: What would be the percentage of African Americans on the faculty?
Speaker 2: In the faculty?
Speaker 1: Say you had fifty.
Speaker 2: And so there're 55, then maybe 15, 20.  I'd have to think pretty hard to separate.
Speaker 1: Now, that's higher than most places.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, oh, yeah.  Lots of women.  You know, which is kind of typical in historical black colleges, that you would have women in positions of authority.  It's not nearly the issue in the historical black colleges environment than it is in other institutions, you know.  Women presidents, women deans, women department chairs; that's not at all uncommon, you know.  So, I mean, it's very, very typical, you know, in a minority institution context.  Very typical.
Story_ID: 27881
Speaker 1: UDC [University of the District of Columbia] is a--you alluded to the fact it's considered an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  By the White House Initiative of Historical Black Colleges.  Even though one of our former presidents didn't seem to know that.  But, yes.  It is officially designated.  What the White House says--and this is long before President [Barack] Obama--it's always been listed among Historical Black Colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we're--we--some of our faculty say we're the oldest, because Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania]  started as a high school when we started in, I think--sorry--1839, Matilda Miner, when she started.  It was--let's see.  Maybe--I'm trying to think of the dates.  When Matilda Miner started her school, it was post-secondary; whereas Cheyney was a high school.  So even though Cheyney goes back to, like, 1837, and therefore, theoretically, is the oldest historical black college.  UDC--I mean, D.C. teachers started with Matilda Miner school, something like 1861 or so.  I got the dates a little mixed up.  But in any case, we're the oldest--we could be thought of as the oldest university--you 	know, post-secondary institution, according to one of our faculty.  I'll put it like that.
Speaker 1: It could be.  I know Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] is a candidate.
Speaker 2: Wilberforce is old.  But Cheyney is the oldest in terms of (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1856 is Wilberforce.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And but whether there it was a high school or not is another question.
Speaker 2: Right.  See, that's the thing.
Speaker 1: Links--
Speaker 2: Lincoln, right.  Lincoln in Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Lincoln really was founded by whites, so (simultaneous)(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  A lot of them.  Well, so was Howard University.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, I mean (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: All (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: That--those are some of the arguments people use to debate who is the oldest.
Speaker 2: Right.  Sure, sure.  Right.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Right.  But you know, your historical black colleges--you know, one thing I learned from being involved in these outreach activities play a critical role.  I think it's one thing Sylvia Bozeman [also a HistoryMaker] might have talked about, you know, that the--and you know, I think what we see as individuals, we might send our children to historical black colleges for undergraduate and get them a good foundation of who they are, you know, and their people's accomplishments and so on; then they can go out and do these other things, you know.  So, all of my kids--one son went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], my daughter went to Spelman [College, Atlanta], other son went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and UDC.  You know, so all three of them went to historical black colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife is a Howard graduate too.
Story_ID: 27882
Speaker 1: So I take it the majority of your students at UDC [the University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia] are African American?
Speaker 2: They are, even though that's changing as well.  But, yeah, that's true.
Speaker 1: So, does the campus--was the campus situated in--
Speaker 2: Okay.  The campus is on the site of the former federal laboratory, Harry Diamond Labs, and it was where Washington Technical Institute was housed.  And so when they merged, that was really the best property for the merger.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the campus in Van Ness [neighborhood in Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: That's the campus in Van Ness, right.  So a couple of doors down from where (ya'll were?), yeah.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, and it's--and actually, as much as I dislike the former president, he did some physical plan improvements.  How important they were, but he did some.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.  So, by '84 [1984], you the department chair.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who or what were some of the other people in your department [of mathematics], I guess, that you--I mean that--I don't want to put you on the spot, but who are some of the other people in the department?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, we have--well, like I say, what has happened, you know, we had attrition.  You know, we've lost enrollment; and so, therefore, you know, positions were lost.  An enormous reduction in force in the spring of 1990; it's like February of 1997.  And I had just kinda--I had gone back, I guess, in maybe the fall of '95 [1995] somewhere.  I was back part time.  I wasn't back full time.  And somebody--but anyway, so--and we lost a lot of very--enormous--a lot of good faculty with the reduction of force, you know.  And, you know, I would say gutted--not only gutted our department, it gutted the institution, you know.  And it was a--it was studied by AAUP [Association of American University Presses].  A lot criticism made of how things were done and so on and so on.  I mean, that's just kind of off the subject.  But anyway.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I asked about who else was in the department with you as well?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Beverly Anderson is in the--who's retired now; our department chair (unclear) is Dr. Bernice Stedman, she's a graduate of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], Ph.D. from Howard; Tepper Gill.  Did you ever interview him?  Yeah, he's (unclear) he's quite a character.  Tepper Gill.  He's at Howard.
Speaker 1: I've heard his name too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  T-E-P-P-E-R, G-I-L-L.  He's a talker.  You should have no problem with Tepper.  He likes to talk.  And so, let's see.  We have--we have a Spelman [College] graduate, got her Ph.D. maybe--where she got it--maybe the University of North Carolina.  She's Kim Barnette.  She's a new faculty member.  She's a visitor.  She's visiting really. B-A-R-N-E-T-T-E.  We have Russell Goward.  These are people who are there.  We don't have that many.  Russell Goward, G-O-W-A-R-D.  We have Abdollah, A-B-D-O-L-L-A-H, Darai, D-A-R-A-I.  I think he's from Iran.  I'm just sort of looking.  We have Shurron, S-H-U-R-R-O-N, Farmer.  Just sort of thinking around, because we have--there're about twelve faculty.  We don't have that many.
Speaker 1: On that--so, the faculty members reduced from 50 to--plus (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Fifty to--almost 50 part time.  Yeah.  We have about 12 faculty.  No.  We don't have any part-timers.  They split us, the community college, and the four-year institution have split.  If you had an institution where most of the kids are first generation, almost everybody's in the first two years, and you carve out the first two years, you wouldn't be surprised if you don't have a lot of enrollment in the upper division.  And, of course, we don't have a lot of enrollment, and we're under attack for that, politically, but, in any case.  So, yeah, I mean, we have--I can't think.  I'm trying to think.  Yeah, so we had a lot of people.  You know, a lot of people who retired. The rift like I said, cut us probably about in half.  And then, people retired and so on and so.
Speaker 1: In terms of attracting students, are the D.C. public schools producing D.C. (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I would say, you know, they're a troubled system.  Just editorializing.  Michelle Rhee [former chancellor of the D.C. public schools] was not a help, but anyway.  I don't that Kaya Henderson is much better, but least she's not Michelle Rhee.  But, yeah, the city, the city's in trouble, you know, like a lot of many urban systems.  And I think that we could take--we could make bricks without straw.  We've been doing it for a long time at the university.  Been nobody graduate who doesn't know what they're supposed to know.  Might take them a while.  We had a young man, whose name I can't recall, went on from an undergraduate degree at UDC in physics to a post-doc at the University--no, excuse me.  A Ph.D. at the University of Michigan in physics, high energy physics, and now is doing a post-doc in [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana].  So we have illustrious graduates.  On the other hand, that's not everybody.  We have--but, you know, we do--I think we do--we're like many yeoman [ph.] institutions.  We're moving people forward.
Story_ID: 27883
Speaker 1: What's the biggest--I think it was Shirley Jackson [also a HistoryMaker] that told us that she thought that illiteracy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was a tremendous factor in math success, even though you may have a math aptitude, if you can't really read.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't--I mean, most of the kids--I don't know that that's it.  I mean, that's just--I mean--but I mean, by time someone gets to freshman year in college, I mean, now we're requiring standardized-SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test], you know.  So, I just think, you know, you have a range of responses in the classroom, and so, I mean, I think we're preparing people reasonably well.  I mean, we're not getting the stars, you know, generally speaking.  But they're getting a solid foundation to go on to do graduate study, you know, if that's what they want to do.  They want to go to law school and so on and so on.  I mean, I think, you know, we're a strong undergraduate institution.  We don't get much respect, but I think we're doing a good job.  And I think we're taking the people--we're taking students that people wanted to throw away.  And, I, you know, I'll editorialize in this sense, you know.  When you steal from the little people, you're really a thief, you know.  And to people, they're a lot stealing from the little people.  So, you know, you go to somebody like Mobutu.  You know, if the people are dirt-poor and you're wealthy, there's something wrong, you know.  And, you know, we see a lot of that, I think,
Speaker 1: Yeah, the former leader of the (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Congo.  Right.  Zaire.  Or you know, Baby Doc, Papa Doc, you know.  If you're a billionaire and everybody around you is dirt poor; I mean, not poor, but dirt poor, something is wrong, you know.  And, I mean, we have a lot of little people in the District of Columbia.  Not all of them are minority.  But we have a lot of, you know, poor people or people who are not well-educated.  And, you know, when that's your constituent, you don't necessarily get a lot support from the powers that be.  And we're not getting the kind of support that we need to educate these people.  Now, there's a lot--there's a lot of--we have what's called the D.C. Tuition or College Assistance Program, the D.C. CAP, I think is it.  And so, if you're a D.C. resident, this is through the auspices of some of the powers that be, and Eleanor Holmes Norton, you can go to any public institution anywhere in the country and get up to $10,000.  You can go to any historical black college.  I don't think you'll get ten thousand, but you get something.  Any public--if you go to any public institution, well, public historical black college, you can go to a private historical black college like, say, Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Morehouse [College, Atlanta], you don't get quite as much; maybe you get five thousand, something like that.  But--so what this is doing, this is draining the talent from the District of Columbia.  Everybody else has a state institution because they want to keep their kids in the state.  So the University of Michigan gives in-state tuition to Michigan residents to keep kids in Michigan, right?
Speaker 1: So this is doing--
Speaker 2: So the education--
Speaker 1: --just the opposite.
Speaker 2: --doing just the opposite, and I don't think it's an accident.  And so, you know, it's an effort, I think, to sort of bleed the talent out of the city.  A lot of kids do come back, you know.  I'm not saying everybody who's responsible for the program has an ulterior motive.  But I do think there're some ulterior motives at work, you know.  There's a great deal of effort to build up the community college, which--how far can you go with a two-year degree?  You can be somebody's plumber, and now you can make good money as a plumber, there's no doubt about it.  But you're always going to be a plumber.  You're not going to be an entrepreneur, you're not going to be a captain of an industry or anything like that, if you have a two-year degree.  Now, I'm not saying--there are some Bill Gates out there, right.  You know, Steve Jobs, but Bill Gates is not uneducated.  He's educated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He spent all his time in the computer lab, but he is educated.
Speaker 1: He didn't depend on school to educate him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I mean--but if you look at Malcolm Gladwell's book, you know, 'The Outliers'.  You know, Bill--Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, just spent all their time in the time in the computer lab, right, at the university, right.  I mean, he didn't just necessary go to class, but he was getting an education, you know.  So, I mean, I think there's a lot of that that goes on, you know.
Story_ID: 27884
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what happened, about a year after I resigned as chair [of the mathematics department at the University of the District of Columbia (UDC)], and I came to the MAA [Mathematics Association of America], what happened was, Jim Donaldson [also a HistoryMaker] encouraged me to take the position--there was an effort made to get the association to look at its own practices in regards to minorities.  And there was a committee that made forty-two recommendations about how to get minorities more involved in the association and in mathematics.  And the--one of the recommendations was that there would be an Office of Minority Participation in the association.  And when that decision was made, and I was one of the possible candidates, I was encouraged to be a candidate by Jim Donaldson.  And so I did it and I eventually became the person.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is in 1990.
Speaker 1: 1990, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, tell us about SUMMA?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was an acronym:  Strengthening Underrepresented Minority Mathematics Achievement, which was coined by Marcia Sward, S-W-A-R-D, who was the executive director at that time.  I worked with a woman named Florence Fasanelli, F-A-S-A-N-E-L-L-I, and we were tasked to find--we had support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York to run a particular program focused on pre-college students.  And the idea was that--this was very popular at that time, that you would bring kids in for a few weeks in the summer, and you would give them math enrichment activities.  And so, these were soph--it had various names.  Summer Science Camps was one name NSF [National Science Foundation] had.  Young Scholars is another name NSF had.  And we went around encouraging people to apply to NSF to get these grants, and anybody else who would fund you, you know, and some schools funded people.  And we did a lot of that for several years.  Got a whole bunch of folks.  I mean we weren't the only ones.  I mean this was very popular.  Now, you know, it's faded in popularity, and we got--got caught in the crimp, you know, the change there, because we had a lot of people ready to go and nowhere to go.
Story_ID: 27885
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We were talking off-camera about Dr. [Roselyn] Williams [also a HistoryMaker] at FAMU [Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, Florida]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Johnny Houston [also a HistoryMaker] and some of the other people at these summer programs--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and through NSF [National Science Foundation].  NSF through the--
Speaker 2: Department of Energy, a number of agencies.  We had a program in UDC [the University of the District of Columbia, Washington, District of Columbia] funded by the Office of Naval Research.  I mean, lots and lots of people funded the pre-college program.
Speaker 1: So, how does SUMMA [Strengthening Underrepresented Minority Mathematics Achievement] work really?  Was it paid for solely by the mathematics department?
Speaker 2: No.  What we--we had lots of--we had, certainly MAA [Mathematics Association of America] money.  But we also had support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, National Security Agency [NSA], National Science Foundation.  What we tried to do was to find programs that we thought would increase minority participation in mathematics, science and engineering; and improve the mathematics education of minorities because those were our goals.  And, also, we wanted to be an integral part of the Mathematical Association, so we had former presidents, for example, on our oversight committee; former presidents of the association and so on.  So we were--we're very much involved in the MAA internal structure.  And what we were doing for pre-college programs, we were given money from the Carnegie Corporation of New York to give small planning grants.  So we give someone a $5,000 planning grant, they would design--we'd help them design a program.  And then we would, maybe, review their proposal, and they would go to someone, like, National Science Foundation, Young Scholars Summer Science Camps, or maybe they'll go to the [U.S.] Department of Education [DOE], Minority Science Improvement Program; you know, those types of entities that were out there.  So we were sort of a conduit.  And we were sort of reflecting what a professional association inherently does.  It brings people together, you know.  So we had--we did that for a long time.  Really for those five years.  That was--the major thrust of what we had done was the under-the pre-college, you know, the pre-college activities.  At one time, NSF funded consortia or--so we put together a consortium of pre-college programs called SUMMAC, SUMMA Consortium of Pre-College Programs.  We were good with acronyms.  So, in any case, we were trying to involve more and more people.  This was something that was already in existence.  There were lots of programs like this.  They weren't always necessarily minority-focused.  And so that was one of the things that we were trying to do, was to take some things that were perhaps already being done, and focusing a little more on minorities.  So there were--there are programs--for instance, Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] has a pre-college program that's still in existence, which was founded by someone named Arlo Ross. R-O-S-S.  And young people came there, you know, high school students.  And they worked during this--you know, worked for several weeks during the summer; maybe six weeks, something like that.  And it just encouraged them to go on and study more mathematics.  We had a number of alumni who were very successful in mathematics.  There was a program at Xavier University [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I can't think of the name of the person.  But in any case, he's a red-headed guy.  Can't think of his name.  He's a white guy.  And he--he told the story of how he got into pre-college programs.  Well, he was--it's Carmichael, I think is his name.  I can't remember his first name.  But Dr. Carmichael at Xavier, which is very successful in minorities going on to health fields, medicine, pharmacy; those types of institutions.
Speaker 1: He's in Louisiana, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah.  At Xavier, right.
Speaker 1: And what he said he had done was, well, he was noticing problems in freshmen chemistry.  So he says, "I'm going to do something with a bridge program, between twelfth [grade] and freshman year."  Then he said, "Well, let's do something with the twelfth--let's do something over the summer with the twelfth graders."  You know, the kids going into the twelfth grade.  So he eventually ended up with a program, I think, called SOAR [ph.], which worked through all the summers for high school students to really get them ready.  And it's very successful in getting kids.  So this was very popular at one time.  Unfortunately, it seems it's lost in popularity.
Speaker 2: The funding is dried up.
Speaker 1: The funding is dried up for those pre-college programs.
Story_ID: 27886
Speaker 1: What's pretty popular now is undergraduate research, you know, getting kids who are already in college involved in research.  So we have an initiative in that area for getting kids.  We have a National Research Experience for Undergraduates Program, which--I was doing the statistics recently for a report.  We've, I think, let's say, for about 450, a little bit higher number, 450 students have been served since 2003, and we've had about 90, 97 sites that was--where the programs have been given.  And there are small research groups.  So you have about four minority students and a faculty member who may or may not be a minority person.  We've just been all over the place.  We've been at Cal State-Chico, California State University at Chico, where the first--one of the first students we ever funded--when we funded a faculty member who worked with these students, that young lady's gone on and get a Ph.D. in math.  And she now is on the faculty--she's doing a post-doc at the [United States] Military Academy, West Point.  A young man--a young lady we funded that same summer, 2003, she's gone on to get her Ph.D. at Arizona State [University] in applied mathematics.  I think she got her degree in 2012.  A young man we added to a program--there was someone who had a summer research program.  He said he wanted to add this one minority student.  He didn't have any extra funds.  We gave him funds for one student.  That student got his Ph.D. in 2009, he's now on the medical faculty at the University of Pittsburgh Hospital [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  He got his Ph.D. in statistics at the University of Pittsburgh.  And we had a Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] student in the summer of 2005.  So we funded all over--we funded people all over the place.  And this young man got his Ph.D. recently, and he's now at the military academy, West Point, as well.  So we've had about 450 students who've gone through out summer research experiences.  Like I said, about 95, 96 sites.  I don't remember the exact number.  And, you know, we've had--and some people funded multiple times.  So it's not as if, you know, 96 different schools.  But, Cal State-Chico, Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia], Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland]; let's see.  Burl, a Manhattan community college, Grambling [University, Grambling, Louisiana]; you know, Virginia State [University].  Clark in--no, excuse me. We do Clark-Atlanta [University].  We had Atlanta Metropolitan College at one time.  So, you know--like I say, Spelman [College].  Just all kinds--you know, lots and lots of different places have been funded.  We had Cal State, San Bernardino; Cal-State, Stanislaus.  We've funded lots of different places.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I know--this is the National Research Experience for Undergraduate Program (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Experience for Undergraduate Program (simultaneous).  Yeah.  That's also our biggest initiative right now.
Speaker 2: There's an acronym that I can't pronounce it (laughs).
Speaker 1: NREUP.  Yeah, it's not a noun.  It's just a--it's a bunch of letters.  You know, just a bunch of letters.
Speaker 2: Somebody let the poetry out of the office (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  It was just called NREUP.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But--and that's funded by the National Science Foundation [NSF] and by National Security Agency.
Speaker 2: NSA, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 27887
Speaker 1: You were mentioning consortiums.  I know there's one consortium was Bowie State [University, Bowie, Maryland] and Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], and (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But then there's lots of entities out there, yeah.  I guess, yeah.  We were working, at that time, like, we were looking at pre-college programs, trying to bring them together for greater, you know, efficiency and effectiveness.  And, I mean, what I guess--like most people, I mean, we try to be entrepreneurial, so if it's something that we think fits the association, you know, I guess, the--what is that--I won't say motto--but anyway, if it fits the association's goals, and it's something that will increase minority participation, then we're kind of interested in it.  And so, like I say, so we don't do anything with pre-college programs any more 'cuz it's just not any support for that out there.  And there're people who are still doing it.  But they're getting funding, you know, from other sources and so on.  So, we work with all kinds of people.  Manuel Berrios Anzonel (ph.).  This is an Hispanic person that--University of Texas, San Antonio.  He had founded a program called, San Antonio Prep, pre-freshman engineering program or Tex-Prep, which is the state-wide program; work with--did a lot of involvement with him.  He was a very, very effective person.
Speaker 1: Now, what does--does the undergraduate research approach seem to work better than the high school summer program?
Speaker 2: You know, it's easier to convince people.  You know, everybody is used to taking labs in college.  People weren't as convinced that you could something with high school kids that would make a difference, because the track--okay, so, for instance, I told you about kids who got there who we worked with in 2003--by we what I mean is that somebody worked with in 2003, and they get their degree in 2012.  That's a long lead time.  There's not that much patience out there for taking time like that.  So we had four students.  We've been, you know, we supported them early on.  We haven't continued to support them.  I mean, they had, like, maybe one summer, then they go on; they come back to school and they're charged up in a different way.  And now they have a desire perhaps to go on to graduate school.  Lot of kids never would have thought about graduate school before going through something in the summer.  I mean, just like really and truly when I was in high school working with my chemistry teaching during the summer was an eye-opening experience.  It was a great--just a great experience.  Now, I didn't end up in chemistry, but I could easily have done that, and it would have been--that would have been an impetus towards that.  And you know, getting kids involved in stuff early on.  I mean, just like--it's like, you know, people, you know, you want your child to be a mega star.  Without me calling any names, they get them involved in music, right.  So, you know, you get to see if your kids can sing, you get your singing group, try to get them a contract, and you know, that's their path.  Well, we want people to do math and science, we try to get them involved in that.  You know, it'll be nice if the schools could kind of do it routinely.  And I watching this TED program on public television not too long ago.  I haven't seen that many of them.  You know, they had the guy from Harlem [New York], you know, that's been very successful in getting kids involved.  And I not too long ago read 'Outliers', and Malcolm Gladwell talked about--I actually read all of his books.  He's a very interesting author.  And Malcolm Gladwell talked about in "Outliers" that minority kids fall back during the summer.  If you look at their performance that--in terms of grade level at the end of the school year, they're typically pretty near grade level.  But at the end of the summer, they've fallen back.  And so, and this is one of the things that the guy from Harlem spoke about, that we're still doing things the same way.  I mean, I don't know about year-around school.  I mean, that's another story.  But, in any case, the fact that kids are off during the summer, especially kids who are not well-off, you now.  Gladwell talks about a minority youngster whose parents are middle class, and he's being taught to negotiate the system first versus a young white girl who's from a lower class family, who doesn't have a clue as to how to negotiate the system, and probably gonna fall back during the summer, you know, and so on.  You know, it's an interesting book, you know, in a lot of ways.  I don't know if you read it, but it's a very interesting book.
Speaker 1: I've seen it.  I heard it discussed.
Speaker 2: He's a very interesting author.  And he's touched a lot of good points, you know.
Speaker 1: 'Outliers' by Malcolm Gladwell.
Speaker 2: Gladwell.  Malcolm Gladwell.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 27888
Speaker 1: When you come up with a program like the National Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program [NREUP], do you have to do, like, a study or something?
Speaker 2: Well, you have to do a proposal, right?  And what--yeah, I would say the National Security Agency has been a big supporter of SUMMA [Strengthening Underrepresented Minority Mathematics Achievement] early--for a long time.  And they responded--we did a proposal to them about this idea of undergraduate research, and they didn't give us a lot of money, but they gave us enough to do these little small programs.  Typically, the undergraduate research program might have, let's say, 15, 20 students, while ours have little, small, maybe four or five students.  And that's a different model.  You know, it was reflective with a fact that we didn't have a lot of money to work with.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And the executive director at that time, Dr. Tina Straley, S-T-R-A-L-E-Y, said, "Well, let's take the money we got and come up with something."  Right?  So  we had applied to NSF and didn't get funded.  And one reason, we didn't have a track record in this area.  And, you know, it's peer reviewed.  You know, a lot of criticism from the government, but they're actually kind of stingy with money.  If you don't have a good program, we're not going to give you diddly; we're not going to give you any money.  And we didn't have a track record in this area.  And what we were trying to model ourselves on was a good program, but we didn't--didn't cover it with a very good proposal, so we didn't get funded.  But what--NSA did fund us, and--but didn't have enough money to run one of these big 15, 20-person programs, so it said--so she suggested, Dr. Straley, "Let's do something small.  You know, let's take the money we've got and run with that.  Let not send the money back.  You know, tell them, you know, we didn't get as much money as we wanted, so we can't do it.  Let's call it something."  So that's what it did.  And so that's where--that was the impetus of this particular model.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I--I mean, I think it's good.  You know, it's not typical.  It's not the stars.  We're not asking people to find the stars.  We have minorities who are the researchers, you know, faculty.  We have non-minorities.  The first year we funded three people:  two white, one black.  You know, we've funded as many as 13, maybe three or four black, the rest white.  You now, it's whoever is going to work with these minority students.  The students are supposed to be citizens or permanent residents, and they're supposed to be minority.  And the 90-something percent have been minority.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sometimes, kids have been maybe attached to the program funded by somebody else, you know, but--you know, I mean, I can editorialize, but I mean, put it like this:  You have to open stuff up, you have to make stuff available to people, you know, if you're going to sell something.  That's what we're trying to do.  Trying to sell mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And basically, the program like the National Research Program--now, this is--it's something that's developed by the office here in (simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We would put together a proposal.  You know, we took the criticism that we received from the National Science Foundation--(coughs) excuse me.  So the following year when we reapplied--well, we had a little track record 'cuz we had gotten this money from NSA.  And that was one of the criticisms.  So, you know, anybody submitting a proposal, as they--one of the things I always tell you, get on the panel and review.  Then you kind of know what passes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What passes muster.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: And ignorance is never bliss, you know.  So, if I had had a quote, that might be it.
Story_ID: 27889
Speaker 1: Now, I don't know where it stands today, but I got a stat [statistic] here from the nineties that, like, one year, like, there were only four black Ph.D.s in math graduated in the whole country.  And that's (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The numbers--okay.  I have tracked the numbers, myself.  And I didn't look.  I mean, I could go get them.  They're right upstairs. But, in any case, what we have on the average, we have less than twenty a year.  And that's black, Hispanic, and American Indian.
Speaker 1: That's nationwide, right?
Speaker 2: That's nationwide, yeah.  The American Mathematical Society gets the statistics.  National Science Foundation tracks the statistics as well.  And, because you don't want to use all the talent that we have in the country, you know.  People talk about race-based things being unfair, you know.  You know, a lot of that's--let's just say, some of that's disingenuous.  Let's put it that way.  You know, I think that's the case.  And so, if you look at the numbers--first of all, American citizens are not getting--if we're getting the majority of math Ph.D.s, it must have changed, because at one time we were not.  Okay.  These mostly foreign nationals.  And--
Speaker 1: That's across the board.
Speaker 2: That's math and science in general, because many people view their job in math and science as keeping themselves in a job by having graduate students.  They're not as sort of looking at the bigger picture.  If I don't educate somebody from this country, or somebody who's going to stay in this country, and if you're going to stay here, that's fine; but a lot of people are going back home.  Now, everybody's not a refuge from Communism as was once the case.  That might have been, you know--refugee from Communism.  You know, I mean, they're like one of the mindsets in the past.  So most people that you educate here, they're countries are doing--the reason why they're going to go back home, you know.  So if we don't educate--there was a--Bill, William Velez, V-E-L-E-Z, was a mathematician at National Science Foundation [NSF].  He's at the University of Arizona.  Even though I claim when I--I claimed he was from Arizona State [University] one time and got in some trouble; but from the University of Arizona, and while he was at NSF, he said, "Well, if we're going to fund research, you need to have some citizens among your graduate students."  You know.  "If we're not--if not--we're not going to fund a significant number of American citizens, then why are giving this money out?"  You know.  But anyway, that's not the predominant mindset.
Story_ID: 27890
Speaker 1: Now, how did the presence of Walter Massey [also a HistoryMaker] at the NSF [National Science Foundation] affect, you know, funds for minorities?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if I was involved in things.  A person that was really instrumental in terms of what we were looking at was Luther Williams [also a HistoryMaker].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think he may have--might have followed, you know, Massey.  I think Massey had been there, and it was gone, and Luther Williams, he was head of the Education and Human Resources Directorate, and he was very dynamic in terms of getting programs started.  And, you know, so he had a big impact of things, like, the statewide systemic initiatives, the summer science camps.  You know, he had a big--he was very, very commitment to making sure that everybody got a chance at education.  And everybody got some human resources, you know.  And he was very--and Massey, I think, was gone before I got involved with this.  I'm not positive, but I don't remember much about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Luther Williams, I know.  We were doing a lot.
Speaker 1: What about other African Americans in NSF, though (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, let's see now.  I'm trying to think.  This woman in biology, I'll try to think of her name.  Not the best person.  But Luther Williams was a program officer.  Who was his--one of his assistant was very, very dynamic.  Now, Wanda Ward is there now, I think.  She's very good.  She is an African-American woman.  Wanda is very good.  You know, it shouldn't be necessary for you to be a minority to be concerned.  Right?  And I can say that about the [Mathematical] Association [of America; MAA], that it's not a minority organization, but it is concerned.  So, anyway, Wanda Ward, Elvira Doman; she is now retired.  E-L-V-I-R-A, D-O-M-A-N.  She was in the National Association of Black Scientists, and she was, like, a mentor out at the University of Maryland Baltimore County, the Meyerhoff [Scholars] Program, but she was also--she's one of the few black program officers.  She was in biology though out at NSF.  Yeah, so, you know, it's kind of coming.  I can't think of everybody, 'cuz, you know, this goes back a number of years.  So 1990, that's not yesterday.  So, you know, that's--what's that, twenty-three years ago, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I don't remember all that stuff.
Story_ID: 27891
Speaker 1: So what's the future look like now?  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community in terms of STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics] education?
Speaker 2: I think--well, let me make this comment.  You know, we used to tell children that anybody could be president, and it wasn't true.  It is true now.  And I think, you know, President [Barack] Obama has sort of taken our tail and turned it around and made it a truth.  And it's important, I think, for kids to realize, you know, if people didn't come here from overseas with nothing, absolutely nothing and make it, that is no reason why we shouldn't be able to kinda figure out a way to make it.  You know, I know there's opposition; yeah, there's lots of reactionary forces, lot of ignorance.  But, you know.  I met a person from--we all remember Idi Amin.  All right.  So Idi Amin expelled the people from India, people of the Indian extraction from Uganda.  Well, I met one of these guys here in the United States.  He said, "I came here with one dollar."  And he said, "I had the same suitcase."  He pointed across the room.  "There's my suitcase that I brought here."  Says, "I'm not afraid to try anything."  And this man is successful.  Now, you mean to tell me that I can't be born here and can't figure out a way to, you know, get up, you know, kind of make progress.  I'm not saying that, you know, we've seen enormous change in our lifetimes.  Okay.  I was watching 'To Kill a Mockingbird' last night.  Okay.  This happened to come on, Turner Classic Movies [TCM].  There was on--I didn't watch it that closely because I've seen it a bunch of times.  But, you know, this is not the 1930s.  Okay.  Anybody who thinks it's the 1930s says that things haven't changed wasn't around then, 'cuz things are very different.  Okay.
Story_ID: 27892
Speaker 1: You know, I've traveled in the South.  You know, I went back to, I think it might be Greenwood.  I'm trying to think--it's not Greenwood, Mississippi, but anyway, I was in 1990--I as there in 1966, summer.  I got tear-gassed, you know.  I had gone South to see who was telling the truth.  Were the people in the movement telling the truth, or was the government telling the truth.  And I didn't think the government was telling the truth, so I just went--I always want to know for myself.  So I went down there to find out.  So they put in the paper that we had an illegal demonstration.  And what really happened was, people were demonstrating.  This wasn't SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], this was SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  See, they were marching at night.  It was--people from SNCC thought was pretty stupid.  But anyway, they were marching at night.  Police came and said, "We're going to give you, let's say, a minute to disperse."  They didn't give us a minute.  They fired the tear-gas and dispersed us.  And I found you can't breathe tear-gas.  I got, you know, I didn't know it hung to the ground.
Speaker 2: Is that that assembly in the park, like,
Speaker 1: This was--this--we were going to march to this park.  I think it was--I can't think of--
Speaker 2: Is that when James Meredith was around then?
Speaker 1: No.  This is--these were small potatoes.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: No.  These were no big potatoes.  Trying to think.  It's not Greenwood.  Grenada, Mississippi.  That's where it was.  G-R-E-N-A-D-A.  And so they were marching at night.  Like I said, this was thought to be folly, you know.  But, any case, so they're planning this march.  And we were standing around, 'cuz, you know, we thought they were kind of crazy.  And the police didn't give them a chance--didn't give us a chance to disperse.  And you do find that tear-gas is heavier than air.  So if you go down, you get yourself a lung full of tear-gas.  And I got me a lungful.  You know, you kind of run.  Got hit in the back by a policeman as I was running away, you know.  But anyway, I didn't suffocate because I was running to get some air, you know.  And they--we did march one time--and I'll tell you, the strategy was that we march in front of the white stores.  People were throwing bricks, right?  Police stopped them from throwing, when it would damage property.  They didn't care about damaging people.  And as I told you--
Speaker 2: That's why you were in front of the white stores (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's funny, you know, marching in front--we stood in front of the white stores.  And, yeah, I told you when I was a child we used to throw rocks.  Well, I was very good at dodging rocks, even when they come out the dark, you know.  And it doesn't help somebody behind you.  They could get hit.  But, you know, I didn't hit or anything.  But, anyway, so I went back 30 years later, 1996.  I was visiting.  One program we had, we were, like I say, we were trying to get people to start these pre-college programs.  So I visited Jackson State, and I was talking to them about Grenada.  Say, "Why don't you just go up and visit."  One of the comments they made to me was, "Well, we got black state troopers.  They just not--they not in the white areas, but we got black state troopers."  And they do.  They had black state troopers in Mississippi.  I went to visit Grenada, and there was a person who had been--well, when I was there, shortly after I left somebody was killed.  His name was Jay--you know how people--you know how in the South they put the Junior in your middle name?  Name was James Junior Hardiman (ph.).  If you look at an old issue of 'Jet' from about the 1966-'67 [1967], he was killed by the police.  And he was somebody I knew.  So there was somebody else I recall.  You know, I hadn't thought about these people in 30 years, but I went to Grenada, just north of Jackson about 30 miles.  I had, you know, a rental car, drove one up there.  And I asked about this guy, I think his name was Herman Prince.  Called him Punch.  And I said--well--'cuz, you know, I'm just asking them.  I couldn't remember his name.  If you had asked me his name the day before, I wouldn't have been able to remember.  I got up there I remembered his name and asked--said he was killed in some sort--he wasn't killed by the police.  Some sort of, I guess, maybe, some sort of activity; I forget details.  But, you know, just--and how it wasn't that different from what it had been, you know, that it was--this 30 years, almost 30 years to the day that I had been--I hadn't been, I mean, I hadn't--certainly hadn't been in Grenada, Mississippi in 30 years, you know.  Going back to the Civil Rights days, you know, we were told not to hitchhike.  You got to be very careful who picked you up, you know.  But I was in Grenada for a short period of time, and then I was taken down to Selma [Alabama], you know.  I traveled around a lot.  I don't know if I was making a particular contribution, but I did see a lot of things.  I was just learning, you know.  Just learning about myself, learning about what was happening, you know.  So I hitchhiked from Grenada down to Selma with a black family, you know.  And, of course, back in those days, you know, civil rights workers, everybody, you know, look out for you and stuff.  So it was an interesting experience.
Story_ID: 27893
Speaker 1: You, as a mathematician, I think, someone asked me, I think we were preparing for this interview, they says, "Well, what does this civil rights activity got to do with him being a math professor?"
Speaker 2: That's a good question.
Speaker 1: (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, it's just kind of that those were the times; that was the first thing.  Didn't matter kind of what you were, you know.  Marion Barry was a chemistry major.  We, one time, gave a grant to LeMoyne-Owen College [Memphis, Tennessee] and they were very--and Marion Barry is from Memphis, all right.  And he was an alumna--alumnus of the LeMoyne-Owen College, very beloved alumnus, you know.  And he was like, say, he had done his undergraduate degree.  He was a graduate student in chemistry before he got involved in the [Civil Rights] Movement.  So, I mean, you know, it's just, like, I'm sure people in these demonstrations in Turkey, they have other things that they are, but they are demonstrators, too.  And so, you know, I went back to math.  You know, a person you might say is a quintessential Civil Rights worker/mathematician is Bob Moses.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, whom I didn't know from those days.  But, I mean, he was an icon of the Civil Rights Movement.  I actually got to know Bob Moses through the Mathematical Association.  Florence Fasanelli knew him, and he founded the Algebra Project.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Algebra Project.  And Bob sees, I think, I read his book, you know, 'Radical Equations', and, you know, he sees this as the new Civil Rights, being to having access to math and science.  And the way the world is constructed now, you know, in terms of math and science, 'cuz it is so much involved in everything.  It's our way of understanding the world; that if you can't do math and science, you can't understand the world.  And if you can't understand the world around you, you're going to be at a disadvantage, 'cuz the world is going to do its thing, you know, and a person who is unaware of how the world works in various ways is going to be at a severe disadvantage.  You know, you don't have to want to necessarily be a mega millionaire to want to have some money in the bank, you know.  You know, the way in which math and science impact the world today, a person who's ignorant in them, you know, is just going to be, you know, just really at a severe disadvantage.  And, you know, so we taught a general--liberal arts mathematics course, and there's nothing in that course that you absolutely need.  The only thing you probably could probably make use of would be the financial part.  There's, you know, there's a chapter on finance, you know, revolving loans you might say; you know, compound interest, you know; things like that.  So, you know, which, I hate to say it, every time I went in to buy a car, I never took a calculator.  If it wasn't for the fact that on the paper it said, "Well, this is the interest rate, this is the payment," I wouldn't have--you know, that's kind of silly, you know.  And that puts me at a disadvantage compared to someone--my youngest son went to CarMax.  A friend of his said, you know, you get somebody there with the price.  His car was totaled recently.  You know, get an idea of what's a good price for this type of--of what kind of car you want.  He wanted a V-6 so on and so forth.  And he got a very good deal on a used, you know, a used car.  But he'd actually done his homework.  And, you know, that's what people need to do.  And you have to be educated to do that, you know.  And being ignorant, there's no value to being ignorant, you know.  You know, you used to say, (unclear).  You know, the little stereotypes.  You want to--you hide it in a book.  You know what I'm talking about.  That was the old stereotype, you know.  You want to hide something from certain people, hide it in a book, you know.
Story_ID: 27894
Speaker 1: If you can't read--now this is the thing I think kids don't realize.  There's a mathematician here who was associated with the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] exams, College Board Educational Testing Service.  He said, "There is a higher correlation between your verbal score on the SAT and your first year grade in calculus than there is between your math score and your first year grade in calculus."  And what this boils down to is, everything is reading.  Everything is reading.  Now, you know, math and science are very important.  But if you can, as you know I said Shirley Jackson [also a HistoryMaker] said, "If you can't read, you know, and you can't master the written word."  Okay.  If you look--now, we all love the Internet, right?  I don't see a lot of pictures on the Internet. I mean, you find music on the Internet.  But mostly what I see on the Internet is stuff to read, you know.  You go to Wikipedia, it's not little--nobody showing up no hand signal.  You got to read something.  Okay.  You know, most things--most information that we get, at least in my generation--I don't know about this future generation--it involves reading, you know.  know.  And people that can't read, you know, and it's something you need to get kids involved in early, you know, is reading.  I mean (unclear)--only children are going to do certain types of things, so I did a lot of reading as a child.  So I always liked to read.  And I got to the point that the longer the book, the better.  And I never read 'War and Peace', but I like to read long books; you know, kind of go away for a while and stuff like that.  But being able to read and being able to comprehend the information is the, I mean, that's really--that's what makes us human, to a very large extent.  You know, process your learning information.  Just watched this NOVA special.  Had to--actually had to record it 'cuz I'd--it came on late at night, three or four times, I couldn't stay up that late; had things to do the next morning.  There's one about Earth from Space, and what we're seeing with this, all these satellites, all these measurements that they had taken on how the Earth actually works.  (coughs).  Excuse me.  So Earth from Space is showing you all these different satellites and the measurements that they had taken, okay.  And they used pictures, you know.  They're showing these flows and, you know and different colors and stuff.  But somebody had to know something to do that, you know.  And somebody had to really be able to read.  And if there's one skill a person has to have, you know, is being able to read.  I mean, there's just no getting around that, you now.  I mean, there may come a time when, you know, you get your little web and computer and it might just right into your brain.  It hasn't got there yet.  We're not there yet.  And so, unless somebody going to give away information, and we don't see that happening, you got to go out there and get it, and you got to be able to read to get it, you know.  So I, you know, when your own children coming up, you try encourage them to read.  Now, you know, the boys--my daughter was easier to convince.  But the boys want to see "Transformers" all the time, be able to play games and stuff.  But--the--you know, like, you know, everybody--we all need to read, you know.  And the world--there was a mathematician--when we go to meetings, there's often talks about the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics.  That was a talk that had been given, and how math has crept into so many different areas.  So many problems that we're trying to access, we're trying to solve, involve mathematics.  We funded one woman at Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio] who was doing gait analysis, as it was called.  So if someone is wearing an explosive vest, they gonna walk different from someone who's not, you know.  That was kind of me.  Didn't, you know, didn't get all the way into it, but kind of got started into the analysis of that.  And, of course, these are the types that, I mean, the ways in which mathematics are used.  You now, we see it in the context of computers, so there were these issues that came up with this prism program, right.  Not prison, but prism.  You know, just came up in the news.  Well, it's computer science, but this is science and this is math, right.  But this is how the world runs.  And I like Google.  Everybody, you know, the people that founded Google used a mathematical algorithm to search, you know.  They're not thumbing with their fingers, you know, trying to see how this, you know.  Let's use some mathematics on this.  That's one of the reason their such a powerful search engine, that they use mathematics to develop the algorithm to do the searches, you know, despite what "Bing" might say.  Those "Bing" commercials, you now.  See those and stuff.  So, you know, it's sad to see that students don't take advantage of education.  No, it's not true; for instance, not like when our parents say, you know, if we walk 50 miles--you know, how Bill Cosby show, "I walked 50 miles barefoot each way," and stuff like that.  You know, that's not our experience.  But we did.  We've been a period, you know.  When we know how to do--you know, we went without, and we had privation, we had difficulties, you know, because of our race, and, you know, and other issues.  And it's unfortunate that so many young people act as if they can just blase their way through life.  It's that life doesn't work that way.  This is a very harsh and cruel world, you know.  And you see people who don't have a clue.  And a person that's clueless is not going to survive as well as somebody who pays attention.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 27895
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, you know.  Like, you don't even know how your name even gets into these pots, and you get called to do some of these things.  You know, I--you know, I had--like I said, I was never one to look back as much.  I want to say I'll leave it for somebody else to figure out if anybody care or anything.  You know, we all--we all are going to be gone someday, you know.  I don't think it's going to be anything that striking, you know.  I did--I was taught or came to believe that it is important for everybody to have a fair chance.  I think fairness is, you know, a rock, unassailable belief, that everybody should be treated fairly.  I want to be treated fairly.  I think other people should be treated fairly.  Even if it doesn't necessarily benefit me, you know.  That's not what fair is.  Fair doesn't mean I get to do--to have my way all the time, you know, or that everything benefits me.  You know, we had a--so I'll be interested in seeing people treated fairly.  If--I can't bring a non-minority student to my class and mistreat them and expect that a minority student to be treated well somewhere else.  That doesn't make--that's not right.  So, and I should treat everybody in my class fairly, you know, or if I'm involved in some activity, we should treat people fairly.  Now, I think--you know, and I don't want to ignore history.  I don't say that everybody started, you know, started equal--and Jesse Jackson, you know, talking about, you know, if you're going to pull yourself up by your bootstraps, you got to have boots, you know.  So, you know, he was a good one to turn a phrase, as you well know.  But, I've been--I've always or at least came to be interested in seeing people treated fairly, you know.  That was one of the reasons I wanted to find out what was happening in the South, because I wasn't from the South.  My mother [Amanda Lawyuna Bowman] was and was very upset.  You know, when she was, and it was me, she was really--she didn't play that.  She was very serious.  "No.  I don't want you to go South."  You know.  Nobody wants to lose a child.  And I was the only one.  So and like say, I was--when she had me, she was late in life when I was born, so she wasn't too keen on me going down--and I, you know, I don't think I was in a great danger, you know.  At least, I certainly wasn't hurt, you know, while I was down there.
Speaker 1: (unclear) tear-gassed and hit in the back by (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I was running.  I was definitely running, you know.  I went to Guyana. (unclear), you know.  This is when Burnham was in power.
Speaker 1: Forbes Burnham.
Speaker 2: Forbes Burnham, (unclear) was a big forest then, and so on and so forth.  But you know, I really see that I've always been--I always want to see people fairly.  You know, just, you know, if I can't do something, well then, let the person who can do it, let it be the best person.  But let it not be the person that we think is the best because of some inconsequential exterior thing.  So it shouldn't be your race, it shouldn't be income, you know.  But I wonder, for instance, you know, why is it that wealthy school districts always have pretty test scores, you know.  Now, I'm not saying that they're perfect, and they always say money can, you know, money is not the determining factor.  Well, I've never seen a wealthy school district give up money, you know.  And I mean, maybe it's parental involvement, you know, and so on and so forth.  I know on a military base, they have pretty good scores across the board, because everybody has to be involved.  So I know sometimes parents are not as involved as they should be.  There's lots of blame to go around.  But, you know, I do believe things should be fair.  And, you know--
Speaker 1: So you would see your legacy as that of making things (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, that was--well, then I was interested in doing that.  Now, I might not have done it, but that's what I was interested in doing.
Speaker 1: That's what you were trying to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's what I was trying to do.  And whether it's treat students fairly in the classroom or whether it's trying to have students in these other contexts treated fairly, you know.
Story_ID: 27896
Speaker 1: Is there a particular program or outcome of a program that you're the most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, as I've said, you know, since the MAA [Mathematical Association of America] is folks who are undergraduate--the undergraduate curriculum, the Undergraduate Research Program fits right into the MAA.  MAA wasn't into--wasn't really a pre-college institution.  So, you know, even though we did that, that wasn't essential to their mission.  Undergraduate Research is right down the MAA's alley.  And everybody is into undergraduate research.   You know, there's--everybody funds it.  The chemists, the geologist, you know, the physicists; you know, just any and by--you know, just any area of math and science; but especially science.  They're doing--and, of course, you know, all of us took labs when we were in high school and undergraduates.  It was very, very common.  And what has happened is that it spread, you know, out into the other fields, you know. So, the engineers, you know, they want to have undergraduate research.  Everybody wants to get these kids involved in math and science.  I've always felt, you know, that, for instance, there's difference between having rich individuals and having a rich country.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You know.  Without calling any names, sometimes, there're countries where there rich individuals and the country is poor.  America, I don't think, should be country that has only rich individuals.  I think we should be a wealthy country, 'cuz, you know, we have a lot of wealthy--well, wealthy resources.  But that means that it has to be spread around indifferently perhaps than it's being spread now.  Nothing wrong with somebody being rich, you know.  If they earn it legitimately, you know, they have a good idea, you know.  I mean, Bill Gates was a little predatory, you know, with Windows, but, you know, that was pretty much legitimate, how he got his money.  He certainly, he's doing something good with it, you know, now, to a larger extent.  But, so somebody getting rich, there's nothing wrong with that.  But if you getting rich is going to imply that nobody else can get rich or nobody else can have a decent standard of living, then there's something wrong with that, you know.  And that's kind of where I--kind of how I feel about things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27897
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--I haven't asked you about your family.  You told us a little bit about them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: So I have a wife and three kids.  All of them grown now.  The youngest is thirty-three [years old], is a boy; next boy is 36 now, be 37 this December; and my daughter is 39 now, be 40 in December.  My wife is a retired school teacher.  And also, for a period of time, prior to the re-administration, she was the English Language Content Specialist for the District of Columbia.  So she was in Essential Administration under--let me see, can I think of--this is, you know, several administration ago, and before this radical transformation was attempted under Mayor Fenty.  You remember, with [Michelle] Rhee.  And she was a mentor teacher in the Prince George County Public Schools as well; now she's retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you all meet in school?
Speaker 2: No.  We didn't meet at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  I met her--the first class I taught at Federal City College, her student was a student, and she had a Christmas party, 1970.  I could tell you the date.  And that's how I met her.  And we've been married forty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 27898
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean, you know, I'm certainly involved--I'm actually a deacon, an Ordained Deacon in the Catholic Church.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  Is there any--you have any feelings about some of the philosophical issues--
Speaker 2: Issues of the day?
Speaker 1: --yeah (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean--
Speaker 1: --between science and religion?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually, I think that a person knew--I mean, obviously, people are going to--most people will take their opinions and that's what colors how they view things.  And so a person could be a scientist and believe in God.  It could be a scientist and not believe in God, you know.  A person could be an atheist and be a scientist, or be an atheist and not be a scientist.  So, you know, I mean, I just think all those things are sort of independent of each other or we know we incorporate them as we see fit, you know, kind of individually.  I do think that fair play, like I say, again, is--I mean, I don't know--you know, it's religious or non-religious value.  I mean, I just think somebody who's not interested in fair play, I'm not as interested in, you know.  I don't really identify much with that type of person whatever their background.  I have found both the first--the executive director at the MAA [Mathematical Association of America], Tina Straley --I'm sorry.  Marcia Sward, who's now deceased.  Tina Straley and now the current Executive Director, Michael Pearson.  I do find them interested in things being fair, you know.  And what I've--what we've done here would not have been possible without the executive director's support, you know.
Story_ID: 27899
Speaker 1: One thing I didn't ask you about.  Your parents weren't at your graduation from Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], but how (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, here--just because I didn't graduate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I think that what happened was, 1970, I did go to the graduation at Howard, and I'm pretty sure everybody went.  You know, it's hard to remember, but I'm pretty sure everybody went.  Now, my mother did go to my Ph.D. graduation from [University of] Michigan.  My father [William Anthony Hawkins, Sr.] didn't go.  I don't really remember why, but my mother went and my wife went--no.  Yeah, yeah, because I was--
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever kind of reconcile herself to why you went down South?
Speaker 2: Oh, well.  I just think, you know, just, it was kind of a moot point.  I mean, you know, she was, you know, she was--my mother was--what I observed in my parents was, when my parents promised to do something, they did it, you know.  I mean, they would follow through and stuff, much more so than I've been a person to do.  And so, you know, it's just a generational thing.  It was--I mean, she didn't have any objection to me staying at home or anything like that when I was at Howard and stuff.  It was just that she didn't want me to go out there and get killed.  And she thought that by doing that, she would prevent me from going, and I just was always pretty headstrong, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.  I mean, I wouldn't have minded checking some of this with her if she was still alive, but in most cases, you know, we just didn't agree, and she was trying to pressure me and I just didn't--you know, I just refused to accept it that particular night.  Normally did what she said.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  Just not--just that one.  So that was amazing--that was just something that happened, you know.  And I've--came through unscathed.  So, you know, I mean, it was--and I didn't go back to the South.  I mean, I, you know, I just--I really wanted to see, and I came back and went back to school.  I had kept an interest in the [Civil Rights] Movement and things related to it and so on.  Still interested, you know, in a lot of ways.  You know, everybody filters information their own way.  So, you know some things are--some are rhetoric, I'm not impressed by; some I do find impressive.  I find action more impressive than rhetoric.  And I find the president [President Barack Obama] impressive because he acts.  Doesn't talk--doesn't talk as much.  Doesn't talk about doing stuff, he does it, you know.  I admire him, and, you know, think we're lucky to have him even though not everybody feels that way.  That's pretty obvious without me going into those people (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 27900
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, for those that would remember me, probably your family or my family, I guess fair-minded, you know.  Not perfect by any stretch, you know; lot of flaws, but, you know, try to be fair-minded.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can't ask for more than that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: All right.  Thank you.
