Story_ID: 18096
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm an interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Coy Melnick.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Everette Lynn Harris, E-V-E-R-E-T-T-E, L-Y-N-N, Harris.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 6-20-55 [June 20, 1955] in Flint, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a novelist and professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: October 15th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time--and you don't have to give your address, but--.
Speaker 2: In my home in Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 18097
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Fisher Island [Florida].
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no.
Story_ID: 18098
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Etta Harris, E-T-T-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say that's her maiden name?
Speaker 2: That's her married name.
Speaker 1: Married name, okay.  What was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 12th, 1932.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: I have no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in Arkansas.  I don't--.
Speaker 1: Okay, but it's in Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay.  Now what do you know about that side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Probably just only to my grandmother, you know.  She was born Bessie Allen (ph.)  in Arkansas.  I never knew my, my, my grandfather or my great-great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your grandmother ever tell you stories about you growing up there or what life was like when she was coming up?
Speaker 2: No, I think that they grew up in, I guess, what--the country, you know.  I know my grandmother's mother died shortly after her birth and she was basically raised by older brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do they have any stories passed down through the family about where the family was when slavery ended or during reconstruction or any of those kind of stories?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well did your mother talk about growing up in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, I know they picked cotton.  You know, it's--you know, went to school.  I think the family must have moved at some point to Little Rock [Arkansas] because that's where my mom was educated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This says she went to high school in Little Rock--Dunbar, right?
Speaker 2: She went [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was she able to go on to higher education at all?
Speaker 2: She did a little junior college.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us what was your mother like and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, she, she was a factory worker, you know.  She's done all kinds of jobs.  I remember when I was a little boy she worked in school cafeteria.  I know she did domestic work at some points in her life.  But for the most part, she worked in a, a factory [American Telephone &Telegraph Company], teletype in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what was her personality like?
Speaker 2: My mom's very, you know, reserved--very kind woman.  Never really heard her ever say a bad word about anyone, very humble.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, there any, any story about any of the other relatives on your mother's side of the family that you remember, or any--?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a close-knit family, you know.  She had brothers, and she had a sister.  My grandmother remarried and so it was her stepfather who had children of his own, and they were brought into the family.  And, you know, my mother's sister who was actually her stepsister is, is her closest confidant and friend, you know, even to this day.
Story_ID: 18099
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  Can you give me his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I know very little about my father.  My father was killed.  When I met my father one time in my life.  So, his name was James Jeter, and it's spelled J-E-T-E-R.  And I do know that he was born in Union, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story at all that your mother [Etta Harris] tells about how they met?
Speaker 2: They met in a department store.  My mom worked as elevator lady or girl or whatever.  My mom went to Flint, Michigan, after she graduated from [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And, she met my father there.
Speaker 1: Okay, Flint was big auto town with a lot of, you know, big plants and--least it used to be, you know, 'cause it's famous now for not having them anymore.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But then it was booming, right, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of people, you know, left the South, I'm sure, and went, you know, to Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your father working in the auto plant somewhere?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I think he was.  I think he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did know his family were educators.  But that's basically it in terms of my knowledge of him.
Speaker 1: Okay, his family were educators, but he himself was not?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Well, what did his other family members do?
Speaker 2: I knew very little about their family, know very little.  Like I said he--I met him when I was around thirteen or fourteen, and he was killed the next year in a car wreck, so--.
Story_ID: 18100
Speaker 1: You were born in Flint [Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And--but you didn't grow up in Flint.
Speaker 2: No, I moved to Little Rock [Arkansas] when I was around three or four years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what are your earliest childhood memories in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: For some reason I just remember Little Rock as being, for lack of a better word, depressing.  We lived in a all black neighborhood, you know, went to all black, you know, schools up until, you know, eighth grade.  It was not a middle class neighborhood, but it wasn't a project either.  It wasn't welfare.  It was just a bunch of working class families.  You know, just regular houses--nothing extravagant.
Speaker 1: Mostly frame houses?
Speaker 2: Yes, mostly frame houses.  I remember the school.  You know, I went to [John Edward] Bush Elementary [School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  It was a big, old school with a graveyard behind it and a graveyard on the side of it.  I remember that one of the graveyards was for black people and one was for white--very near the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went there a whole eight years?
Speaker 2: I went there for six years.
Speaker 1: Six years and then to junior high?
Speaker 2: Then I went to junior high.
Story_ID: 18101
Speaker 1: Who all was in your household?  Was your--I know your--did your grandmother [Bessie Allen] live with you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You have brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  I have three, I have three sisters.  My mom [Etta Harris] had remarried, and my stepfather who I thought was my real father was there until maybe seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what was your stepfather's name?
Speaker 2: Ben.
Speaker 1: Okay, Ben Harris?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now it's much--there's been much publicized that you didn't really get along that well with him or he didn't--you know, there was a lot of tension with him.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 18102
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, the sights, I guess, would just be of the neighborhood [in Little Rock, Arkansas], you know--streets, kids playing ball in the street, cars.  We lived on a relatively busy street.  For me there was always a lot of arguing, if you will, you know.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: In the household or in the streets too?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In the household, the streets.  Not necessarily the streets, but more in the household.  The sounds, I mean, the smells--my mom [Etta Harris] cooking, you know.  Kind of Ivory Snow--Ivory soap kind of existence, if you will, you know.  I remember a treat was popcorn that was cooked in a skillet, you know, with grease and what have you.  And I remember my grandmother's [Bessie Allen] house always smelled of food 'cause she was a good cook.
Speaker 1: Did she live close by?
Speaker 2: She lived about a block and a half.  So, Sunday dinners were always usually there.
Speaker 1: Okay, any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Music, you know, Motown.  I'm sitting here trying to remember, and even though I think I have a good memory, I just don't really remember a lot of it or, or chose not to remember a lot of it.
Story_ID: 18103
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah--Metropolitan Baptist Church [Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The minister was Reverend Blathers [ph. UNABLE TO VERIFY].  And it was an old church.  And they built a new one maybe before I was in the sixth grade.  But it was a cornerstone in the community in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: It was a pretty good-sized Baptist church then?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Was it the biggest one in Little Rock--,
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in the black community?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No, okay.  But one of the important ones.
Speaker 2: Well, it was important to me, you know.  It was important to our community.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you involved in choir or, or any of the activities in church?
Speaker 2: No--Vacation Bible School, made me the junior usher board, you know, but, no, not in the choir or anything.
Story_ID: 18104
Speaker 1: You say there's a lot, there's a lot of arguing around the house.  What were the, what were the arguments about?
Speaker 2: You know, I have no idea.  I just, just know I was, I was glad when he left, you know.
Speaker 1: Now what did your stepfather [Ben Harris] do for a living?
Speaker 2: He had a lot of odd jobs.  He was a painter, he was a truck driver, lot of odd jobs.  He, he didn't keep a job for long.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you think his kind, his personality kind of spilled over into other things and so he didn't--?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a drinker, and his personality would change when he dranked, sometimes for the good and sometimes for not so good.
Speaker 1: That's interesting 'cause most people when they talk about drinkers, they talk about them changing for the worst all the time.  He actually can go get--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 18105
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a little boy.  What were you interested in and what kind of things did you do?
Speaker 2: I loved to read.  School [John Edward Bush Elementary School, Little Rock, Arkansas] was important to me.  It was a place of refuge for a lot of, a lot of time.  I looked forward to going to school.  A smart alec, you know--thought I knew everything.  But I also loved sports.  But I was too small to really participate in sports.  I was a real skinny kid.  So, I didn't get to participate in organized sports.  But I did used to like to play, you know, street football.  I used to also, you know, could--probably could have tumbled well if I had been, you know, given instruction.  It was a part of, of me that when I couldn't play sports or something that I wanted to be involved.  So I wanted to be a cheerleader, but there were no boy cheerleaders, so that wasn't something that I was able to pursue until later in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you say--so there's no, no recreation center around there or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, no it was--what was it--the Dunbar Community Center [sic, Dunbar Recreation Center, Little Rock, Arkansas], which was quite a ways in distance.  But I do remember participating at some point in little league, you know, baseball.  I didn't really like baseball, still don't.  Kick ball and dodge ball and, and things like that where we played in the street, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: I used to read this lady, and I don't--can't remember any of the titles of her books Lois Lenski.  I used to always--I don't know why.  She wrote about pilgrims and, you know, I don't know why I found that so fascinating.  But, you know, I remember never really reading any black authors until I read, you know, like James Baldwin and Maya Angelou.
Speaker 1: How, how old were you when you read James Baldwin and Maya Angelou?
Speaker 2: Probably twelve or thirteen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Now did you like television and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked television a lot.
Speaker 1: What were your favorite shows?
Speaker 2: 'I Love Lucy',  'Andy Griffith',  you know, 'Leave It to Beaver', 'Hazel', '[The] Ed Sullivan [Show]', you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any favorite musicians in those days?
Speaker 2: Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye, the Supremes.
Speaker 1: Because you were saying the Motown sound was a big thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because that would probably--I guess you had to have been--oh, yeah, you'd been about four or five, five or six when they started really coming out strong, I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 18106
Speaker 1: You were born right after the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision, Brown vs. the Board [of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954] decision, just as they--you were little when they started desegregating [Little Rock] Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the upheaval about that?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I remember my mom [Etta Harris] once telling me that we came back to Arkansas around that time.  And I don't remember any of it.  But for some reason it had an impact in my life in the fact that I should have gone to Central when I was in high school, and I didn't.  I refused to go to Central--partly because of that.  I lived in walking distance of Central when I was in high school.  I always hated Central.  Never been inside the halls of Central High School, even though that was the time when I was in high school that was the high school because they had closed down the black high school.  So that's where I was supposed to go to school, but I didn't.
Speaker 1: You just refused to go.
Speaker 2: I just--they had a thing called freedom of choice.  If you were a minority, you could go to any school that was not black.  And so I went to [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.'] Hall High School [Little Rock, Arkansas], which was in the affluent white neighborhood.
Speaker 1: It's called Hall, H-A-L-L?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you--did, did you know anybody that had relatives who went to Central during that time period, during the time period of integration that, that told stories to you or why did you have such a negative feeling about it?
Speaker 2: Because I thought it was a bad reflection on the state.  I had seen the pictures, you know, seen the stuff in the history books.  So I just thought it was really a bad image for the state and for the city.
Story_ID: 18107
Speaker 1: Tell us about grade school.  Now, you went to [John Edward] Bush Elementary School [Little Rock, Arkansas], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: You said you liked school a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I loved school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were there any particular teachers that you remember that were helpful to you, you know?
Speaker 2: Miss Gant, she was my third grade teacher.  I remember she was really beautiful and she encouraged me in reading and always thought I was an excellent student.  She was also the teacher I remember the day [U.S.] President [John F.] Kennedy was shot being really upset, you know, and us getting out of school.  And I remember that day very vividly.
Speaker 1: Yes, 1963, so you'd have been eight years old in third grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Anybody else in grade school?
Speaker 2: All, all of my teachers.  I liked all of them.  Miss Wilson was my first grade teacher.  Miss Burns was my second grade teacher, and Miss Rouse fourth grade.  Miss Rouse was tough, but she was good and fair.  It was in during the times of corporal punishment, if you will.  I think Ms. Broadnix I had for the fifth grade.  Really wouldn't say I didn't like her, but she, she was the one I remember the least about.  And Miss Mansker who was my sixth grade teacher, who really encouraged me.
Story_ID: 18108
Speaker 1: What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high, I started at [John Robert 'J.R.'] Booker Junior High [later Booker Arts Magnet School, Little Rock, Arkansas], which was right across the street from the [John Edward] Bush Elementary [School, Little Rock, Arkansas], but I left Booker in the eighth grade and went to West Side Junior High [Little Rock, Arkansas], which was ironically very close to [Little Rock] Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  It was the first integrated school that I went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how was that being in an integrated environment for the first time?  Was that--did you--was that a dramatic difference for you?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  White people didn't hold any great mystery for me, you know.  I just looked at them as people.  So it wasn't any different, you know.  I got along very easily with my white classmates.
Speaker 1: Now was--was Little Rock when you grew up, was it--I've heard it said by others I've interviewed that Little Rock was fairly progressive city for the South, I mean even before the Central--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't remember any instances of out-and-out racism as a little boy.  I remember riding on the back of the bus because I wanted to, not because I had to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of kids get on the back of the bus, so--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I remember being able to go freely, you know, downtown into department stores and movie theatres.  I don't remember any segregation.
Speaker 1: Did you have to sit in the balcony or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I think I'd sit in the balcony, again, because I wanted to, not because I had to.  You know, I don't know if it's something that's passed down that you just naturally did that, but I don't, you know, I don't ever be, recall being told to do something because I was black.
Speaker 1: Well, I know a lot of kids ride on the back of the bus because it's the--puts the furthest difference between them and the bus driver.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you can do whatever you want on the back.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Movie theatre, same thing--go to the balcony.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's no supervision.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So that would--it would basically to try to--you say you used to clown a lot in school and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I could be very mischievous, you know.  It was my way of making up for my, my size, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were real little?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You appear to be an average-size person today, but in those days you were really small.
Speaker 2: Really small, the--real thin, you know.
Speaker 1: Can, can you tell us any stories of what you might do in class to--?
Speaker 2: I know that I used to--I'm trying to think what I would get in trouble for.  I remember probably just talking too much.  I remember I used to could recite all of 'Charlie Brown's Christmas' [sic, 'A Charlie Brown Christmas'].  And when I would get put out of classroom, I would keep talking and get into even more trouble.  Yeah, I would--I was always told I talk too much, too smart for my own, you know, good kind of thing because I was kind of flippant, you know.  Pretty much said what was on my mind when out of the earshots of adults.  But I was also very respectful of people.  I was always a "Yes sir, Yes ma'am" kind of guy to black people and to white people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you weren't really a big troublemaker in school--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no.
Speaker 1: --but you were somebody that, you know, probably talked too much.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I liked--it's hard for me to believe, but I liked to laugh a lot.  You know, I, you know, I do remember laughing a lot--more so when I was away from home than when I was at home.
Story_ID: 18109
Speaker 1: So home was still like a lot of tension at home.
Speaker 2: Yeah, home was not really a good place for me.
Speaker 1: Did your parents [mother Etta Harris and stepfather Ben Harris] argue a lot or--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My parents argued a lot, but, you know, it was both--it was also a place though that I loved being because my mom was there.  And I, you know, I love my mom to death.  And she was always in so many ways my protector.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was--and once again it's been well-publicized, at least those that read about you, if they read, they read anything about you at all, they know that you had a lot of tension with your stepfather.  And what was the, what was the source of all this tension?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I became older and learned more of the history, I learned that he and my mom had dated in high school.  And when she graduated from high school she went to Michigan and he wanted to marry her then right out of high school, and she wouldn't, you know.  And so she went to Michigan and when she came back she had me with her.  And so I'm sure that had a lot to do with the way he treated me.
Speaker 1: So that kind of put you--it made you a target, I guess, in some ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I didn't--but I didn't know.  As far as I knew I--he was my father.  He was the only father that I ever knew.
Speaker 1: So kind of territorial parenting going on or something.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, most definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't, you didn't know he wasn't your father the whole time until when?
Speaker 2: Till I was about thirteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember how, how you found out?
Speaker 2: I found out from finding my birth certificate, looking for my birth certificate.  After he had beat me one time a babysitter who was a family friend, Jean, had witnessed the beating and just couldn't believe that any father would--treated his son that way and planted the idea in my head that maybe he wasn't my father.  So it was only one way to find out and that was to find the birth certificates.  And so I knew for years that--no one knew that I knew--but it was a great source of relief.  It seemed like nothing he did after that really ever bothered me again.  The beatings didn't stop, but I just had this protective shield around me because I knew he wasn't my father.
Story_ID: 18110
Speaker 1: You said that after about the age of thirteen you knew your, your stepfather [Ben Harris] was not your father and that made things easier to deal with on some level 'cause you didn't have that, you didn't have the same emotional attachment to him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, most definitely.  That was a, a reason not to love him, you know, like you thought a, a son should love his father.  And to know that, you know, I understand why he treated me the way that he did.
Speaker 1: Did you think you loved your father [James Jeter] before you found out?
Speaker 2: I thought I did.  I tried, yeah.  But, you know, he was very abusive toward me and toward my mom [Etta Harris], you know, who was the most important person in my life.  And so there were times when I hated him as well.  I think to this day, you know, I have, don't have strong feelings toward many people as I do, you know, toward him.
Speaker 1: And did he treat your sisters--?
Speaker 2: He treated them wonderfully, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they never had any the kind of problems you had with him.
Speaker 2: No.  I mean they got whippings but, you know, when they did things, you know.  I got whippings for, you know, no reason.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said you met your real father as a teenager, too, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you said you met him?
Speaker 2: Probably about thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, about the same time that you found out.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, well, tell us about that and how did you come to find, you know, to meet your real father.
Speaker 2: Well, I used to go to Michigan in the summers, and we have a lot of family in Michigan in Flint.  And just one summer I was staying with some cousins, the Allens, and I remember it's like it was yesterday.  I was in the kitchen washing dishes or doing something, and I looked out the window and I saw my cousin who I call my uncle because he was, he, he's my mother's cousins, but we called them uncles because they were older and you know.  And Uncle Clarence, I saw him get out of the car with someone, which was not unusual because he worked in the automotive industry and he fixed cars at his house.  He had, you know, somewhat of a little makeshift garage if you will.  And so it was not unusual for people to come by.  But this day it just seemed different to me.  You know, I looked out the car, out the window he had a guy with him.  And I just knew immediately that was my father.  It was no announcement that Uncle Clarence is going to introduce me to my father, you know, 'cause my mom didn't know I knew.  And I saw him coming across the street.  And when they came into the house I kind of froze.  And then I heard my uncle call for me.  And it was no way for me to get out of the house without them seeing me because I became frightened.
Speaker 1: So you actually wanted to get out of there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to get out.  And my uncle called me and he said, "I got somebody I want you to meet."  And he said, "This is James."  And he said, "Do you know who I am?"  And I said, "Yes sir," and darted out the door, yeah, and--.
Speaker 1: That was it?  That was--?
Speaker 2: He came back the next day and took me out to his house and introduced me to his, his kids and his wife, and that was it.  And then maybe the next April he was killed in a car wreck.
Speaker 1: What kind of impression did he make on you?
Speaker 2: It's hard for me to say.  I don't--I wish I could remember what he looked like.  He--I remember he was, he was handsome to me, you know--fair skinned and a good grade of hair.  He must have been about thirty years old.  And, that's all I really remember about him.
Story_ID: 18111
Speaker 1: You used to go to Flint [Michigan] every summer?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: You'd spend like a long period of time in Flint?
Speaker 2: The whole summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's another venue of growing up.  It really is a--.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Well, what was, what was the difference between Flint and Little Rock [Arkansas] that you could--?
Speaker 2: Flint seemed so much progressive, more progressive, like a big city whereas, Little Rock, even though it's a--they're both probably similar in size, you know.  Flint seemed blacker, you know--that northern feel where everybody had a basement.  And there were lots of boys, lots of male cousins.  And interesting enough I always wanted brothers and so that's one reason that I, you know, got to go.  There were some advantages of being the only boy, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, anything else about Flint was different?
Speaker 2: I remember, you know, swimming, you know, the high schools had pools in them.
Speaker 1: Had better facilities?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that--we didn't have that in Little Rock.  I just looked forward to going.  I remember, you know, catching the bus.  And of all the strangest things I remember Paducah, Kentucky, you know.  The bus would stop in Paducah.  I don't know why I remember Paducah.  Maybe it was the name.  But it was always a great adventure for me to get on that Greyhound bus and, and go to Michigan every summer by myself.
Story_ID: 18112
Speaker 1: Now, in those days did you have to, did you have to sit in the back of the bus in the South before you got to the North or anything?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no.
Speaker 1: So it--none of that was going on when you were coming up as a kid--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, no.
Speaker 1: --that you--okay.
Speaker 2: I missed everything and I--and in a lot of sense I came along when all the fight for integration had been fought.  I missed the, you know, Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: Well, when you were a little kid, though, people were still like, they were doing Freedom Rides on the buses.
Speaker 2: But it was--.
Speaker 1: You probably didn't realize it.
Speaker 2: Unbeknownst to me, you know.  What did I know?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That's when they were doing it, '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: I remember the Detroit [Michigan] riots [1967-1968] just from watching them on TV.  I remember the Vietnam War from TV.  All of my--you know, I never, you know, marched or, you know, like I said, was told that I couldn't do something 'cause I was black.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you never had any direct problems yourself with any of that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 18113
Speaker 1: Did you have any teachers in middle school [John Robert 'J.R.' Booker Junior High School, later Booker Arts Magnet School, Little Rock, Arkansas] that really were important?
Speaker 2: I guess Miss Adams, you know.  She was the journalism teacher, and she put me on the newspaper staff despite the fact that I had horrible grades.  And I had horrible grades in junior high because I didn't apply myself.  I was too busy being, you know--in elementary school [John Edward Bush Elementary School, Little Rock, Arkansas] I made great grades, but in junior high, you know, I was not a bad kid, I was just a busybody, you know.  And so I skipped school a lot, you know--you know, trying to make an impression on my classmates.  Since I couldn't do it with physical prowess, you know, I did it with being funny and smart.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you'd actually skip, skip classes and I mean--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hmm, yeah.  'Cause my mom [Etta Harris] went to work at 6:30 in the morning and she got home around the same time, so she never knew, you know, what we did during the day.  My sisters, who all went to different schools, we were never in the same school.  We were all three years apart, so after elementary school we were never in the same grade, you know, same school.
Speaker 1: So they couldn't tell, tell her that you weren't there.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened?  Did that behavior--I guess that behavior changed at a certain point.
Speaker 2: It changed in the, the ninth grade.  And I got suspended from school for hitting the teacher with a book in the eighth grade.  And I hit him with the book because he had--embarrassed me because I was reading a comic book.  And he told me to put the comic book up, and I told him when I finished.  And he came and grabbed the comic book, and I took the math book and threw it at him and, and hit him.  So I was suspended.  But I couldn't tell my mom 'cause that meant she would have to miss work.  And she was a hourly person, and that was money from, you know--it would have been a very, very big deal.  And so I just stayed at home for like forty-four days, and--.
Speaker 1: You were suspended for forty-four days.
Speaker 2: I was suspended for three, but you could not get back into school until your mother brought me.  So, since I, she didn't know, who was going to take me back to school, you know?
Speaker 1: So nobody--I mean she didn't know that you were suspended.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And so for forty-four days went by without you going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And nobody in your family suspected you were--.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I just acted like I was going to school.  And I would sit home and watch soap operas, you know, and stay out of eyesight of any adults in the neighborhood who might see me and tell my mom.  So when I went back, when she finally found out, 'cause they sent a truant officer to her job, and she took me back to school, the principal, his name was Weldon Faulk, a white man, said, "We don't really know what to do with him.  He scored so high on aptitude test and standardized test, but yet he won't apply himself," you know.  And, you know, he said something to the effect, "This kid is so smart, but he just won't, you know, do the work."  And he said to me--he said to--my mom said to him, "Do you know how it is to raise, you know, four kids by yourself?"  And he said, "No, I don't."  And my mother started to cry.  And I saw what my being a badass was really doing to her.  And so he said to me, "See, look at what you're doing.  You're making your mother cry.  What are you going to do with yourself?"  And I said, "Well, I'm going to go to college."  And he said, "Not with these grades you're not."  He said, "There's good and bad news, basically."  He said, "The good news is is that no college will see these grades," 'cause I was like in the eighth grade.  He says, "But if you keep this up, you'll never get into college."  And I was going into the ninth grade.  And I realized then that I had to, to change 'cause I, I did know that I was gonna go to college.  I basically felt like I had learned everything I needed to know in the sixth grade.  And so that was a changing point in my life.  Interestingly enough, in the ninth grade, because of my grades I was in all remedial classes.  But once I had turned the motors on and started to, to do the work, I was far ahead of any of the kids in remedial classes.  So, the teachers would put me in the back of the room and teach me what they were learning in the regular classes.  And that's kind of when I turned it around.  And still in high school [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] I was like a B student, but I could have been, you know, better.  I know that I could make, could have made straight As had I, you know, applied myself.  But there was a big change from the junior high grades into high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there still a lot of tension at home with your stepfather [Ben Harris]?
Speaker 2: No, he was gone by then.
Story_ID: 18114
Speaker 1: How did he leave [stepfather, Ben Harris]?
Speaker 2: He left.  I mean--the last time I really remember seeing him was really kind of traumatic because he pulled a knife on my mom [Etta Harris] when she was in the backyard hanging up clothes.  And I just remember her screaming and, you know, neighbors coming out and him running away basically.  And she would separate from him a lot, but this time--I think this time it really sunk in and, and she never let him back, you know.  That was always my big fear that when she would separate with him that it was--she was always going to let him come back.
Speaker 1: So this time he just never came back.
Speaker 2: No.  He came back, but--to Little Rock [Arkansas], but I always avoided him.  He moved to California.  Interestingly enough, after I graduated from college [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas] he called me once, and all that fear came back.  He was coming through Dallas [Texas], and I was living in Dallas.  And I remember taking the phone off the hook, you know, and not answering it that whole weekend.
Speaker 1: He called--what did he call you about?
Speaker 2: He just called to say "Hi" to his, his son.  You know, he always called me Mike, you know, because he thought Lynn was a feminine name.  And it was just that, that same chill.  Here I was an adult, but I didn't want to see him.
Speaker 1: That's, that's--it's interesting how people perceive their, themselves or how they think other people perceive them as far as--.
Speaker 2: Most definitely.
Story_ID: 18115
Speaker 1: You were a little bit different growing up from most people and stuff.  You had different sexual orientation.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And when did you find that out?
Speaker 2: I always knew, you know.  But I didn't know what it was.  You know, I didn't know what it meant.  I didn't know how it was going to affect my life, you know.  I liked girls and--but I knew that the boys were much more interesting to me.  I've always got along with women and girls so that wasn't new.  But I think my relationship with my father [James Jeter] always made my relationship with boys and men different.  Now, my cousins--you know, I've had a lot of uncles and male cousins who I always got along with and never had any kind of conflicts, you know, because my, my mother's [Etta Harris] brother and my mother's sister, all of them had boys.  And we did a lot of stuff as a family, as a big family.  So, you know, I loved my cousins and, you know, and vice versa, you know.  So--but it was, it was kind of my big secret, you know.  And it got me in a lot of trouble, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now those were the days--and it wasn't any, wasn't much understanding for anything like that in the--,
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --'50s [1950s] or s'60s  [1960s], especially not in the black community.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it just wasn't--I mean it's a--so, what--did you know anybody else had the same orientation as you?
Speaker 2: No.  Interestingly enough, when I was in maybe the tenth grade I started an affair, if you will, with a older, married man, and--.
Speaker 1: How much older was this guy?
Speaker 2: He was probably early thirties.  And when I decided to call it off, you know, he told my mother, you know.  Was very traumatic, and he started basically to stalk me for most of my tenth grade year.
Speaker 1: So you were like fifteen, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So he tells your mother.  Now, well, how did your mother react to that?
Speaker 2: Not good, not good.  She--I came home that day that he had told her, and she was on the porch just rocking.  And when I spoke to her she didn't speak to me, which was very unusual.  And I went in the house and asked my sisters what was wrong with her.  And they told me some man had come and told her that he was in love with me.  And my uncles, I remember them coming and, you know, saying, "What did he do to you?  Did," you know, "did he force you to do something?"  And he didn't force me to do anything that I didn't want to do, but they had a Peace Bond put out on him where he couldn't come within a certain, you know, feet of me.  So he would just always be where I could see him.  I was aware that he was around.  When I think back, I was really kind of scary, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and this--I guess your parents and your uncles, 'cause this guy's thirty years old.  He's really, even though, you know, you say that whatever he did, it, you, you consented to, but, I mean, still it was wrong for him to do this.  I mean, do you look back, do you think it was wrong for him to do whatever he did?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I mean it was wrong for him to stalk me, you know.
Speaker 1: I mean if he was going after a fifteen-year-old girl, it would be, or having relations with a fifteen-year-old girl, it would be, it would be illegal.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I never, never viewed it that way.  I never viewed it that way.  And there were other kind of affairs, if you will, with, with football players in high school who, you know, wanted it, you know, definitely kept a secret.  So a part of me knew that I wasn't the only one 'cause a lot of times I remember thinking that I was the only one in the world that this had happened to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I've raised an interesting issue, too, in high school [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  Now I used to hear football players doing--you know, and I used to wonder, "Well, this guy, he can't be gay because he's a football player."  But if he is, you know, and people would say, "Oh no, that guy's not gay, he's just a football player who was engaging in, you know, in homosexual activity."  But how can you, I mean, if you are engaging in those activities, aren't you gay or, or--?
Speaker 2: I think young boys tend to experiment more than young girls.  I think sometimes, you know, guys do it when they're in high school and, and never, ever do it again, you know, for whatever reason.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  'Cause I always wondered people--I'm thinking when, you know--.  Anyway, so were there a lot of football players that, that really--?
Speaker 2: It was, you know, I found myself--that was the kind of guys I found myself attracted to.  So--but they were always older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so now did this affair with this thirty year old man, did this like cause, like the community like to know about this, or did--was it still kind of like--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) It's--not a lot of people knew about it, you know.  I remember I was working at Baskin and Robbins [sic, Baskin-Robbins] and we had to, you know, I had to tell the manager and stuff because he--what he would do is he would come and park in the parking lot, you know, and he was just kind of creepy, you know, for the most part.  And I, you know, I just lost interest in him.  I mean he wanted, he wanted me to, you know, to move out, you know, and get me an apartment--that whole kind of thing.  And I, I was kind of--my interests were swaying back to girls, because I knew that if some of the things that I wanted to accomplish, people couldn't know about that.  You know, I wanted to be student leader.  I wanted to win, you know, popularity contests.  And that was just not going to happen if people knew that about me.  And all of the men or gay men that I knew then were real feminine.  We had about three gay guys in my school, and they were all very feminine, and--.
Speaker 1: So they were like op-, they were pretty much out--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, openly gay.  And I know I didn't want to be like that, you know.  I, you know, still to this day, I'm very uncomfortable around effeminate men.  And I know that's because I thought that indicated how I was supposed to be and I was never really comfortable being effeminate.  Even though [stepfather] Ben [Harris] used to call me a sissy all the time and said I act like a girl, I knew that I didn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's just part of the abusive relationship.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Now did you actually like girls in the same way that--I mean, would you consider yourself bisexual or, or--?
Speaker 2: I don't consider myself bisexual now.  But my first sexual experience was with a girl, you know.  And I had sexual experiences with girls.  And they were pleasant, but they were not like, like with guys.
Speaker 1: Okay, so to add I--so I guess this would probably add more confusion to being an adolescent than, than most people have, which is a very confusing time anyway and filled with a lot of tension and stuff.  So I mean how'd  you get through?
Speaker 2: I don't know how I got through, because there were, there were a lot of times I set myself up for, you know, disappointment because never was any of these relationships going to end up with, you know, me being in love, which is what, what was happening for a lot of my classmates, you know, with boyfriends and girlfriends.  And a lot of these people were doing it, were doing it secretively.  So, you know, you couldn't talk about it.  And, you know, there were some incidents where, you know, my life was in, you know, at risk, in danger.  Because a lot of these people reacted differently once the act itself was, was complete. You know, 'cause these were older, married men or men, you know, within the community who had, you know, a lot to, to lose more so than me.
Speaker 1: That raises a--yeah, it's a dangerous--men are more dangerous than women anyway.  I think, I think stats have shown that, so--,
Speaker 2: Yeah, most definitely.
Speaker 1: --I think all kinds of men, whether they're heterosexual or homosexual, they're more dangerous than women are, so and more--they tend to be more adventurous sexually, too, than women are.  We could say that, too, I guess.
Speaker 2: So, you know, it was, it was always a, something that got in the way of me having a childhood free of drama, you know.  It was always in the back of my mind that this was going to stop me from reaching my full potential.
Speaker 1: So you went from having this abusive relationship to, with a father, he leaves and then adolescence, here's the onset of adolescence, and here you're in another troubled kind of a situation.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, is there--you said you were, you were threatened a couple times by, by--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  He--actually beat up by a guy, you know, really bad, you know, after having sex with me.
Speaker 1: So, these are like older guys when stuff that--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a girl fall in love with you that you've dated?
Speaker 2: I, you know, dated a lot in high school and a lot of the girls that I really liked, but they were always kind of be unattainable--the cheerleader, the only black cheerleader, or--.  And interestingly enough, when I went to high school white girls found me, I would say, attractive or wanted to be my friends.  And it was never anything, you know, sexual.  They just, just liked me.  Girls always have liked me.  And therefore it was very easy to, you know, to be seen with, with young women because they liked me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, you know, think the first time I just really felt the butterflies about a girl was a young lady names Rose Crader, whose father was a coach.  And she was the only seventh grade girl on the cheerleader, and she was beautiful and popular.  And we were friends.  We remain friends to this day.
Story_ID: 18116
Speaker 1: Then I felt like the obstacle would be more of the one of social class because she was from a middle class family.  Most of these girls were from middle class families.  So, they became unattainable for me simply because, you know, where they were from and where I was from.  But by the time I got to high school [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] I was pretending, you know, not only to be straight, but pretending also to be middle class, because I didn't go to school in my neighborhood, so nobody knew what my house looked like.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is a--so you had two things that you had to keep, keep straight now--who you are, I mean economically and--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because of the high school I went to was a very affluent high school in terms of where the students came from.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is Hall High School, right?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 2: And were there very many black students in school with you?
Speaker 1: No, no, less than 5 percent.  And all the blacks that went to school there came from affluent black families.
Story_ID: 18117
Speaker 1: Your grades are getting better you said in high school [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas].  You said you were at least making Bs, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, did, did you focus on writing at all?
Speaker 2: No, because, interestingly enough, at Hall--I talk about never really facing racism--well, at Hall, I did because the journalism teacher was a racist.  And I was--took journalism in the sophomore year, but I was never allowed to be on the newspaper, the yearbook staff.  It was always all white.  And, interestingly enough, I ran into a teacher who remembered that time and, you know, confirmed, you know, my thoughts that, you know, she was a racist.
Story_ID: 18118
Speaker 1: You're at [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.'] Hall High School [Little Rock, Arkansas], and you said this teacher, you discovered this teacher was, in retrospect she probably was a racist--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, but she was really, really slick with it.  She was the kind that would smile in your face and, and, you know, and, you know, stab you in the back, so to speak.
Story_ID: 18119
Speaker 1: When I was at West Side [Junior High, Little Rock, Arkansas], you know, despite those bad grades I was on the newspaper staff.  And the newspaper staff was always the smart kids, but you--they--even the smart kids had to, you know, submit a writing sample.  And, I submitted something and was, was chosen.  I think part of my abusive childhood and a part of my being gay allowed me to be, you know, some ways more creative.  I felt I could--I had to have some way of voicing how I really felt.  And even though I didn't write about those kinds of things, I was almost taking a picture of my life then and knowing that one day that hopefully it would get better.  I knew it wouldn't get better in Little Rock [Arkansas].  I knew eventually I would have to leave.  I always knew that.  But, it allowed me to, to dream of, of, of being successful so that I could, in fact, get out of Little Rock.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Little Rock is a--do you think it's true when people say the South is more conservative than the North or--?
Speaker 1: Well, I've lived in New York City [New York] so I would definitely say that, you know--.
Speaker 2: Well, New York City was a liberal place--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah, but I've lived, you know, other places.  But I'm back in Arkansas now teaching school, so I think it's changed.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  But at that time you knew you had to get out of there, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 18120
Speaker 1: Now did you run for any class offices or anything like that in high school [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], or--?
Speaker 2: I did, and I lost.  Interestingly enough, it's one of those painful high school memories.  I ran for sophomore class representative, which was like sophomore class president.  It was the only office that a sophomore could hold.  And, eleven kids ran, and all of them were white, and all of them were from the popular junior highs that were the feeder schools.  And, the first time I had more votes than anybody.  Nobody knew me.  You know, I made a speech, and, you know, everybody thought I was the best thing since sliced bread.  But, the guy who was supposed to win, who would be the student body president at the junior high, the white junior high, he and I were in a runoff.  And, I'll never forget this.  On the day that we had the runoff, there were about forty black kids now in the sophomore class who were bussed in because they had closed Horace Mann [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] down.  I wasn't in that, their neighborhood, so I had to get to Hall the best way I knew how.  And they didn't want to be there.  I wanted to be there.  Well anyway, on the day of the election, the bus was late.  The bus got to school late.  And you voted during home room.  And I ended up losing by three votes to Brian Sutterer (ph.).  I got 323 votes.
Speaker 1: So you imagine that you had at least three votes on that bus, somewhere, at least out of forty.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  And interesting enough, the person who was the bearer of bad news was Mr. Faulk, the principal from my junior high [West Side Junior High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] who was now the principal at Hall.  And he told me how I should be so proud of how far I had come.  I had come so close.  And I was pissed off because I should have won.  And I never ran again.  Everybody thought that I would run and that I would win because I would, I did win Friendliest Junior Boy and stuff like that.  I was in Key Club, I was in--you know, very, very active and very, very popular.  But I never ran against him again, you know.  And I probably could have beat him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, so you were fairly popular in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all right.  So I get a sense you're like a big personality in school and--.
Speaker 2: A big personality.  I continued on through college [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas].  But looking back I, I know it's probably because I was trying to hide so many things.  I had a lot of friends, but no one really knew me, you know.  People liked me.  Their parents liked me.  And, you know, I was the kind of person that had a whole lot of friends but wasn't really close to anyone because being really close meant really revealing yourself.
Story_ID: 18121
Speaker 1: How did you choose to--how did you choose a college?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] or, interestingly enough, the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  And I could not afford the University of Michigan because of out-of-state tuition, so I was going to work that summer.  I was going to work for a year and then go to school.  And the summer after my senior year [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] when everybody started packing up getting ready to leave for college, I decided I wanted to go to college now.  I didn't want to work a year and go to Michigan.  And I drove basically up to the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, and they in one day got me in and got me money, and we just kind of found each other.
Speaker 1: That's cutting it pretty close.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just went on up and got in.
Speaker 2: Got in.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And there wasn't many African American students there.  It was in northwest Arkansas, which was really, really white.  It was my first time away from home, but in a sense it was where I was destined to be.  I loved college football.  I loved that whole thing.  I used to see--I used to always watch college football and I would see the campuses and the kids walking, and I thought this, that's gonna be my life one day.  And the University of Arkansas was certainly, you know, one of those typical southern universities, you know, with the beautiful buildings and, you know, everything I dreamt a college should be.
Story_ID: 18122
Speaker 1: Now this is the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], the Razorbacks, right and all that?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is big time college football and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now I read that college football is your favorite television experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I love college football.
Speaker 1: Now what is it about college football that's so--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I've always loved it.  I've loved it since I was very young.  When I was in high school [Robert Cleveland 'R.C.' Hall High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] I used to get their, the preseason magazines, and I would write down the schedules of every major college on index cards and alphabetize them.  And on, on Saturdays I was watching sports shows and write down their scores on the cards.  I could almost tell you every, every team's record, you know, and, you know, who they played.  And that was my hobby.  That was, you know, what I looked forward to.
Speaker 1: And so you're a real sports fan.
Speaker 2: I love sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love sports to this day.  I mean, tomorrow I'm leaving out of here early to go to Auburn, Alabama, for a football game.  And it's something, interesting enough, that [stepfather] Ben [Harris] might have given me because he loves sports, too.  And I, I, you know, it's my passion, you know, even today.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite team?
Speaker 2: My Arkansas Razorbacks, you know.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: To me there is no other team.
Speaker 1: Does basketball have a similar appeal or--?
Speaker 2: I love basketball, not as much as football, you know.  But, I love tennis, you know.  I love the Razorbacks the most, but I love college football.  Like last week we didn't play, but I was still in front of the TV all day watching college games.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, it's a big deal at Arkansas--,
Speaker 2: Yeah, a very big deal.
Speaker 1: --college football is, all over the South. Matter of fact and the North.  I mean University of Michigan and Ohio State [Columbus, Ohio] and--.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that's kind of why I wanted to go to Michigan because loved their band and their big crowds.
Speaker 1: Huge crowds.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I was born in [Flint] Michigan, so, you know, that probably would have been my, my second choice.
Speaker 1: It was your first if you could have gotten the--if you had the resources to go.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I probably would have been at Michigan.
Story_ID: 18123
Speaker 1: Well what was the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas] like for you?
Speaker 2: It was challenging.  Remember first semester I made a 1.3 grade average because I was suddenly able to do what I wanted to do.  And I didn't miss a party, and a party didn't miss me.  Was first time I drank beer.  And, you know, it was just a fun time for me, but it wasn't good for me academically.  And my mom [Etta Harris] threatened to make me come back home.  And second semester I buckled down and end up making a 3 [point] 88 in grade average the second semester.
Speaker 1: That's a dramatic turnaround.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what that did was it got me entree into the elite in terms of--I was in the honors college.  And sometimes I would coast.  And I remember one semester I could have easily have had all Bs. But because the professors knew me and I was very, very active, it was ever a benefit of the doubt they'd give me a A/B thing, I would get an A.  You know, I try to, you know, tell my, my students now, "You know, you, you need to talk to your professors."  They all knew who I was.  And, you know, when, when in doubt I would get the higher grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, been, there've been, studies have been conducted where teachers see students as A or B or C.  And once they get that fix, that's how they treat you.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.  And so I had done so well, and I was in a lot of different honor societies.  I was on the yearbook staff and newspaper staff, and by my senior year I was editor of the yearbook--first time it ever happened for a African American.  It's first time it ever happened in the South at a major university.  And, you know, I had a budget and got to hire and fire people and--'cause we didn't have a faculty advisor.  The editor was the boss of the--of the yearbook.  I had an office.  It was tremendous experience for me.  And I was in a lot of activities, and I was, you know, where I was always the first or the only African American in the groups.  So it's a organization called Cardinal Twenty, which was the top twenty freshmen based on academics, and you'd have to interview and be picked.  You know, having straight As didn't ensure you'd get in 'cause there only could be twenty.  And I was the first black to make Cardinal Twenty, yeah.
Story_ID: 18124
Speaker 1: Now you were also a cheerleader too, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, you know, in college football you see the cheerleaders, you know, they do a lot of acrobatics and that sort of thing.  Now is this where you--how did you--?
Speaker 2: It is something I, that I always wanted to do, but I equated it with being gay or feminine, so I didn't do it until my senior year [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas].  And I did it at the coaching of several football players.  And that was the only reason that I did it publicly.  But privately it was the best time of my life, on some levels.  On some other levels it was not because I was the first black and because the squad was not ready for blacks on the squad.  And they were not always kind.  Some of them were, but a lot of them were not.  Interestingly enough, jumping ahead to my life today, I'm back at the University of Arkansas--I'm teaching there.  And last year, to tell you how God is, the first day that I get on campus as a teacher, the cheerleading coach quit and one of the athletic directors who knew I had been a cheerleader asked me to come and help out the sponsor.  And last year was one of the best years of my life because I served as cheerleading coach at Arkansas.  And these kids whom were mostly 95 percent white were some of the best human beings I've ever met in my life, you know.  It was like I got to relive my senior year of college.  Because as cheerleading coach you go everywhere with them, you're down on the field with them, you know.  And this year I'm back, and they have ten African Americans, you know, on the spirit squads there.  And I'm like a, you know, a father for them, you know.  And they come over my house every Sunday to eat, and it just taken what was a, a difficult time from my past and now it's such a, a wonderful, you know, part of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're down on the field in all, in the midst of all that excitement.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Still, yeah, even this year.
Story_ID: 18125
Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to write much in college [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: No, I took a--you know, I majored in journalism, but I was always on the management side, you know.  As editor of the yearbook, interestingly enough, you don't get to write a lot because you're assigning, you're, you know, you're telling other people what to do.  And so I did not write a lot.  I wrote, you know, my parting thoughts, you know, in the yearbook, which I really thought was a good piece of writing because it came from the heart.  But I didn't really have an--you know, think that I could be a writer.  I majored in journalism.  Several--a couple of TV stations were interested in me to do sports, but IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] came into my life my senior year and they offered three times of what any newspaper or TV station was willing to offer.  And so although I was not really interested in computers or business I went to work for IBM because they were offering me more money than I thought I'd ever make in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were hired as a--in what capacity?
Speaker 2: As a sales trainee and after a year and a half promoted, you know, to sales rep.
Speaker 1: Okay, now where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: In Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Dallas, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: The Little Rock [Arkansas] office is the one who, who--they recruited me like I was a star athlete, and I told them, "No."  And they said, "Why not, why don't you want to come work for us."  I said "'Cause I don't want to work in Little Rock."  And so they said, "Where do you want to work?"  And as a cheerleader we used to play a lot of schools in Texas and Dallas was always where we stayed, you know.  And I just thought Dallas was just the most wonderful city in the country and so that's where I went to work.  I graduated from the U of A [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas] and--.
Speaker 1: What year did you come out?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay and went right to Dallas.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what was Dallas like for you?
Speaker 2: Dallas was--it was interesting 'cause I now was making money, and I was now officially middle class, you know, on my own.  I had an apartment, a car, and nice suits, and I got to travel a lot.  I got to go to New York City [New York] for the second time in my life.  But the first year and a half you're with IBM you do nothing but train, and you train in, in New York, Endicott, New York.  And so I had a whole new set of friends--still pretending that I was straight.  You know, going to the, the straight bars, which was interesting.  I would always pick up guys there quicker than I could at a gay bar.
Speaker 1: Now how does that work?
Speaker 2: It just kind of happened, you know.  You know, I was real--I was young and still excited about life and all that.  And people, again, just took to me, you know.  Interestingly enough, it was so few cheerleaders and stuff, the African American at major schools, you know--people knew who you were.  And so I had that from being at--you know, Arkansas played on TV a lot, you know.  So the, the squad, they had put me and my partner on the end, you know, thinking, you know, it's kind of the way of separating us, but that was the best place to be for TV games because that's where they were shooting.  So, Dallas was, was, was good for a time being.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what happened to change it?
Speaker 2: I think, you know, my own lack of self-esteem, my own lack of confidence.  I'm, you know, first time exposed to gay bars and that can be a kind of exhilarating and demoralizing at the same time.  And--.
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: In, in the sense that now you're in a atmosphere to be picked and not picked, you know.  I had never had a problem of people finding me interesting and attractive on certain levels.  But this was, this was different.  This was kind of--a lot of ways kind of, you know, shocking.  I had never gone to a gay bar until, you know, I graduated from college and moved to Dallas, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so the object--so you were--you, it's hard to come to, it's hard to adjust to this new kind--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I don't want to be gay.  Yeah, I didn't want to be gay, no.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay, you didn't want to be gay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're still fighting, fighting that--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I was still fighting it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--but Dallas, you know, I got involved, you know, with church and made new friends, you know, of African Americans.  Because one of the things about the experience at University of Arkansas it was, you know, pretty a white kind of experience for me.  And now I was meeting blacks who had graduated from college and who were doing well--you know, more of my own peers, you know.  And so that was good for me.
Speaker 1: Now how did your mother [Etta Harris] feel about your success and all that?  Does she--?
Speaker 2: She's proud.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.
Speaker 2: She's proud, very proud.
Speaker 1: I can imagine she probably was.  Yeah, so were you the first person in your family to graduate from college?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you sisters go at all?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That seems like it'd make you very special in the household.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't think it surprised anybody, you know.  It was pretty clear that, that I was gonna--I'd like to say despite all the difficulties that I had growing up people are really not surprised about my success.  'Cause there was something about me that let you know that I wasn't just gonna stay there and be in Little Rock and, you know, you know, get married or be gay or whatever, you know.
Speaker 1: So they felt you were going somewhere?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you--now how long did you stay with IBM in Dallas?
Speaker 2: About four years and then I moved to Houston [Texas], you know.  And I went to work for Hewlett-Packard.  It was really the start of my running from myself.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you try to start a new life in Houston in terms of--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hmm, yeah, Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Was there anything in Dallas you were trying to really--any people you were trying to get away from?
Speaker 2: No, you know, just Houston seemed more cosmopolitan.  I, I think I really moved to Houston 'cause Houston seemed to have more black gay men than Dallas.  And I did move to Houston and got involved in my first real relationship with a guy.  And that ended disastrously, and I moved back to Dallas.  And from Dallas I moved to New York for the first time.
Story_ID: 18126
Speaker 1: When did you arrive in New York?
Speaker 2: I arrived in New York when Vanessa Williams won Miss America.  I'm--which is 1983 or some--.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, so--.
Speaker 1: Now I remember '84 [1984] it was revealed that she had these photos shot or something taken in college and big scandal about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I had a real good friend who was Miss Arkansas.  And she invited me--she was the first African American to be Miss Arkansas and the only one who's won.  And she invited--she told me to, to come go to the pageant with her.  And I ended up during the week that Vanessa was going to win the rumor was that she, you know, was going to win--going into New York City from Atlantic City [New Jersey] and walking into Wang Computers, which was the big computer company then and interviewing for a job.  And the lady liked me and she asked me, you know, would I stay until Monday to meet her boss.  And I did even though I had a job in Dallas [Texas].  And they hired me, and I came back to Dallas and got my stuff and moved to New York.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Wang was big then, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They kind of fell aside--I don't know what happened to Wang.
Speaker 2: They just fell apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so you're in New York now.  This is 1984, '83 [1983], '84.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you had already visited New York, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd visit New York several times.  New York was like a magic place for me.  You know, I would go up in--go to Broadway shows and, you know, stay in hotels, and it just seemed like the most wonderful place in the world.  And I always wanted to live there.  You know, it was a large black gay community.  There were men, you know, doing things, you know, with their careers, and they just all seemed so happy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have to really worry about trying to--.
Speaker 2: No, no.  For the first time in my life I really felt I could be me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long did you stay with Wang?
Speaker 2: Maybe a year or two and, you know, worked for a lot of different companies.  Went to work for AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company] in the World Trade [Center, New York, New York] of all places on the seventy-second floor.  I never had a problem getting a job.  One, now I had all this experience.  Two, I always interviewed well because it was very easy for me to be chameleon-like.  I could know how to read people, know what they wanted, and never had a problem getting a job, never.  I always interviewed very well.  The University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], I think, in so many ways prepared me for that.  I was always well spoken.  IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] taught me how to dress and never, ever had a problem getting a job.  All I had to do is put on blue suit and a white shirt and a red tie, you know, say what I want--knew they wanted to hear, and I had the job.
Speaker 1: Sounds like the presidential debates (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I, I--.
Speaker 1: Red tie and blue suit--.
Speaker 2: I, I prepared more for the interview than I actually would the jobs.  But in New York I was doing a lot of partying, you know.  So I'd oversleep, you know.  I would stay out all night and try to go to work.  I remember one weekend some friends of ours, mine, we went to Chicago [Illinois] for the weekend, and we got back to New York City like at 5:30 in the morn--5:30 Monday morning, and I had this big meeting, and I went, you know, straight from the airport to home to change clothes and straight to work and falling asleep in the meeting, you know, and my boss being so mad at me, you know.  But, New York was also interesting in the sense that I had a lot of the values, even though I was gay, that my mom [Etta Harris] had installed in me I tried to apply to my life.  And that meant that sex was something sacred.  And while I had a lot of one-night stands, I was still in search of the one person.  And so I didn't sleep around or do a lot of the things that other young men my age were doing, you know, because of my Southern upbringing.  Kids in New York or people in New York used to call me Mary Tyler Moore because I had this hopelessly optimistic look on life and love, and I wasn't gonna let, you know, big city people, you know, change that.
Story_ID: 18127
Speaker 1: Were you able to do any writing during this time [early 1980s, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, was, no.  Interestingly enough, my group of friends and my best friend, one of them was a guy named Randy Johnson who had graduated from Columbia J-School [Columbia University School of Journalism, New York, New York], and he wanted to be a novelist.  And Randy was my best friend in the world.  And Randy died in early, the late '80s [1980s].  And, interestingly enough, I don't think I ever would have been a writer had he not died, because that was the career he had chosen.  And he used to always say because I always had a job and he always didn't have a job, because he wanted to be a writer, you know, starving artist, so to, so to speak.  And when we'd go on vacations and stuff and, you know, everything we did, it would be my money because I, you know, was making good money as a salesman.  And he used to always say when he sold his first novel that he was going to, you know, take me away on a vacation or pay me back.  And, like I said, I never would have been a writer had he lived.
Story_ID: 18128
Speaker 1: You're in New York City [New York].  This is--we were talking about New York--19--.
Speaker 2: In the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Late '80s, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, that's kind of when AIDS showed up.  And, I lost of lot of friends, and I moved from New York, I think, to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your best friend [Randy Johnson] die of--?
Speaker 2: No, to--.
Speaker 1: He wasn't part of--.
Speaker 2: To this day I don't know what happened.  He, you know, he died mysteriously, you know--in good health.
Speaker 1: Of an illness or--?
Speaker 2: Nobody knows what happened because they found his body and it was kind of decomposed.  He was still struggling with writing and what have you, so his phone was cut off.  So it wasn't uncommon for me to go a couple of weeks without talking to him.  And so people had saw him, you know.  I left New York because, again, of another bad love affair and moved to Chicago [Illinois] and then moved from Chicago to [Washington] D.C. in search of, you know, Mr. Right.
Story_ID: 18129
Speaker 1: Now who did you work for in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Chicago I worked for--I don't remember who I worked for in Chicago--computer company.  I mean, there were--you know, I have these sales skills, and it was not a lot of black men who knew the computer industry.  So, like I said, it was always easy for me to get a job.  So, I may have had a, had a couple of jobs in Chicago.  Chicago was the first city, though, that I really kind of had a, a breakdown, if you will, you know--really went into a deep depression so much that I couldn't even work, you know.  But Randy [friend Randy Johnson], like I said, he just died mysteriously--to this day I don't know what happened to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved from Chicago to [Washington] D.C.--and was that any better?
Speaker 2: No, no.  In D.C. it was probably worse in a sense.  I write in my memoir that D.C. can be heaven for a black gay man, but D.C. can also be hell and partly because there, there are so many choices.  But it was one of these times where I really didn't feel attractive or feel worthy of, of love or that I would ever find anyone because in D.C. it's kind of a vicious cycle, if you will, because there are so many choices and so many options.
Speaker 1: And D.C. is always in the black community during that time period people would always talk about all the available black women in D.C. and they--.
Speaker 2: And partly because it was mostly gay men.
Speaker 1: A lot of gay--yeah, I, so I never, I never heard the other side of that, but I always heard like ten black women to every black man.  But then the black women say, "Well, half these guys are gay."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that what--would you really--?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't put the numbers that, that huge, but it is a large gay black population in D.C., so--.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So D.C. wasn't, was just too much happening.
Speaker 2: Too much happening, right--hard to stay focused.  You know, a lot of nights of, of drinking and, you know, waking up and not even remembering how I had gotten home.  And then I had the death of a really close friend who I had met at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] who was like a big brother to me.  And he had died of AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome], and it was the first time it had hit me that close to home.  And I was with him his last year of his life in terms of being supportive, even though I was real squeamish, you know, about death and especially about AIDS because when AIDS first came on the scene it was a very, very vicious disease, you know, in what it did to people.  And I grew up a lot during that time.  And really how I, you know, in a lot of ways became a writer because with Richard I would write him all these letters, you know.  And in the letters, recounting our friendship and how much he meant to me because I didn't want him to die without knowing that.  And one day he said to me, he says, "You know, these letters have really helped me."  And he said, "You really write beautifully."  He said you should write--you should tell our story.  And, of course, when someone's dying you say, "Yes," but I had no way of knowing how I would ever accomplish that and I was just saying something, you know, to, to get him off of me, to, you know, because the focus should have been on him.  I grew up a lot during that time because I realized for the first time that life wasn't really all about me and my search for happiness.  It was about friends and it was about family.  You know, it was about people who cared about me unconditionally, you know.  And Richard was this very handsome man with green eyes.  And I thought he had everything in the world, you know, because he was the kind of man that would go in a, a bar and men and women, straight, would take notice of him.  He was just that striking, just that handsome.  And, you know, he had his pick of whoever he wanted.  And, matter of fact, when he died he was married.  I mean, he was, he went back and forth, you know, and whatever world he was in, he was the star.  And I used to always say, "Oh God, I wish I looked like you."  And he said, "No you don't."  He said, "I would do anything in the world to have the personality like you and have people think of me the way they think of you," because I was still held in high regard because I always treated people like I wanted to be treated, something that my mom [Etta Harris] always told me.  And so that's the, the way I've led my life and the way I continue to, to lead my life.  But when Richard died, I really went in another deep depression, you know, really deep and ended up here in Atlanta [Georgia] and ended up writing.  Because once I completed therapy, I had stopped drinking, I, you know, just really tried to get my life back together, I moved here because I had family here.  And I did not want to go back in corporate America.  And I, with my doctor in therapy says, "Well, what do you want to do?"  And I said, "I think I want to write."  And my aunt and my doctors and close friends basically said I was the only one in the way of that happening.  And so I started to write.
Story_ID: 18130
Speaker 1: In materials I've read about you--when you were in [Washington] D.C. you tried to take your own life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was a--.
Speaker 2: That was the final straw, so to speak.  And D.C., interestingly enough, still conjures up that time for me 'cause during that time years kind of passed by that I don't remember.  You know, me being such as sports fan I'll, you know, now, you know, meet former [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas] Razorbacks or whatever and I go, "I don't remember you or when you played."  And it was usually during that time when I was in that deep depression because I wasn't paying attention to anything, you know.  I just kind of really lost--my existence was walking from my apartment to the liquor store, you know, before it closed.  And it was, you know, it was horrible.  I mean, I stayed in my house with it just dark almost all the time.  And I felt like I had lost everything and didn't have any reason to live.  I'd lost my two best friends, you know.  I wasn't happy with my, you know, career. I was afraid of my own mortality, you know.  It just didn't seem like I had anything to live for.
Speaker 1: So, now you were drinking a lot.  Were you using other drugs as well?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Just drinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You dodged a, I guess, a big bullet by not using anything else, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--you know, it's--even though I know I have an addictive personality, I've never--started telling somebody the other day, I've never taken any drugs, never smoked a joint or taken cocaine or any of that stuff, you know.  Good thing for somebody like me, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were trying to follow your mother's [Etta Harris] code of conduct on some level--..
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, 'cause my mother, I've never seen my mother with a drink in her hand, you know.  So it was really a very dark time in my life.  Almost--I use the analogy of a tornado, almost, because I had really disconnected from my family and, and friends.  Nobody knew what was going on with me.
Story_ID: 18131
Speaker 1: Once you had some therapy and got yourself together, you came to Atlanta [Georgia].  How'd you actually, you know, this kind of a--you look at this as kind of a rebirth or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's definitely my literary birthplace.  But it was a way--my aunt, my mother's [Etta Harris] sister, has always been someone I could talk to, always.  And she lived here, she lives here with her husband and my cousins.  And I felt like if I could be near her, you know, where I knew I could get a hug every day and where I knew somebody who loved me that maybe I could overcome everything that was going on.  And, it did in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you start to write?
Speaker 2: I started to write here in 1991.  And I didn't--I was gonna do and step into that same tragic kind of thing of getting a job in sales and supporting myself, but this time I didn't.  I just said, if I'm gonna write, I'm gonna write.  And I'm not gonna go back into corporate America where I have to fit in with certain kinds of behaviors, if you will, which I thought would depress me more and cause me to go back to drinking and, and what have you.  And so I just made up my mind that I was going to give writing a shot.  And so it was tough from a financial standpoint, but I finally started to find some peace.  I finally started to find something that I was willing to do for free, which was writing.  And I could see a rainbow, finally.  And that's kind of how I got started.
Speaker 1: A lot of these motivational speakers always talk about finding one's passion in life and pursuing that.  And if you do that, the rest will follow.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I speak at a lot of college campuses now, and I always tell kids, you know, they gotta trust their own instincts.  They gotta trust their own dreams.  And they really have to find their passion early in life and, and pursue it with a vengeance.  I just--my only regret is is that I waited so long to, to find that passion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you--when you first started writing, I mean, did you get in a workshop or anything or did you just start to write?
Speaker 2: I just started writing.  I didn't take a class.  I didn't do anything.  I didn't buy any books.
Speaker 1: I just started writing and--.
Speaker 2: Now were you a fiction fan at that time or did you read a lot of fiction?
Speaker 1: Not really.  I remember reading Terry McMillan's 'Disappearing Acts'.  And, I thought, "Oh, I can do this."
Speaker 2: You know, that came out about '89 [1989], right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was her second book.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And so--and then I remember, interestingly enough, I woke up in Atlanta one morning just out of the blue because I was taking medication for depression and so I would usually sleep late.  But this morning for some strange reason I just woke up like boom.  And there on TV was John Grisham, and he was talking about 'The Firm', his first book and how he had been a lawyer and a legislator, and he just decided he wanted to be a writer.  And I got out of bed that morning, and I went and bought that book.  And I read it in a day.  And again I said, "I can do this."  And so I started writing that week that 'The Firm' came out.  And, interestingly enough, I would end up same publisher he, he's with.  But, it was just something magical about that that told me this is what you need to be doing.
Story_ID: 18132
Speaker 1: Now your first book was--you self-published it.
Speaker 2: I wrote 'Invisible Life', sent it off to all kinds of publishers and agents and what have you, and nobody would, you know, give me any kind of encouragement.  I got so many rejection letters and what have you.  But I really felt like it was a good book, and I, I was happy.  Didn't have any money, these rejection letters were not getting me into any depression.  I knew I had found my life's calling.  And so I just kept, you know, going and going.  And, interestingly enough, having been editor of the yearbook of the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas], I knew about publishing.  I knew how to go to a printer and find somebody whose gonna print the book and how to deal with contracts and what have you.  And so I found a publisher, a printer in, in Nashville [Tennessee] who would print my book for me.  I found someone who, you know, would do the artwork, you know.  And, I just put the book together myself.  And all my marketing experiences from all the years, I knew how to, you know, sell.  And now I was finally selling something that I believed in.
Speaker 1: Now when I think about, you know, when you in flashback, in retrospect, you think about like what would be the audience for 'Invisible Life'.  I mean I can see--I used to manage a bookstore at one time--and I can see why they were able to sell a whole lot of copies, you know.  Did you have that sense?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I didn't really--no, I, I knew a book like that it really hadn't been written even though 'Giovanni's Room'  is, is somewhat similar to that, James Baldwin's 'Giovanni's Room'.  But--.
Speaker 1: That was at a different time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I wrote that book for me 'cause I needed to, you know, put some of my own stuff out there.  And, it just took off, it just took off--word of mouth, word of mouth, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this, your story's almost like story of Biggie Smalls [rap musician] and other people that sold--they made their, they were selling their work out the trunk of the car.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was--,
Speaker 1: Literally you actually did sell your books--.
Speaker 2: --I was doing it, you know, too.  I was going to bookstores, I was going--people would give me book signings, parties, and what have you.  And, you know, I, I never worked so hard in all my life, but I've never had so much fun because it was something that I had created and, and did on my own.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did--so you were self-published and trying to get out there and now how did you become like part of the publishing, I mean the, I mean get published by a big publisher?  I mean how did that--when did that recognition take place?
Speaker 2: It took place six months after I'd self-published 'Invisible Life', and it happened in the most strangest way.  One of the largest bookstores in the South at that time was place called Oxford Bookstore, which is right here in Atlanta [Georgia].  And I remember when I first went to take them my book, they told me, you know, they didn't sell self-published books or what have you.  And, you know, if they did, they would only do them on consignment.  So I started taking my book and leaving it in beauty shops and then especially beauty shops near that bookstore.  And I would only leave one copy, and I would say, "If you're interested please go to your local bookstore and ask for it or call me, you know."  And Oxford started getting requests for it, and so they--first time they took ten books and then they took thirty and then they took a hundred, you know.  And when they would sell them, they would pay me, and they'd order some more.  But a white guy who was heterosexual, staunch kind of Republican [political party], unbeknownst to me, while I'm out there selling my book not knowing what's going on, unbeknownst to me he sees my book at the bookstore and he sees that it's selling really well, and he buys it and sends it to New York.  He works for Doubleday [Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group].  I don't know any of this is going on.  My number is listed because, you know, I'm trying to sell my books.  And one day I got a call from this white lady and she said to me, "Someone gave me your book, and it was one of the most enjoyable weekends of reading I've ever had."  And I thanked her and we talked and from my IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] experience--she told me she worked at Doubleday.  She didn't tell me what she did.  But she just said she worked for Doubleday and if I was ever in New York, you know, to look her up.  And, finally, a, a couple of months later I got an agent in New York, John Hawkins, who's still my agent to this day.  And he said that he was gonna repackage my book, and he was going to send it to a lot of publishers and try to get a, a deal for the self-published version.  And when I was leaving out of his office I said, "Is Doubleday one of the places you're gonna send it to?"  And he thought for a moment, and he said, "Yeah, I probably will."  And I said, "Well, this lady called me, you know, a couple of months ago, and when I get back to the hotel, I'll call, give you her name.  Maybe she's a secretary or something and maybe she can help us out."  And he said, "Okay, yeah, I know people at Doubleday, but give me her name."  So when I got back to the hotel, I went back to, in my little daybook and there was her name, Martha Levin.  And I called him, and I said, "This is the lady who called me.  Her name was Martha Levin.  She really likes my book."  And he, he starts to laugh.  And I said, "What's so funny?"  And he says, "That lady's no secretary."  He said, "She's one of the most powerful women in publishing."  And he called her and fifteen minutes later he called me back and he says, "We have a meeting with Martha in the morning.  Can you stay?" 'Cause I was living in Atlanta and I was in New York.  And I didn't even have money for a hotel.  He's--and he paid for me to stay another night.  And we went over to Doubleday that next morning.  Again, I stayed up all night at Kinko's telling them why they should buy this book and the demographics and the marketing and what I had already been able to do on my own.  And we had a meeting that morning and that afternoon they offered me a three book deal.  So--that's how I got started.
Story_ID: 18133
Speaker 1: Let's backtrack a little bit to--now what was the--give us a synopsis of 'Invisible Life'.
Speaker 2: 'Invisible Life' is, is a coming age story of a young man, Raymond Tyler, who during his senior year of college discovers that he's sexually attracted to men after having not had that happen to him, you know, his whole life and how his life evolves after that discovery.  And it, it patterns my life in a lot of ways in the sense of Raymond, who he is, but there are a lot of differences between Raymond and myself.  You know, Raymond is middle class, Raymond has a mother and a father, who has a really good relation with a brother.  He's successful, he's, you know, never had any doubts about his appearance or what have you.  But, I gave Raymond my heart and the way I view life and the way I try to live my life, and it was very heart warming to see how people responded to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so their response of Raymond is, parallels their response to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They loved, say they loved Raymond and--.
Speaker 1: If they love Raymond, they love you too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my fans have been very devoted to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what does, what are Raymond's ideals in the book?
Speaker 2: Raymond, you know, he, he wants to do what's right.  He wants to treat people the way he wants to be treated.  He wants love in is life.  You know, he wants to be respected.  He wants all the things that he thought he wanted when he thought he was straight, you know.  He wants a, a life full of love and family and friends.  And he wants to give that as well in terms of, of who he is.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Raymond appeared in over and over again--I mean, well, not over and over again, but in several of your novels right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He doesn't appear in all of them, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, but he's been about five of them.
Story_ID: 18134
Speaker 1: You've had, what, six, seven novels on the 'New York Times' Best Seller List?
Speaker 2: I've written eight novels and six of them have been 'New York Times' best sellers.
Speaker 1: This is--you must know this is phenomenal, you know, without anybody, you know--.
Speaker 2: Well, Terry McMillan did it, Alice Walker's done it and Toni Morrison, but not a lot of African American men have done it.
Speaker 1: Not a lot.  In fact, I can't think of anybody else.
Speaker 2: Well, Walter Mosely made the list and--.
Speaker 1: But that many times--I don't think he's made it that many times.
Speaker 2: No, I think I probably hold the record.  I, I do know that I'm probably the first one to, to be, make the list with both fiction and non-fiction.  I don't think anybody's ever done that and African American man.  Very few people, writers in general, have made both lists.
Story_ID: 18135
Speaker 1: Who's your audience?  I mean, is your audience what you thought it would be at the very beginning or is it a broader?
Speaker 2: It started out mostly African American gay men, then African American women came in and just took it over and really made me huge.  And, and now I would say my demographics are almost anybody who reads.  I think, interestingly enough, my fastest-growing segment now are straight black men because they wanted to know what all the hoopla was about.  And now they're reading the books and realizing it's not, you know, something magic or they gonna catch something from it.  You know, they're big fans as well.
Speaker 1: Now it's interesting for you say that they, they realize are not going to catch anything from it?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: There's a lot of, it's, once--yeah, it's true that a lot of people are very homophobic to the point where--.
Speaker 2: I think, yeah, phobia means fear.  And it's, and it's a fear of the unknown.  I mean, I think it's not so uncommon for people to feel that way because it is so, so foreign to people.  And then that they, that they go into it thinking that people can choose to do this, it's--they'll think that maybe they could be tempted.  And, you know, I for a fact know that's not gonna happen.  And I think that's where the fear always comes from, the fear of the unknown, you know, that their lives could be changed by reading this book.  And the only thing I think the book is gonna do is open up their minds in terms of, of the diversity that's within our own community and, and, and how these individuals--you know, 'cause, interestingly enough, the thing that surprised me the most was that people were so surprised that being gay was about as much as wanting love in your life as being straight was and wanting love in your life.  They always equate it with sex.  It always went back to sex and never once did heterosexual people consider the lives of these people and consider that they would want love in their life and consider that they would want families and that they would want, you know, friends, and that they, you know, want someone that they could depend on and love for the rest of their life.  They always thought it was about sex, and for me it has never been about sex.  You know, I remember having a conversation with people in church of saying, "I can choose never to have sex again with a man.  That is a choice that I can make and one that I can live by and live with,  but it still won't change who I am as an individual.  It still won't change the fact that I'm a gay man."
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause a lot's been said about people being able to exercise a choice, and it's just a matter of denying some kind of a perversion or something like that.  I mean, you hear the religious right talk about that.  And they even have organizations, you know, dedicated to that concept.  But what you're saying it's something that you either know you are or you're not.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, the act itself--yeah, I have a choice over that.  But I don't have a choice about, you know, who I am.  I still know that I would be connected, you know, to men, but, you know, it's, it's just like, you know, a straight man who once might have been a player or whatever.  If he finds a, a woman or that he is in love with, he can stop the behavior that he probably exhibited beforehand.  You know, that, yes, but it's, you know, he could be, he's still going to be heterosexual or what have you.  So I don't think people realize or recognize that.  And I've finally come to the conclusion or to the understanding that that's okay, because it's not who they are.  You know, it's not for them to understand as clearly as I do.
Story_ID: 18136
Speaker 1: Your next novel, I mean the one--you had a contract to do three additional books other than 'Invisible Life' right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the first one of this series was 'Just as I Am'.  Now what is, what was that all about?
Speaker 2: 'Just as I Am' was a continuation of Raymond's story because in 'Invisible Life' he meets a young lady who he thinks is gonna cure him of this desire.  And it's a continuation of their story, Nicole Springer.  So, it deals with AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome], it deals with loss.  It deals more with AIDS than 'Invisible Life' did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they have a relationship and, and the reader may think that, okay, this is going to change Raymond.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But it really didn't.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So he has a close relationship with this woman but their--.
Speaker 2: An intimate relationship with her, but when he tells her his truths, the relationship breaks off, but they still maintain their, their--their friendship is real.
Speaker 1: Okay, now does this situation have a parallel in your life that you--I mean, do you know of people that have had this kind of a--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not me in particular, you know, but I've known--you know, when I was in New York, I used to meet a lot of women who were beautiful women, who always, you know, thought I was attractive or wanted to date me, and I think in part because I was kind.  You know, I was a southern gentleman, which I think is, you know, Raymond's, you know, MO [modus operandi].
