Story_ID: 636556
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Lydia Davis Eady. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Elzie Leonard Higginbottom [HistoryMaker Elzie Higginbottom], E-L-Z-I-E, H-I-G-G-I-N-B-O-T-T-O-M, and Leonard is L-E-O-N-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there, is there a story behind the name Elzie?
Speaker 2: No, there really isn't. The only story is that my dad's first name was Elzie [Elzie Higginbottom], so I was named after him.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County], Chicago, Illinois, November 24th, 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a real estate executive.
Speaker 1: All right. And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at East Lake Management and Development Corp. [Chicago, Illinois]. I am the president of East Lake Management and Development Corp., as well as the founder.
Story_ID: 636557
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, I'm required to ask you five lightweight questions that just require a short answer. So, they're kind of a warm up. The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Do you want to know what it is?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Hot dogs.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer, I like summer better than any other time of the year. I like, I like the warmth. I like heat.
Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination is really somewhere where there's water. The Bahamas, I love the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Okay. The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I probably have several of them. But I think that I like--the thing I like best is, I think I need--people need to understand patience. And I will always tell people, especially young people starting with us at East Lake Management, Management [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois], that patience is the smart thing to do if you're in the real estate business. You need to have patience. Without patience, you're not going to really be successful in business.
Story_ID: 636558
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family, but separately, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Katherine [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom], K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E, Idela, I-D-E-L-A, Higginbottom, or Skaggs, really. Her maiden name was Skaggs, S-K-A-G-G-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, Higginbottom.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth was Hopkins Park, Illinois, and she was born November 20, 1923.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, where is Hopkins Park in relationship to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Hopkins Park is about sixty miles south of Chicago. It's due east of Kankakee, Illinois, about ten miles.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother traced them back pretty far. But I can recall on my mother's side, especially on my mother's mother's side of the family. It's the Tetter family. They settled in Hopkins Park, Illinois, which is now more commonly known as Pembroke Township [Illinois], before the turn of the century. My mother's father [Ulysses Skaggs] was an orphan, and he migrated from Kentucky up through southern Illinois to Hopkins Park, Illinois where he met my grandmother [Pearl Tetter Skaggs].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Pembroke, I know it's famous around here for the cowboys that come here for the festivals and that sort of thing. Is your family related to any cowboys that come here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we're not related to any of the cowboys that come here from Pembroke. But we were out there before the cowboys settled out there. And as a matter of fact, we have a parcel of property, I think it's about seventy acres out there that is contiguous to where the cowboys have their ranch. So we don't, I don't know them, but I see them quite frequently when we go out there.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, these are black cowboys, for anybody watching this that's not familiar with this. But there's a group of black cowboys in Pembroke that do a rodeo every year and come into town.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: But your mother's family was settled there before any cowboys got there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely. As a matter of fact, we still have in our family a parcel of property that my father [Elzie Higginbottom] and mother bought from her grandfat- her grandmother [Ellen Tetter], and that's been in the family since before 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they came in, at least in--
Speaker 2: Eighteen nineties [1890s], late 1890s.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now were they engaged in agricultural pursuits, farming?
Speaker 2: Well, to the extent that you could. They--my great-grandmother and her husband, William Tetter, worked in agriculture. And as a matter of fact, I think they worked for a dollar a day so that they could purchase the farm that they purchased. And really my mother spent part of her childhood on that farm.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they had to work--hire out their labor to earn enough money to buy the, the land (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They worked for other farmers that were in the area, and that, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: About when did they acquire their land, do you think?
Speaker 2: They acquired the land around 1900, 1910, something like that.
Story_ID: 636559
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] go to school there too, out in that area (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my mother went to school in, at North Hopkins School [Pembroke Township, Illinois], and then she went to St. Anne High School [St. Anne Community High School]. So the people from that area were bussed over to St. Anne, Illinois, and that's where they attended high school.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when she grew up, were the schools segregated where she was?
Speaker 2: Yes, Pembroke [Pembroke Township, Illinois] was pretty much a segregated community. There may be one or two whites that--farm children that went to the school, but it was predominantly segregated. And St. Anne High School was integrated limitedly--on a limited basis, and that was primarily the students that were bussed in from Pembroke. There were not that many African American families in Pembroke at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, there's a story I read about your mother's graduation. You want to tell us that?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah (laughter), yes, I think it's--my mother has repeated it to me several times, where she, at her graduation she was supposed to walk down the aisle with a white student from St. Anne, and the student refused to walk down the aisle with her because she was black.
Speaker 1: Okay. And she's repeated it enough, and it probably has made an impression on her, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Well, it did make an impression on her. And as a matter of fact, Pembroke was a very, very poor community. And coming from a poor community and being integrated into St. Anne High School, there were other things that made impressions on her as well, such as not having adequate funds to buy appropriate clothes and that sort of thing to have in school, and to really measure up to the other students that came from other parts of St. Anne.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, she grew up--basically she was seven or six when the Depression--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the Great Depression hit. But I've heard people say that it didn't make any difference, because they didn't, they weren't doing that well anyway. What was your--how were your--
Speaker 2: Well, she wasn't doing, they weren't doing that well in the Depression. But the thing I guess you can say is that if you lived in an agricultural community, there's always ways that--you don't have to worry about eating. You can--there's, you know, people raised their food. They had vegetable gardens, they had chickens, they had animals that they slaughtered for their meals. So it is not, it does not have the same effect on you as if you lived in an urban area where you don't have the opportunity to do that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, did your mother have a chance to go to college after, after--?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't. My mother did not attend college. She graduated from St. Anne High School, and shortly thereafter she married my dad [Elzie Higginbottom].
Story_ID: 636560
Speaker 1: Now, let's go to your father's side, side of the family. Can you give us your--well, your father's name is exactly the same as yours, right?
Speaker 2: He [Elzie Higginbottom] doesn't have a Leonard.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And my father's side, actually I think my father's name--my father was born in Oxford, Mississippi. And I think they probably have--you know, in Mississippi they kept pretty good records. But there was always an issue as to how you spelled your name, and what your name actually was. But his family migrated to Chicago [Illinois] at an early age for him. And his name might have been changed slightly when they got to Chicago. And that's--so as I said, they migrated from Oxford, Mississippi, his mother [Ada Woods Higginbottom] and father [Noles Higginbottom], and at that time I think it was three siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what year was your father born?
Speaker 2: My father was born in 1915.
Speaker 1: Okay. And is there a story associated with how they, why they decided to migrate to--from Oxford to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, basically for a better way of life, you know, as many blacks did at that time. They were migrating to the urban areas so that they could find employment and that sort of thing. And my father's father had a couple of brothers that I think migrated here with him at the same time. So, it was basically to find employment and a better way of life for their families.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did they go directly to Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] when they--
Speaker 2: My father's father moved directly to Morgan Park. And my grandmother--my grandfather and grandmother moved directly to Morgan Park. And then her brother [Freddie Woods] moved to Morgan Park as well. And her last name was Woods, and her son [sic. nephew] is a famous gospel singer and minister today, Maceo Woods.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you hear much about the history of Morgan Park? I mean, other black folks in Chicago have told me since I've been here in the '70s [1970s] that Morgan Park is kind of a special community in the sense that it was almost like autonomous from the rest of the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Well, it was. And there were two sections of Morgan Park. There was basically west Morgan Park where mostly all the whites lived, and then there was this little enclave called east Morgan Park, and that's where the blacks lived. The radio personality, Jack L. Cooper, was there. And I think a number of other--Nat King Cole I think spent some time there. And there were a number of celebrities that--people t- there were a number of people who are celebrities today that lived in Morgan Park and grew up there. So, it was, it was a nice place to live. And as a matter of fact, the grade school that my dad went to, John Shoop [John D. Shoop Elementary School; Shoop Academy of Math, Science, and Technology, Chicago, Illinois], is still there and operating. It's an E track school [Track E] today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did Morgan Park in those days have a more rural kind of flavor to it than the rest of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, it didn't have more of a--it was a little more rural because the lots were a little bit larger, so you had a little bit more space. But it was really, I think you could say the way it was at that time, was, it was like a close-in suburb to the inner city, like the downtown Chicago area, or the area closer to the Loop [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 636561
Speaker 1: Okay, where, where did your father [Elzie Higginbottom] go to school then?
Speaker 2: My father went to, to grade school to John T.--John Shoop school [John D. Shoop Elementary School; Shoop Academy of Math, Science, and Technology, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --which is on 111th [Street] and Vincennes [Avenue], I believe it is. And then he went to high school at Tilden High School [Tilden Technical High School; Edward Tilden Career Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did he have any stories about growing up that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: Well, he had lots of stories (laughter), my--growing up in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]. You know, as I said, my grandfather [Noles Higginbottom] came to Chicago [Illinois] to find a better way of life for his family, but they wound up really being peddlers. They peddled fruits, and primarily watermelons that they would buy at the South Water Market [Chicago, Illinois] and then take them by horse and wagon and peddle them all over the Near South Side of Chicago to many of the communities that were economically better than Morgan Park.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, they peddled them by horse and wagon?
Speaker 2: By horse and wagon, yes. My, my--that's, that was my father's first vehicle. And he continued through life basically doing that. But I think the important thing to focus on is that that experience really made my father an entrepreneur. So, throughout his entire adult life, he was always looking for some entrepreneurial activity to get involved in. And as many people had to do at that time, he would work a day job and then go out and do his entrepreneurial activities in the afternoons and evenings after he got out of work. So, it's basically like having two jobs.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right. So, where did he work during the day?
Speaker 2: He worked at several places during the day. Over the course of his career he worked at a place in, right near Hammond, Indiana called American Mazola [sic. American Maize Products Company] where they made Mazola oil. He worked at various foundries. He worked at Electro-Motive [Electro-Motive Company; Electro-Motive Diesel, Inc.], which is over on 103rd [Street] near the Bishop Ford [Bishop Ford Freeway].
Story_ID: 636562
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met, that they tell?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was is that my father moved--my [paternal] grandfather [Noles Higginbottom] moved the family from Chicago [Illinois] to Pembroke [Pembroke Township, Illinois]. And my father's youngest brother was dating a young lady who happened to be my mother's sister. And so the two brothers had a double date, and so we had a situation where two brothers married two sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay. So they, so both couples got together?
Speaker 2: Both couples got married, that's right. My Uncle Wesley [Wesley Higginbottom] married my Aunt Irma [Irma Skaggs Higginbottom], and my dad, Elzie [Elzie Higginbottom], married my mother, Katherine [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom], who was the older of the two. And Wesley was the younger, and Irma was like the fourth child. They both came from elev- large families. My mother was one of thirteen, and I think ten survived. And my father was one of seven.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, I guess you grew up with a lot of cousins I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did grow up with a lot of cousins. But you know, the thing about it is that people's lives take different paths. And my father, trying to develop his entrepreneurial activities, really focused more on being an entrepreneur, and we spent a lot of time in various businesses that my dad would start. So we did not have a lot of time to spend with our cousins, even though we did have a lot of cousins both on my mother's side and on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was, you know, I was, until I was eighteen years old, I was the only child in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you grew up basically as an only child?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay. I didn't realize--'cause I know you had a brother [Eric Higginbottom], but I didn't realize how older--how much older you were.
Speaker 2: Just as I was getting ready to go to college [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], my brother was born.
Story_ID: 636563
Speaker 1: When you think about then your, your mother and father's personalities, and their habits, their talents, their looks even, who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's a combination of both. I think that, I think my father [Elzie Higginbottom] was much more of an entrepreneur, but my mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] was a lot more deliberate in her thinking. And so, I think I have a combination of both. I think the--much of my drive comes from my father, father; and I'd say the deliberateness comes from my mother's side.
Story_ID: 636564
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was--sure, I have a, a number of them. But as I mentioned to you earlier, my parents [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom and Elzie Higginbottom] bought my, my mother's grandmother's [Ellen Tetter] farm. And my dad--because they had moved, moved--his family had moved to Pembroke [Pembroke Township, Illinois], and they stayed out in Pembroke, my dad decided that he wanted to be a farmer. And he had grown up in Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois], and while he might have had a lot of experience in peddling fruits and vegetables, he did not have much experience in growing them--or corn, or being a farmer. And my earliest, some of my earliest childhood memories are, we used to go by horse and wagon and do what they call shuck corn. In other words, we harvested corn by horse and wagon. We'd take the horse and wagon and drive it down the row, and we'd take the corn ear off and throw it in the wagon. And that's how we harvested the corn. Then at the end of the day, certainly we had to water, water the stock. And we had a few cows, and needless to say, the horses. And so we then had to feed them and do chores. And my responsibility was to pump these large fifty-five gallon drums of water by hand. So, I can remember all those wonderful childhood memories. And my father worked in the city at the time, and he would come home back and forth. And every Friday afternoon, every Friday evening when we'd come home, when he'd come home there was always a treat, and we'd always have ice cream and, and cake to celebrate the coming of the weekend.
Story_ID: 636565
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up in your household then was--your household consisted of your mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] and your father [Elzie Higginbottom] and you?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or were there any grandparents there?
Speaker 2: No, my mother, my father, and myself. My grandparents on my mother's side [Pearl Tetter Skaggs and Ulysses Skaggs], they lived about seven miles away. My grandparents on my father's side [Ada Woods Higginbottom and Noles Higginbottom] lived about three miles away until my grandmother on his side passed away. And then, so they were--you know, we had access to them, but they weren't living right there at the same place we were living.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, how long did the family live on the farm?
Speaker 2: We lived on the farm until I was in the fifth grade, and then we moved to Chicago Heights [Illinois]. And when we lived on the farm, my dad was--one of the jobs that he had was he operated the heavy equipment for the road commissioner. You know, they would repair the roads and that sort of thing, in addition to farming. And that's how he supplemented his farm income, by having, as I said, an outside job.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother work too, during this period?
Speaker 2: My mother worked. My mother worked at Joliet Arsenal [Joliet Army Ammunition Plant, Will County, Illinois]. And those were all long drives. I mean those drives were like forty and fifty miles a day, forty miles one way from Pembroke [Pembroke Township, Illinois] out to Joliet Arsenal, and then from Joliet Arsenal back. And then when we moved to Chicago Heights she worked at Joliet Arsenal, and so she drove from Chicago Heights to the arsenal. And when we were in Chicago Heights, we had a--as I said, my parents were both entrepreneurs. My father was always looking for some sort of entrepreneurial activity, and my mother was very supportive of it. And there we had a retail store in which we sold a number of things, from watermelons to coal to fish. Whatever people wanted to buy, we were there to try to provide them. And that's how we supplemented our income. And my father just loved being an entrepreneur, and I think that's where I get part of it, from my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, his store basically sold whatever he thought the people wanted?
Speaker 2: Well, it was at different times. We sold, we sold, we sold watermelons. Then in the wintertime we would sell fish, and that would be fresh fish as well as fried fish. And primarily those were the two, three products that we sold.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you were saying that he would get his watermelons from Water Market [South Water Market]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd come into Chicago [Illinois], where they were brought in by railcar. And then what happened is that we would, we would buy a railcar filled, and we would truck them throughout the city and suburban areas, selling them off of a truck. And then we would take them to our store and sell them at our store.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, on the way back and--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as you got--
Speaker 2: And we sold them watermelons by the whole or by the slice. So, you could come in and you could sit at a counter and you could buy a slice of watermelon and, and you could sit there and eat it.
Story_ID: 636566
Speaker 1: Now there's a watermelon story, I read, where your father [Elzie Higginbottom] gave you some watermelons to sell. And there's a lesson in the story, I believe. So--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, yes. My father had--as I said, we would buy them by the carload. And my father bought some watermelons. And generally at the end of the, at the end of the car there would be some small watermelons that the farmer would put in there just as his starters, to load the car. And my father had some, and he had them at the store. And he gave them to me, and I took them and put them out in front of the store to sell. Well, right next door there was a fellow that had a grocery store. And he did not sell watermelons prior to us moving there and opening up our store. So he began to start to sell watermelons, and so he had some watermelons there that he was selling. And when I put mine out in front, since my dad had given them to me and they were small, I marked the price down. And I think, if my memory serves me correctly, I started at $1.25. And the guy comes out. And he sold meat and that sort of thing. He comes out and he looks at my sign. His watermelons I think were like $1.75, something like that. So he marked his down to $1.25. I went back in and I told my dad, I said, "You know, he marked his watermelons down the same as mine, and mine aren't going to sell because mine are smaller." So my dad says, "Well, what do you think you should do?" So, I went and marked mine down to a dollar. (Laughter) And maybe I don't have the numbers exactly right, but the story is there. And so this guy comes out and he looks at mine, and he marks his down to a dollar. (Laughter) So I go back, I go back out there. And I was like maybe nine, or--no, I was maybe ten or eleven. And I went back in, and I was kind of puzzled by this. And I said, "Dad," I said, "every time I mark mine down, he marks his down." So, I says, "He's down at the same level as I am." I says, "How low can I go?" And the guy said--my dad says, "Well, how much did yours cost you?" And I said, "They didn't cost me anything." He says, "Well, figure it out. How low can you go?" So, I went back out and I marked mine down to seventy-five cents (laughter). He came back and he marked his down to seventy-five cents. So I said, "Okay, I'll fix you." I went back and I marked mine down to fifty cents. Mine didn't cost me anything (laughter). Well, he stopped at seventy-five cents (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a good story.
Speaker 2: But it taught me something about being an entrepreneur, and it taught me something about business. And I think that probably if more people had an opportunity to do that today, we'd have, in our community we'd have more entrepreneurs, more people who would be willing to open stores, convenience stores, and provide the needed goods and services that many of the citizens in the communities that we live in would--are need- in need of.
Story_ID: 636567
Speaker 1: We always ask this question. Can you describe where you grew up; and what were the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up--when we moved to Chicago Heights [Illinois] then that's really, really where I spent most of my early teen years, and I lived there until I went away to college, college [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. And we lived on the east side of Chicago Heights, and there were--Chicago Heights was a working class town, heavy industry; Victor Chemicals [Victor Chemical Works], which was a chemical plant, and Columbia Tool [Columbia Tool Steel Company, Chicago Heights, Illinois], which is a tool and die plant. So, many of the sounds, many of the sights and smells that we had, they were all heavy dirty industry smells. And the sights were people coming home from work in actually pretty beat up dirty work clothes, because it was dirty industry. And, but everybody was working, and that, you know, that had an impression on me. People would go to work and earn a living, and they'd come home and they're able to take care of their families. And it was a close knit town. Because Chicago Heights--while Chicago Heights was a very big, large town, probably about twenty thousand in population, mostly all the black people lived on the east side of Chicago Heights, which is now pretty much barren. But they were all working class people, hardworking, all had, had jobs in heavy industry, and we had a, had a mutual respect for one another.
Story_ID: 636568
Speaker 1: You were describing Chicago Heights [Illinois] when you were growing up. And--
Speaker 2: It was a, it was a working class town. But we did have a lot of adults, and primarily males, and because there was all dual household families. And they took a lot of interest in sports and athletics, and we had a park that was near our house that we used to all go play at. And there was always some parent there that would help teach us how to play baseball, show us how to run track, teach us how to play tennis, that sort of thing. So, the adults there took a great deal of interest in the kids as they grew up. And so throughout our grade school years, we had that sort of--I'd say parental support, adult guidance. And then we went into junior high [Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], and then when we got to high school they followed us through, even into high school. And they would come to all of our athletic events and that sort of thing. So, the community really showed a great deal of interest, as they do in Chicago Heights even today.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, is the principal high school there Tilden [Tilden Technical High School; Edward Tilden Career Community Academy High School]?
Speaker 2: No, the principal high school--no, Tilden is in Chicago [Illinois]. The principal high school there was Bloom--Bloom Township High School [Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, Bloom Township, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I think my graduating class, there was close to nine hundred kids.
Speaker 1: So you came out of Bloom Township?
Speaker 2: I come out of Bloom Township High School (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 636569
Speaker 1: Now, you said you spent a lot of time growing up working, doing different things to help your father's businesses and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did. You know, coming from a small family like I did, with basically my mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom], my father [Elzie Higginbottom] and myself--that meant that we were always, whatever activity one of us was engaged in, the other one was probably engaged in. And since my dad was the breadwinner of the family and the head of the household, whatever activity he was engaged in, both my mother and I were engaged in. So as, I would go with him to the South Water Market [Chicago, Illinois] to pick up the products that he was selling. And then on the way home we would, I would sit on the back of the truck while he drove the truck, and we'd go through communities and sell the products. Then when we got home we would unload the truck, and that's where we did our retailing. So, and the same was--for about five years my dad sold coal, and that was in Chicago Heights [Illinois] when most people had coal burning stoves and coal burning furnaces that they heated their homes with. And we would go down to southwestern Illinois, just south of Joliet [Illinois], and buy truckloads of coal and bring it back, and then we would parcel it out into bushel baskets. And then we would deliver bushel baskets to people who needed coal. And we had a route like that, and we'd continuously do that. We did the same thing, my dad, for five or six years. And basically at the same time, for five or six years, he sold ice. And if you notice, as I said, in his retail store in the summer, he'd sell watermelons. In the winter, he'd sell fish. Well, in the summer he'd sell ice, and in the winter he'd sell coal. So, because--I mean he was really catering to the needs of the people that were in the community, and he was really meeting the needs of the consumer. But people didn't need ice in the--people didn't need coal in the summertime, but they needed ice. And many of them had the old fashioned iceboxes, and so they would need ice in the winter, but not as much as they did in the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so did your father have a pretty nice facility to store his coal and his ice, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, we actually, actually, it was, I guess you could call it just in time. Because, you know, you're really operating these things--you're really kind of working for wages. Even though you're an entrepreneur, you're working for wages. You're making--you're going and buying something and you're marking it up and you're making a little profit on it. So, I say it was just in time. Because what we'd do is, at 5:00 in the morning, or 4:30 in the morning, we'd leave home to go down to Morris, Illinois and buy a truckload of coal and bring it back. And we'd get back maybe at seven or eight o'clock that morning, and then we'd sell it that day. So, I say it was just in time because we were actually meeting the needs of the consumer at the same time. And the ice facilities, we always purchased those products from other companies that were much larger, but not were necessarily catering to the market that we were involved in. So, they were catering to a broader or a much bigger market. So we would do it basically on a consumer basis, and it was more local.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the ice, you were selling the blocks of ice for the--
Speaker 2: Right. What we would do is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) iceboxes?
Speaker 2: Right. What we would do is we would buy--the icehouses used to make large chunks of ice, and they would be in like a two hundred pound block. And you could chip off twenty-five pounds, you could chip off fifty pounds, or you could sell someone a hundred pounds. So, then we'd put them on a truck and cover them with a canvas. And then we, we had a certain route that we would go to and we would supply people. Basically the same people had iceboxes, so you knew when their ice was going to run out, and you just had a route that you would go on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We'd get up early in the morning and go do that. So, I had an opportunity--I mean this was a good experience for me, because it gave me an opportunity to spend a lot of time with my father, which I think today in our community--I think young males don't have an opportunity to spend as much time with their father. But since I was, since I was involved in his work and he was an entrepreneur, it gave me a lot of, an opportunity to spend a lot of time with him. I think that today if we had more of that, I think we'd have a different, different kind of society. We wouldn't have the violence in the communities that we have today.
Speaker 1: Do you think it helped too, being an only child?
Speaker 2: Well, it did help being an only child. But, but on the other hand, you could look at it the other way. If I'd have had somebody else, I'd have had some help doing that work (laughter). So, it--I mean that was, that was helpful. But, but there was always enough work for three or four.
Story_ID: 636570
Speaker 1: Now it occurred to me too, as I'm hearing you tell this story, that you got a chance to see a lot of the Chicagoland area (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. We went to a lot of communities. I mean, we, today we manage Altgeld Gardens [Altgeld Gardens Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and I can remember when my dad [Elzie Higginbottom] and I used to peddle watermelons through Altgeld Gardens. It was a public housing development then. It was a wonderful community. And you know, a lot of famous ballplayers--Cazzie Russell came from that area. So, and we were out there at the time he was growing up, and we were, we met a lot of the people that lived there, that had lived there for years. Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois] and many of the suburban areas. And I got a chance to see some of the other cities in the State of Illinois, because we had to go to some of those cities to buy the products that we sold.
Speaker 1: Right, right. So did you spend a lot of time on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], in the Bronzeville area?
Speaker 2: Not a lot of time, not a lot of time on the Near South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. No, we didn't--my dad spent a lot of his time when he was growing up on the Near South Side, and that was before it changed racially. And he would sell a lot of, sell watermelons and those sort of things. And he also sold coal to the people there that lived in tenements that had coal burning stoves. And so he spent a lot of his time there, but my time was mostly Morgan Park, south.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, all right, so, yeah. So, as you were getting stuff from Water Market [South Water Market, Chicago, Illinois], which was deep in the city, you'd drive out south.
Speaker 2: I'd drive out to Robbins [Illinois], Phoenix [Illinois], Harvey [Illinois], Chicago Heights [Illinois], Homewood [Illinois], those areas.
Speaker 1: Okay. You hear these stories about kids that don't leave their own neighborhood and that sort of thing. But it seems like you really got around.
Speaker 2: Well, and I think that I had an opportunity to see a lot of things. And riding with my dad, when I saw it, if I had a question about it I could ask a question and I could get a good answer. So, I did have a, I had some very good life developing experiences by doing this as I grew up. And I think this is something that many of the chil- kids today don't get. So, that was good.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now, how old were you when your father started the laundromat [Morgan Park Laundromat, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], just a freshman in high school, going into my freshman year in high school. He started the laundromat in 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I would have been--it opened in nineteen six- so I was in the, in the eighth grade [at Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], and then going into high school.
Story_ID: 636571
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the beginning of grade school, and then we'll, we'll pick up the laundromat [Morgan Park Laundromat, Chicago, Illinois] story in high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: So, where did you start elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to a local elementary school in--on the east side of Chicago Heights [Illinois] called Franklin School. They later changed the name to Gavin School [Dr. Charles Gavin School], which was named after a black doctor [Charles Gavin] who grew up on the east side of Chicago Heights. And he came from an entrepreneurial family, too. They owned the local drycleaners. And then I went from Franklin School to Washington Junior High. And as a matter of fact, earlier today I had to go to Chicago Heights on an appointment, and I drove by my grade school and they were tearing it down.
Speaker 1: This is Washington Junior High School [Chicago Heights, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I then I went to Washington Junior High and spent my seventh and eighth grade there, and then I went on to Bloom High School [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me, now did you like school?
Speaker 2: It was, it was mixed. There were certain things about school I liked, and there were certain things about school I did not like. But my parents [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom and Elzie Higginbottom] always impressed upon me the value of an education. So, so, we had to--and they always told me that, you know, in life you're going to have to do some things you don't like, in order to be able to experience the things that you like, that you're going to like. And so I was--you know, but I didn't--I could really do without school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I could tell you that my favorite subject was gym, but it wasn't, (laughter) because I was in athletics. But I--arithmetic was my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay. Did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a favorite coach. You know, I had a number of teachers that I liked, but when I got to high school I had a coach, Ralph Steben, he was our track coach. And he was my, he was my favorite. He was, you know, he was a pretty, pretty hard taskmaster, but you know, he, he was successful as a coach. We had a number of, in the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s], Bloom Township was four years state champions in track and field.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, all right. So, so grade--is there anything about grade school that is significant, before we take you out of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it was, it was a local grade school. And I had a great, I had a great deal of good experiences there, because it was all neighborhood kids. And so, many of the kids that lived next door and down the street and that sort of thing, and we all went to grade school there. And I think it was a very successful, I had a successful experience there. And, you know, I think it gave us a good foundation. We, you know, our grade school was one that had a focus on education as well as community. So what we did was, we had a very close knit type community. But the principal and the teachers there had a good focus on education, so we didn't have a lot of conflict in our grade school. Because, you know, they said one, you have to get a good education. And two, you have to be loyal and faithful to the people in your community. And that's what they preached, and that's, that was what we got out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was your grade schools all black?
Speaker 2: It was like 90, 95 percent black. Our junior high school was probably more 50/50. And then when we got to Bloom it was much, it was probably 15 to 20 percent black, and the rest was majority students.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, Bloom--
Speaker 2: Because Bloom drew from a much bigger area. It grew from, as I said, the majority of--at that time the majority of the black community was on the east side of Chicago Heights. Bloom did not provide education to Harvey [Illinois], Dixmoor [Illinois], and those places. That was done by Thornton High School [Thornton Township High School, Harvey, Illinois]. And Thornton High School was basically just the opposite. Bloom was maybe 20 percent black at the time, and Thornton was probably 60 percent white--60 percent black and 40 percent white.
Speaker 1: Okay, right. Yeah, Bloom, there's a Bloom Trail [Bloom Trail High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Bloom Trail was the high school that came--that was built a year after I graduated. So, and that was because Ford Heights [East Chicago Heights; Ford Heights, Illinois] and Sauk Village [Illinois] and the areas in the southeast part of the south suburban area, they needed a high school there, because bussing was quite a little ways and Bloom High School was getting, from the standpoint of attendance, too big.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, they built Bloom Trails.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I did not--that was not there when I was in high school. It came the year after I finished.
Story_ID: 636572
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], did you ha- did you have a focus--did you take the business course in high school?
Speaker 2: I did. Whenever I had an opportunity to take a business course, I always took a business course. I, but in high school we, you know, the curriculum was pretty much academics; reading, writing and arithmetic and some foreign language. Because the focus there was to, was to prepare kids to be able to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, because I wondered. I know they were doing the three track system when I was in school. I'm a little younger than you are, but they were, they had a business course, a general course, which I don't know what it would prepare you to do other than work a job, you know, right after that. And then they had the business course, general course, and a college prep course. Did they have that at--
Speaker 2: Well, that was--no, that really came I think mostly after I graduated from high school. Because what we were doing there was, everyone was prepared to go to college. Now, you did, you could take shop if you wanted to take shop. But that was basically the only--and you could take home economics, and that was primarily for the girls. But generally speaking the curriculum was such, was set up such that you could go from this curriculum right into college.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was fortunate that--and I think that's good. I think that's--because what it did was it gave us the opportunity to have a well rounded education and experience a number of things. But it also prepared us, gave us the good kind of foundation that we needed to get into college.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you were in high school, did you envision yourself going to college?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was always--there was always--that I was going to go to college. I didn't know how we were going to--my parents [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom and Elzie Higginbottom] didn't know how we were going to afford it, but they knew I was going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a little easier. I mean, you know, even though I came from humble beginnings, it was a little bit easier because it was only, I was the only child. So, you know, it was easier for my plans to--my parents to make plans on a much more, on a much smaller budget than if you would have had three or four children at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: I was a good student in high school. I was, I went on to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], so I was a good enough student to get in the University of Wisconsin (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: I mean, could I have been a better student? Yes, I could have been a better student, but while my parents had a focus on education, they also had a focus on the fact that there are certain things that you have to do in order to have a successful life and be able to raise your family, and one of them is education. The other one is that you must have a good work ethic. Because you can have all the education in the world, and if you don't have a good work ethic you're not going to be able to put the education to use. And if you have a great work ethic and very little education, you'll always be able to have a job, but you will not be able to advance to the level that you might be capable of advancing to, for lack of education.
Story_ID: 636573
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was--my mother was a--was Church of God in Christ. So if you know that, you know they go to church all day on Sunday. And it, I'd say--and we had one down--there was one that's still down there, and it was right down the street from us that we used to attend. And, but, you know, it was always--well, what we tried to do is we had, we tried to have a balance. My parents [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom and Elzie Higginbottom] always felt that you should have a balance. You had, you had religion, you had some time for recreation, but you had to work. Because at the end of the day when you--you know, all these things had to be supported economically. So, the real foundation was to make sure that you had the wherewithal to be able to support these activities. Now, this doesn't mean that you had to be a great giver, but you had to be at a level that you weren't dependent on the rest of society to provide for you and your family.
Story_ID: 636574
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of recreation, what did you like to do? Did you like music, or movies, or TV, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, no I (laughter), I would have liked music, but when I was in grade school at Franklin School [Chicago Heights, Illinois] they had Lyons and Healy [sic. Lyon and Healy Harps, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. You know how they'd bring out the band instruments? They'd try to sell band instruments, and they would let the children experience them. And I said I wanted to be a drummer, because I thought that was great. And so, the fellow from Lyons and Healy that was bringing out the equipment to kind of talk to you about what kind of instrument you should play, he says, "You want to be a drummer?" And I said, "Yes." And my mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] was sitting right there. And he says, "Well, I tell you what I want you to do. I want you to pat your foot and clap your hand at the same time." And I couldn't do it. I had no rhythm at all (laughter). Now, my father [Elzie Higginbottom] had rhythm. He could sing well. But I had no rhythm at all. And he looked at my mother and he said, "You know, this is the first black child that I've ever encountered that doesn't have any rhythm." (Laughter) So I did not, I did not--needless to say, I did not focus on music. But we did have, as I said, we had a nice park near our house, and we had a lot of adults that were always there supporting the different kinds of activities, whether it was baseball, track, or what have you. And so I would go over there, and that's how I got involved in running.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did they have a formal program for track?
Speaker 2: Well, they had, they did have a formal track program. But the formal program was coached by parents. So, we would have--and it all worked up to one meet. And that was, there was a place on Halsted Street called Glenwood School for Boys [Glenwood Academy, Glenwood, Illinois], and they had a huge track. And we would have one annual meet at the Glenwood School for Boys. And so they coached our team, and the best kids got an opportunity to run at Glenwood School for Boys.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you in like middle school when you started running?
Speaker 2: I started, I started running in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my first meet, and that was at Glenwood School for Boys. And then I went to middle school and I ran, and that was the seventh and eighth grade [at Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]. And then I went to high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], and that's where I really started running. Because I was, I was a little small. I wasn't, I wasn't one of the bigger kids, so I was kind of small for my age.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, so running was something that I could do.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you--what event did you run in in the beginning?
Speaker 2: I ran the sprints. I ran the 220 and the 100, and that sort of thing. But then when I got to college--when I got to high school, the coach had me start running the quarter mile.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was it about you that made him choose you for the quarter mile?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: That's the hardest, that's one of the hardest sprints to run.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things, one of the things about it is that you need more quarter milers than you do anything else, because you have to have a mile relay. And I think sprinting, being a little smaller than some of the other guys, while I had the leg speed, I didn't necessarily have the power. So, a quarter mile, you have to have endurance and you have to have determination. And I think that those are two of the things that he saw in me. And he could build up the endurance, because he made me run cross country. And I hated to do that, really. But I ran--my freshman year I was injured, and my parents were concerned about whether or not I'd be able to run in high school because of the injury. But they took me to a number of specialists and good doctors, and they said, well, you know, it was, it had something to do with growing. And I grew out of it, my sophomore year I grew out of it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Was it a knee problem or something?
Speaker 2: No, it was a hip problem. It was a problem with my hip. I didn't have, I didn't have problems with my knees; I had problems with my hip. And it was probably something between my back and my hip. Maybe in some of the development, something hadn't developed quite like it should. Probably today they could tell you exactly what it is. But back then, and they were just guessing. And, but, you know, as God would have it, I grew out of it. But I was still small. I was still smaller, but, but I had pretty good leg speed and a lot of determination. So, I was able to make the team my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And the coach--
Speaker 2: Ralph Steben.
Story_ID: 636575
Speaker 1: Ralph Ste- Steben [Ralph Steben], like, tell us about him. I mean, why is he your favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a chemistry teacher, but he was a--just a hardnosed guy, and he knew that if you wanted be a good athlete it really required a lot of determination and a lot of hard work. And he practiced us very hard. As a matter of fact, one time he wanted me to go out for cross country, and I wouldn't go out for it. I said, "I don't want to run cross country, it's too slow. I'm a sprinter." I mean a quarter miler basically is a sprinter. Back then, they called it the 440 yard run. But basically, it was a sprint. And I said I wasn't going out, and he really was, it was a real dilemma. So, he called home looking for my dad [Elzie Higginbottom]. And my dad was off working, but my mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] answered the phone. And she said, "Well, what's the problem, Coach Steben?" And he says, "Well, Elzie [HistoryMaker Elzie Higginbottom] will not run cross country. I've been trying to get him to run cross country for a month now. He really needs it for his endurance." And this was my sophomore year. "But he won't run." And so, my mother says, "Well, what about track?" He says, "Well, you know, I think he does really well in track and he likes track." And I used to go home and talk about track all the time. And she says, "Well, I'll tell you what, coach. You call him in the office tomorrow and you tell him no cross country, no track." And so, I didn't know that she had told him this, but I later found out about it. So, the next day I go to school and he calls me in the office. And he says, "Elzie, what about cross country?" I said, "Coach, I'm not going to run cross country. I don't want to run cross country." So he says, "Well, I tell you what." He says, "I think you really need to run cross country. But if you're not going to run cross country, you can't run track." And I said (laughter), "Well, are you--you mean I can't run?" And he says, "No, you will--I will not permit you." He was both the cross country coach and the track coach. "I will not permit you to run track if you don't run cross country." So, needless to say, two days later I was running cross country. (Laughter) And he, and it was good for me, because it helped build my endurance. But, but, his determination and will to try to get the best out of every athlete that he coached was always impressive to me. And the other thing, it was always good sportsmanship. Today in athletics, I think that too many of our participants do not display good sportsmanship. You know, at the end of the day, the most important thing in athletics is good sportsmanship, to display good sportsmanship. The second most important thing is winning. And that was kind of the way he coached all of the guys. And he had great athletes that went on to--some of the smaller universities and that sort of thing. And as a matter of fact, some of the kids that came behind me that he coached, one of the young men became the athletic director at Bloom High School [Chicago Heights, Illinois].
Story_ID: 636576
Speaker 1: How were black people treated at Bloom [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] for the most part? Did it mirror how they were treated in the community? Or was it better, or worse?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, we weren't treated, we weren't treated that poorly in the community. I mean it was, you know, the black people were on the east side of Chicago Heights [Illinois]. Chicago Heights is a town that's pre- at that time it was predominantly, it was black and predominantly Italian, and we all came together at high school. And there were a number of people that--from our community that worked with the coaches over at the high school. But I'd say we were treated very well in high school. We did not experience in high school any prejudice. We lived in separate communities within this town, but we did not experience any prejudice at Bloom, and it was a great experience for me. I think it was a great experience for all the kids that came there. And the students from Ford Heights [Illinois], which was then called East Chicago Heights, also went to Bloom. And these were, these were families of modest means. But when we got to high school we were all, we were basically all on the same level. And there was a lot of respect for the kids that came from the east side, and how well they were doing in athletics and academically. So, there were no issues there back then. They've probably had more issues since then than they did when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what kind of counseling did you get at Bloom?
Speaker 2: Well, we, I mean, the counseling--see, it was basically--your curriculum was going to take you on to college. And your counseling was you had to, you had to get good grades in this class, this class, this class, and that class. And basically back then it was reading, writing and arithmetic. That's what got you into college. And so, they counseled everyone for college. And I think we developed a good foundation at Bloom, and that foundation enabled students to get to various colleges. And the business community in Chicago Heights was very supportive of the high school, and very supportive of the high school athletic teams. And while there was not a big black business community, it was a good strong business community from the standpoint of banks and savings and loans and that sort of thing from the other, from the majority community. And that--there was a big support for athletics.
Story_ID: 636577
Speaker 1: Now, were there many black professionals in town when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not many. As I said, the Gavins owned the cleaners. They did not have--we might have had one black teacher. But it was all, primarily all majority community people teaching us.
Speaker 1: Okay. You said Dr. Gavin [Charles Gavin] was the--was it Dr. Gavin?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a Dr. Gavin. His father--his brother became a judge, Marvin Gavin here in Chicago [Illinois]. So, and their mother [Manila Gavin] and father [Robert Gavin] ran the local cleaners on the east side of Chicago Heights [Illinois], Gavin Cleaners. And they--now they were, there was five of them. And they, we had, we had an equal experience in growing up. We all, we worked in our parents' businesses. They worked in their parents' business. They worked in the cleaners and that sort of thing. Their mother and father worked long hours in their business. And education was an emphasis. They were not, they did not participate in athletics at the level that I did, but you could see--you could see in them as adults the, the experience that they had with their parents, and--in that entrepreneurial experience that they had. And they, and that's how they performed as adults.
Story_ID: 636578
Speaker 1: Oh, tell me about the laundromat [Morgan Park Laundromat, Chicago, Illinois]. I keep--now I've got to pick up the laundromat now. That, that starts while you're in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: That start- that started while I, that, that started while I was in high school, and I used to go every Saturday. And my dad [Elzie Higginbottom] decided that he wanted to open a laundromat, and he chose Morgan Park [Chicago, Illinois]. We still lived in Chicago Heights [Illinois], and he chose Morgan Park as the place to open it. He found a building there and we acquired the building, and he opened a laundromat there using Westinghouse equipment. So, it was kind of a Westinghouse laundromat. And that was, that was, at that time it was called a launderette. And there, what happened was people brought their clothes in, they dropped them off. You washed them, dried them, folded them, and then they would come and pick them up--and package them, and they would come in and pick them up at the end of the day. And, you know, Fridays and Saturdays were always busy days. And I would go and help my dad there on Friday--on Saturdays, and we'd work there until we finished, sometimes at nine o'clock, that sort of thing, servicing our customers.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I read somewhere that your mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] persuaded your father to buy the building rather than--
Speaker 2: Well, yes. I said earlier that my father found a building, and at first he was going to lease the building, rent the building. And when my mother and father were looking at the type of investment that you had to make to open a laundromat--that means fixture it and do the mechanicals--my mother says, "Well, you can't put this much money in someone else's building." So, she convinced my dad that they should buy it. And since it was a vacant building, the person that owned it, when he didn't have a tenant, he was willing to accept my dad's offer to sell it to him. And my dad bought the building and then--but it was at the same location. He had looked at another building, but this was the one that he wanted, and it was at the same location. So he purchased the building and they--our laundromat's been there since 1955.
Speaker 1: Okay. But you worked primarily on Saturdays?
Speaker 2: I worked there on Saturdays, right. We were closed on Sundays, but we were there on Saturdays 'til late. And then I'd go to school. And it was too far for me to get from Chicago Heights to Morgan Park to help him after school, so I would just go with him on Saturday mornings.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, it didn't interfere with high school?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't interfere with my high school. And what happened, as I was running track--then, we'd have track practice at the end of the, you know, after school. So, it really did not afford me the opportunity to go help him in the, in the evenings, evenings. And so, I would just do it on Saturdays.
Story_ID: 636579
Speaker 1: Now, you became a fairly successful track athlete. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I started running track in the sixth grade [at Franklin School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]. I ran through seventh and eighth [at Washington Junior High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois]. My freshman year in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], I was injured. But my sophomore year in high school I ran on both the 880 yard relay and the mile relay down in Champaign [Illinois]. And we were, we won both of those relay events. So I ran 200 yard--220 yards on the 880 yard relay, and my leg was 440 yards on the mile relay. And I (laughter), it was an interesting story. When I went down there as a sophomore, as I told you earlier, I was kind of small. So, we got off the bus and we went through the gate. And I forgot something, so I had to go back through the gate, to the bus to get it. And when I came back, the officials wouldn't let me in. I had to call for my team, because they didn't think I was a high schooler. They thought I was a grade schooler. So, the coach [Ralph Steben] heard me calling, and he had to come back and get me and let me in. But, but, I was, I was fortunate. I ran a pretty good leg on both legs of my, both legs of my relay. And so, the next year they remembered me. And that was, that year I ran the mile relay and the quarter mile open event. And I won the state championship that year in the quarter mile, and we won the mile relay as well.
Speaker 1: Now, what year would this be?
Speaker 2: That would have been 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1959, 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was actually '59 [1959]. And in 1960 I was the defending state champion and I had an injury, and I did not defend my championship. I got fifth as a senior in the quarter mile. I probably should not have been running but, you know, I was the defending champion and I needed to at least go out there. So, I had a very severe hamstring injury that kind of plagued me through both high school and college. Probably today they could have figured out what the problem was. I think I had a lot of tension in my back, and it put tension on my hamstring. And so, I really probably needed to warm up more, and do more exercises than I had done. And so, it just kind of plagued me both through high school and college. And then I was recruited by the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] as a--I was the defending state champion and I got fifth place, and then they recruited me with the Indiana state champion, because they had a coach there that was an Olympian, Rut Walter [Charles "Rut" Walter]. He was an Olympic quarter miler in 1934 [sic.] or something like that. And he was, he wanted to build a track team at Wisconsin, so he recruited a number of athletes from northern Illinois--Chicago [Illinois] and northern Illinois, and I was one of them that he recruited for us to go up and, and run track at Wisconsin.
Story_ID: 636580
Speaker 1: Now was Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] the, the only school to recruit you, or?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't--you know, I'm, I had offers to go to Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and there were other schools. But I don't, I really don't, I don't really function like that. I kind of, I kind of pick a destination and I say that's what I want to do. And that's, I believe that you're successful at things if you focus on them. I think today people try to do too many things. My dad [Elzie Higginbottom] used to always tell me--and you asked me what's my favorite saying, my dad used to always tell me, he said, "You know, you can be a jack of all trades and a master of none. Just be a master of one." So, I knew that in order to go to college I needed a grant and aid scholarship. And there were--the Chicago [Illinois] area--the Wisconsin and the Chicago area alumni association [Wisconsin Alumni Association Chicago Area Chapter] was very, very powerful. And they recruited, and they had a couple of representatives out in the south suburban areas. So they were, they were leaning pretty heavy on us. And I went to Wisconsin, and I looked to see what kind of school it was. And it had, it had a good rating. And so, I went up and visited it and I really liked it. I did not want to be that far away from home [Chicago Heights, Illinois], because, you know, we're kind of a close knit family. And so it had a lot of things that I liked. I thought Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] was a little too formal for me. And Loyola wasn't quite big enough, even though some people--Tommy O'Hara [Tom O'Hara] went to Loyola, he was a world class miler. So, I picked Wisconsin, and I'm glad I made the--I made that decision.
Story_ID: 636581
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a senior in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], now were you, did you, had you run for class office or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I did, I did not run for any class--not for class office or anything like that. My focus was always on, I wanted to be an entrepreneur. I did not want to be involved in politics, and running for class office was politics. I mean I would have--I was always out trying to figure out how to sell something, or trade something, or do this. And I really, because I had grown up on a farm in my early years, I really wanted--I thought maybe I wanted to be a farmer. And my dad [Elzie Higginbottom] had--while we had modest means, by then my dad had bought the building that--two buildings. He had bought the building that we lived in in Chicago Heights [Illinois] and bought the building that we lived in, that he had his laundromat in [Morgan Park Laundromat, Chicago, Illinois]. And so I was always around fixing up something, and doing that sort of thing. So it was kind of hands on, I kind of liked that. And I didn't think politics was for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you graduated in 1959? Or was it--?
Speaker 2: I graduated, I graduated in 1960. And I entered Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] in 19--in the fall of 1960.
Speaker 1: All right, 1960. So this is the year of the presidential election, Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] versus Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did your family have a position on the candidates?
Speaker 2: No. Well, I think historically my family was always Democratic, because they felt that they did more for the small man. You know, whether that's true or not, we don't know. But that was their feeling, so we always had Democratic leanings one way or another. And we were for Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And he represented the interests that we felt were most in our interests.
Speaker 1: All right. Had your family--did they discuss, did your mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] and father discuss--or your grandparents--discuss the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think a little bit differently. They discussed the inequities in our system, but they also discussed the opportunities in our system. And they were always of a mindset that you don't look back, you look forward. And while you might not have been able to do something yesterday, it doesn't mean that you might not be able to do it today or tomorrow. So prepare yourself, be prepared to do that. And we were, we were--I was aware of the inequities, there's no question about it. But, you know, my parents were always people who really felt that you had to work for a living, and if you went out and worked hard, then you could be successful. I mean, that was just their code. And they worked hard, and they gave me a good work ethic. And I worked hard, and I probably could have worked harder. But, but it's, it's, it's paid off.
Story_ID: 636582
Speaker 1: University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], did, did you have to do anything special in preparation for your trip to the University of Wisconsin, or? You said you visited the campus ahead of time?
Speaker 2: Well, yes. As, when they were trying to recruit athletes they would take you up there for a visit in the summertime before you made your decision, to take a look at it, because they were trying to sell you on the university and sell you on the environment. And I had looked at the academic standing of the university, and I knew that it was at the level that I was interested in, and above. So, they didn't have to sell me on that. As I said earlier, it was not that far away from home, and it had more of a--I liked the people. The people from the State of Wisconsin are probably--there're good people all over the world, but the people from the State of Wisconsin are very good people. And at the time that I went to Wisconsin, the student population was probably thirty-five thousand, and there was probably less than a hundred black students.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So it was an environment which I was not unfamiliar with, because we had a--in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] we had a, kind of a, a similar type environment. And I liked the person who was leaving Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] going to Wisconsin to be the track coach [Charles "Rut" Walter]. So you know, I liked that kind of environment. I liked to be, I liked to--I liked to have a comfort zone. I worked better there.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what was it like? I mean, what were your classes like?
Speaker 2: It was a great experience. I struggled, I struggled--I went--I have a degree in agricultural economics, because I wanted to be a, I wanted to go into farming. And I had, as I said, you know, I had kind of a narrow range. I either wanted to be a farmer or a real estate guy, nothing else. You kind of, you worked for yourself in both of them, and you could, you could move up. The sky was always the limit. So, I, as most freshmen, it, it took me a little time to mature. But we got through our freshman year and, and then we went on.
Story_ID: 636583
Speaker 1: Then, you could only compete in athletics for three years, your sophomore, junior, and senior year; there was no competing your freshman year. However, you did have intramural meets that you participated in. And I, as I said, they recruited a number of top athletes from all over northern Indiana and northern Illinois. And the--one of the--they needed four people for the mile relay. So, they had four quarter milers, and they had to determine who was going to be the best quarter miler. So we had an intrasquad meet just before we went to Christmas break. And the quarter miler from Indiana, he had run faster than me. My fastest time in high school [Bloom Township High School; Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois] was 49:2. His fastest time was 48:8 for 440 yards. And he was tall, six foot, good, smooth, good runner, smooth stride and nice gait. And they thought he would be the number one quarter miler for Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. And I, I hadn't quite accepted that fact (laughter). I thought I should be the number one quarter miler for Wisconsin. So we had an intrasquad meet, and because they thought he should be number one, they gave him lane one, and they gave me lane four. And then they had two other quarter milers that were there. So, there were five of running; one other quarter miler was running. And there, we had a 220 yard track. And after you run the first 220 yards you break for the pole and you run the last lap, which is to get you to 440 yards, and you run that at wherever your position is. So, we, they started the race and we started to go. And I was in lane four and he was in lane one, and going down the backstretch I could kind of see where he was. And I kind of knew where he was, and I felt pretty good about it. And we came around the--so it came time to break for the pole, and I was in four and he was in one. And when we got ready to break for the pole, he looked over at me and I looked over at him, and we were neck and neck. And he grabbed his leg and ran off the track. And I went ahead and won the race, and I became Wisconsin's number one quarter miler and he--well, he was a participant in the mile relay, but the difference was is that I don't think he wanted it as badly as I did. So, he wasn't, he just wasn't--when it came right down to it he--but he was a good guy, a nice  guy, he was a good friend, and he had all the talent. He, I'd say that he was taller, but I prevailed and I became a world class quarter miler as a result of it.
Speaker 2: So when he grabbed his leg, did he hurt himself (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He injured--yeah, but that same injury plagued him throughout his whole college career. So, but the one thing that we learned about later was that when he ran on the mile relay, if we put him in front, he'd run a good leg. If we put him behind, he'd run a good leg. If we put him eyeball to eyeball with the other guy, he'd have a problem. So, it was just his, you know, the level of desire that he had that--great person, great quarter miler, but I think just, just one on one, it just didn't, didn't work too good for him.
Story_ID: 636584
Speaker 1: I think like Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]--didn't Wisconsin go, go to the Rose Bowl when you were there?
Speaker 2: Wisconsin went to the Rose Bowl when I was there, my college roommate, Lou Holland, played in the Rose Bowl. Jim Nettles, he played in the Rose Bowl, all those guys. Yeah, we went to the Rose Bowl.
Speaker 1: And the quarterback, Ron Vander Kelen?
Speaker 2: Ron Vander Kelen, that's right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I thought so. We had to go back in the attic for that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Pat Richter was there with us. He became later, later became the athletic director. So we had, I mean we had really, really--Merritt Norvell, who went on and played on that Rose Bowl team. And we had a good group of guys. And there again, it came down to community and education. We were, we were, we were eligible to participate all the time. We had a good, solid community base. We, it was, it was almost seamless working. Pat Richter, who was the athletic director, who was later the football coach and then became the athletic director for Wisconsin, he was a year ahead of me. But he was from Madison [Wisconsin], and he had a car, and he used to pick us up and bring us back and forth from practice. So we all had a good community spirit. And it just goes to show what kinds of things you can have when people are working together and they're not working against one another. And that's what, you know, throughout my entire business career, and quite frankly, in my young adult--as I was growing up as a young adult, I've always been able to meet good people and work with good people. And that's been in large part, I'd say responsible for the successes that I've had. Because I've always, I always meet good people and we work well together.
Story_ID: 636585
Speaker 1: Now in terms of--I didn't ask you this. But when you mentioned being involved in real estate, what inspired you to, you know, focus on real estate?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a--that's interesting. Because every year, they would give you a summer job. And I had a summer job working construction on one of the dorms. And I stayed in Madison [Wisconsin] that year, and I was making maybe a hundred and twenty or a hundred and thirty bucks [dollars] a week during the summer. And there was an attorney here in Chicago [Illinois], William--Bill Nathanson, William Allen Nathanson, and he was president of the Chicago area alumni association for the University of Wisconsin [Wisconsin Alumni Association Chicago Area Chapter]. And he would reach out to get summer jobs for you, and he'd always call you and say, "Well, what would you like to do this summer?" So, he called me between my sophomore and junior year [at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], and he asked me, "What would you like to do?" Actually it was between in my--yeah, junior and senior year, because I went to school nine semesters. And I said, "You know, I really would like to get involved in real estate." And so he said, "Well, I'll see what I can do." So, he, he tried to get me a job with a number of real estate companies. And he had a friend that was working at Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois]. And that friend called John Baird [John W. Baird] and asked John if he would hire me as a summer intern. John said, "Well, we don't do that." And so, but Nathan- Nathanson was a pretty tenacious guy, and he kept calling and calling. And he had another friend call John Baird. And then he had another friend call John Baird. And so, finally John Baird said, "Okay, I'll interview the person, but I won't promise you anything." And I was in Albuquerque, New Mexico and I was running in the national championships down there. And I had decided that I was going to go and run in Europe for the summer. So it was one more meet that I had to run in up in St. Louis [Missouri], and if I did well in that, that would mean I'd go to Europe. And I thought I'd do all right, because I was like--there were three or four, three or four--I was the number three or four quarter miler at that time. And--
Speaker 1: This is 1962?
Speaker 2: That was 1962; 1962, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962], '63 [1963]. So, I call home and my mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom]--this was on a Thursday--I call home and my mother said that Mr. Nathanson had gotten me an interview with Mr. John Baird of Baird and Warner for a real estate job for the summer. And I complained to her that, "Well, you know, I'm going to go run in Europe, and I'm going to do this and I'm going to do that." And she says, "Well, you know, you do--you make up your own mind. But just remember, you asked him to get you a job. You asked him to see if he could get you a job, and he did that. And so, you make up your own mind and you call me back." So, I--because he had set the appointment. So, she was going to have to call and cancel it. So I thought about it that night, and I said, "Well," I called her the next day and I said, "well, since I asked him to do it, I'll come and interview." And so, I cancelled what I was going to do, and I came back to Chicago [Illinois]. I thought it was the responsible thing to do. I came back home, and that Monday I went to interview with John Baird, and he offered me a summer job. And he said, "I've not done this before. I don't know what would be an appropriate consideration for you doing that. But here's what I offer you." And I said, "Okay." I says, "Well, I have to go back home and talk to my parents." Well, he offered me sixty dollars a week as a summer intern. And the year before, I had made a hundred and twenty dollars a week working construction. So, I go home and we're sitting and having dinner, and my dad [Elzie Higginbottom] asked me how things went. And I said, "Well, they went good. I like what I saw. They offered me a job." I said, "But Dad," I said, "they offered me a job at sixty dollars a week." I said, "And last year, I worked construction and I made a hundred and twenty dollars a week," like I said. So, and we lived in Chicago Heights [Illinois], and I had to take the train. So I said, "Well, Dad, you know, I'm not going to make any money." So he says, "Well, son, you got--last year you got a hundred and twenty dollars in your paycheck a week. This year you're getting sixty dollars a week in your paycheck, and you're gonna get sixty dollars a week in knowledge. That's a hundred and twenty dollars. I think you should take the job." So I called him up and told him I'd take the job. And it was a great decision.
Story_ID: 636586
Speaker 1: So, Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois]. Now, how did you--were you the first black person to work for Baird and Warner?
Speaker 2: Well, they had another fellow that was, he was kind of a rent collector, because they had a--his name was Evans Waters [ph.]. And they had a Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] office, and he used to collect some rents on the South Side for them. But I was probably the first black person that worked for Baird and Warner that was moving into the management capacity. And I can remember that back then I would go to some of the suburban offices, because I worked in the real estate finance department. He assigned me to the real estate finance department, and they assigned me to an appraiser, and so we were doing appraisals. And I would go out to some of the Baird and Warner offices, and when I'd walk in the office they'd look at me like, "What are you doing here?" And I'd say, "Well, you know, Mr. Baird [John W. Baird] sent me here." And then all the doors came down, (laughter) and they'd give me anything I wanted. So, I said, "Well, this works pretty good." So, I used that a lot. And I learned a lot. And then I worked there for the summer and then I came back because I enjoyed it, and I think they were happy with the product that I was giving them. I came back and worked between my--right at the end of my senior year [at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. I went nine semesters, so I worked between my ninth semester and my eighth semester. And I--then they offered me a job as a, in property management. So, I said, you know, "I think's that's good." But they weren't quite ready for it, so I worked in the real estate finance department for a while, and I did some more appraisal work. And I went out to a house--it's very interesting. I went out to a house in Alsip, Illinois to appraise a house. And this is when corporations would buy the executive's house and transfer them someplace. And when I went out to appraise this house, I got back to the office and John Baird said--he called me in his office and he says, "What did you do out there?" And I said, "I just went and appraised the house." And he said, "Who was there?" And I told him, "The guy's wife was there. It was an executive. The gentleman's wife was there. And I went through and looked at it, and appraised the house." And he says, "Yeah, you know, I got a phone call." And I said, "Well, what did the phone call say?" He says, "Well, they said, 'Why did you send a black person out to appraise this house?'" And I looked at him and I said, "Well, what did you say?" And he says, "Well, I asked him, I said, 'Don't you sell a little beer on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]?'" And I said, "What did he say?" And he said, "Well, the guy didn't say anything. He said, 'Thank you,' and he hung up." But the case was, is that that's the kind of person John Baird was. John didn't see anything wrong with me appraising a house in Alsip, because they sold Anheuser--it was Budweiser [Anheuser-Busch Companies]--they sold beer on the South Side, so why couldn't, why shouldn't I appraise that house? And that's the kind of person he was. He was a good person, and he was a mentor. And, you know, I still say today that John is largely responsible for the success that I've enjoyed. He's in the high nineties now. He's ninety-seven or ninety-eight, and he and I became partners in real estate deals, and he's a person that I have a great deal of respect for. And he's been in a number of, he's been in a number of organizations that have really fostered integration and a lot more cooperation between the races. He's in the Chicago area, and he's just a tremendous person. He's a good person; he's been good for me, good to me. And then I left the real estate finance department and I went to work in the management department. And one of my first jobs--and he really didn't hire me for it--was to be the property management at the development across the street which is called South Commons [Chicago, Illinois], which McHugh-Levin [McHugh-Levin Associates, Chicago, Illinois] did back--the Community Renewal Society [Chicago, Illinois] owned the land, and McHugh-Levin did that. And I--that didn't, it didn't work very well for a number of reasons. But then I asked him to transfer me back to the real estate finance department, department, because, as I said, it was--it had to do with numbers and math, and I liked that.
Story_ID: 636587
Speaker 1: What happened at South Commons [Chicago, Illinois]? Can you tell us about what happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well so, what happened at the development, or what happened with me in there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the development got built, but you know, back then they were, they were trying to make sure that South Commons was an integrated development. And we had a senior vice president there that was running the department, and I think he had some--he had some insecurities about how he might do that, and maybe felt a little uncomfortable with me being there. And so, we didn't work very well together. So, I went back to the real estate finance department, and he--South Commons got built just across the street. It's a wonderful development; McHugh-Levin [McHugh-Levin Associates, Chicago, Illinois] did a great job on it. Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois] did a great job managing it. And I--well, there was a, there was a vice president, senior vice president of the real estate finance department. And when I went back down there--because I asked John [John W. Baird] to transfer me back there. And when he did I went back down there and I asked--I asked him, I says, "Well, what do you want me to do? Do you want me to do, continue to do appraising, or what?" Because that's what I did before. He says, "No," he says, "why don't you do FHA [Federal Housing Administration]? That's something your race won't hurt you in." So I, (laughter) I said, "Where do I learn about it?" He says, "Well, we have some books up there." And I said, "Okay." And he was a fine guy. He started working at Baird and Warner in the mailroom and worked his way up to senior vice president, a really nice person, a self made guy. And so, I guess he thought that if he could do it, I could do it. So, he--I started reading the handbooks, and in a couple of years I was one of the highest producing divisions in his department, and I had a very successful time doing real estate financing. I financed many of the high profile developments there in the city and in the suburban areas, utilizing some form of credit enhancement, whether it's FHA insurance or letters of credit and that sort of thing, and I built a, built a very successful department at Baird and Warner. But after having been there for eighteen years, I decided that I wanted to leave and do something in the community. And I went in and I talked to John, and said, "Look, you know, I've had a very, very, wonderful career here. But I really think that I'd like to do something in the community." And that's when I left. And I had been doing some properties of my own prior to that, and that's when I left and decided to come out in the community and try to help rebuild, using affordable housing in some of the inner city neighborhoods. And that's when I started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear). I'm sorry, this is 1975?
Speaker 2: Well, it's about 19--I came out in about 1981, '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay. Because you started East Lake [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois] in '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I--what happened was is I-- he let me--as I said, you know, it's the people you meet. He let me moonlight. In other words I would--as long as I--as long as what I was doing was not in conflict with what my customers were doing, I could do it. Well, my customers weren't doing any inner city deals. So, I would go do inner city deals; and, and then I would, then I set up a little company in which I managed them through.
Story_ID: 636588
Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit to, just to get your view on some of the other things that are going on in Chicago [Illinois] in those days. I think about around the time that you started working for, for Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois], I think they had just finished the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. Did, did you have any thoughts about the high rise housing projects in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I have--and people have--and there's, there's two schools of thought. People agree and disagree. I think public housing at the time it was started was a much needed thing. Because there was a large part of our population, and unfortunately most of them were black, that needed some form of assistance in their housing. They were ill housed. They were living in one--single story buildings that didn't have indoor plumbing, had terrible floors, and they were rat and roach infested. And so, it was a great idea to build housing for them.  However, I think where we really missed the boat was, is that we built the housing and we did not integrate into the development of the housing a social support network that the people needed. Because the reason the people were ill housed is because they didn't have adequate employment, they didn't have adequate education, to name a few. And had we built in an appropriate social support network, we would probably not have had the problems that we had in the public housing that we had in Chicago. You know, people say high rises are bad. Well, high rises are not the most ideal place for large families. However, no one says high rises are bad on North Lake Shore Drive. The people on North Lake Shore Drive have employment, education, families, and some of them even have families with three and four children in them. So, while I would say that it was not the most ideal situation for children, it is something that could have worked, I think, had we put into it the appropriate social support network, so we could have educated the parents that were there, because many of the parents who were going there were poorly educated. So, we could have found employment for many of the parents who were going there. We needed a system of daycare, because we had all the children there, and in order for the mothers to work, we would have had to have a place to deposit--for their children to go during the day. The other thing is that I think that where we, where we really screwed up, is that in order to get in that, a female head of household had to not have a male around. So, now that was a case of breaking down the family structure. And at the end of the day, a good society is one which has a good solid family structure; a mother and father raising children. This isn't to say that it can't be done by a father or a mother, but I think that when you have mothers and fath- when you have mother and father type situations, you have a stronger network. And I think that there's some, there are some statistics that are bearing that out today.
Story_ID: 636589
Speaker 1: Now here you are, you're in Chicago [Illinois], young man with a degree from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. You're working for Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois], an executive. Now, who--where did you live in the city, and who were your friends? Did you start to meet other people who were moving up the same way?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. I moved to Hyde Park. My first two apartments were in Hyde Park. My first apartment was in Hyde Park, I went away to the National Guard because I was--remember, I graduated from college the year--well, it was Vietnam [Vietnam War], and then all the riots started. So, I was in the National Guard in Illinois when we had all the riots, as well as the Democratic Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]. So, I lived in Hyde Park. And I met a number of people. But I think that, as I said earlier, I'm the kind of a person who kind of focuses. And while I had a limited number of friends, I was really focused on trying to develop and build my career as a real estate guy. And so I spent, I spent lots of time. And young kids today are spending sixty and seventy hours a week working--when they're working for these major corporations when they come in as interns, full time interns. And I spent those kind of hours working and learning the real estate business. I mean, I went into every neighborhood. I went on the West Side of Chicago. There was, there was a person there that owned a building, owned a couple of buildings. And he was getting paid rent payments for welfare families by DCFS [Illinois Department of Children and Family Services], and they had cut off his payments. And I wanted to have the experience of being able to see if these properties were manageable. So, I made a deal with him that I would manage his buildings as long as he let me take all of the money that I received in rental income and plow it back into the buildings. And I did that just to get--and I used to leave work, and at 5:00 or 5:30, I'd be over there, and I'd leave there at 9:30 or 10:00 at night, but I knew about the buildings. That's like when you tell me--when someone asks me something about the West Side of Chicago and they say, "Well, you don't know anything about the West Side of Chicago." Well, I was on the West Side of Chicago forty years ago when they really had problems over there. The same thing with the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. I, I started developing and rehabilitating buildings in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] when everyone else was leaving. So, because I thought that--I looked at the real estate, and I thought that there was a great potential there, number one. And number two is I thought that there was an underserved population that was going to be there anyway. So, why not be there and try to give them the very best possible housing that you can give them.
Story_ID: 636590
Speaker 1: Yeah I often wondered when I moved here--that it seems as though, that parts of South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] were deteriorating, and I wondered why lakefront property would be allowed to deteriorate, but.
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't--it all has to do with economics. The group that was mo- moving in did not have the same economic power as the group that was moving out. And that has to do with employment; that has to do with entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship. If you'd go--at that time I used to go down along 71st Street and I'd say, "Look at all these vacant stores." Well, the group that was moving out, they were the, they had a much larger entrepreneurial base than the group that was moving in. If the group that was moving in would have had the same level of developed economic base, they would have filled those vacant stores, providing the needed goods and services for the citizens that lived in the apartment buildings around there. But that group was not as focused on entrepreneurial things as the group that moved out. And that was at a time when my peers, their parents were sending them to college, and they wanted them to--they wanted them to go to college and get a degree, and work for a large company. My parents [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom and Elzie Higginbottom] had a position that you go to college and get a degree, and if you go to work for a large company, you go there to learn, not to retire. So, you know, I was fortunate, because my parents were always pushing entrepreneurship, and they were always pushing, "You have to build an institution." You know, my dad got in--you know, after several different tries and several different businesses, he got in a business that he stayed in for fifty years, almost--'til he passed away. He was in it for forty years.
Speaker 1: That's the laundromat [Morgan Park Laundromat, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes. And so, what you do, is you get into something and you, you have to institutionalize it. And I think that in our community, if we begin to focus on that more today, I think that going forward, our community will be better served and will integrate better into the fabric of our larger community. I mean, I own a building that the Chicago Metropolitan Mutual insurance [Chicago Metropolitan Mutual Assurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] was in. It was a great insurance company, you remember that. I own the building that the other insurance company--it slips my mind.
Speaker 1: Not Supreme Life [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America]?
Speaker 2: Supreme Life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Supreme Life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I mean, those buildings, those properties--and the entrepreneurs that developed those companies had focused on the future. We need more of those kind of entrepreneurs in our community today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it's more difficult, because there's more outside forces trying to capture the dollars. But, you know, the black community in America, if it were a country, would rank somewhere between fourteen and fifteen of the largest economies in the world. We should be able to capture those dollars in the community as well as bring other dollars into the community by providing excellent goods and services. And as you said, these properties are all along the lakefront. So, why should the south lakefront look the same as the north lakefront?
Story_ID: 636591
Speaker 1: Now, you were here in '66 [1966] when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] moved to Chicago [Illinois] to, to dramatize the segre- the housing segregation in the northern cities. And what did--as you were saying, you were working like sixty or seventy hours a week (laughter). So, I don't know what you made of it in those days, but what were you thinking about?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that in order to get us out of the dilemma that we were in, there had to be several different approaches. Dr. King's approach was one approach, which brought everything to the forefront, and it really brought focus on the inequities that were in our society. You also had to have people that were going in, learning the system, and learning how to move through the system in the appropriate manner. I was not involved heavily in the Civil Rights Movement there. I felt that one of the ways that I could be helpful is to learn the system and be able to apply the rules and apply the way the system was operated to our community. And that along with the opportunities and the doors that were being opened by Dr. King as a result of bringing this to a higher profile, I thought that it would be beneficial and helpful to the community.
Story_ID: 636592
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, you know, the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] went up in flames. And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you were in the National Guard.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what was that like, being in the National Guard? Did you go over to the West Side as a guard?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was first deployed over on the West Side as a National Guard. And to tell you how prepared we were, we each had eight rounds of ammunition, that's it (laughter). So, but, and we were there, we were there just to maintain peace and protect people's property, and try to talk to people who were there on the street getting ready to commit something just for the thrill. There were--why would you burn down your own community? And, you know, at some of the posts we had, no problems. Other posts, we had people that were more aggressive, and we had to turn them back. And, but I think that it was bad. It's not someplace that was my preference to be, because I knew that it was a result of the inequities that have been in our system before, but violence is not always the best way to change them. Dr. King wasn't there for violence. Dr. King was there for peaceful demonstrations. That's how you win more people over. And I, I was there, and it was the same at the Democratic Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]. The people that were there protesting had a certain position. We were there as a military force, and we had certain orders that we had to carry out. And we had to respectful and mindful of the position of the people that were there, and it was our job to try to get them to be respectful and mindful of the position of the people that we represented.
Speaker 1: Okay. Give us some idea of the scope of the riot of '68 [1968], I mean on the West Side. You know, a lot of people would never see it except on TV or something, or in an old newsreel. But was it like being in the midst of that?
Speaker 2: Well, Madison Avenue [sic. Madison Street] and Roosevelt Road between Sawyer [Avenue] and Kedzie [Avenue] was all up in flames. Buildings were being destroyed. There were masses of people in the street. And there were, there were people looking for trouble. There was a lawless element out there, like there is always a lawless element, people out there with an idea toward looting and that sort of thing. But people were hurt, because their leader had been assassinated. So they had to strike out, and they had to have a way to demonstrate and show the rest of society their hurt, and that's what happened. But you can't--and that brought a lot--that brought a lot of issues to the forefront, and that did bring about some changes in policies by the federal government. It brought about changes in the thought process by people from the majority community that had never thought about this before, and had never thought about the inequities that were in our society before. So I think it was, while, while it was devastating, I think that, that we got through it, and were a better city as a result of having been there.
Story_ID: 636593
Speaker 1: I think getting back to Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois]. So in 1975, Mr. Baird [John W. Baird] let you work your own gig [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois] as well as his, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you were doing, you were almost work- working like your father [Elzie Higginbottom] in some ways.
Speaker 2: Well, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had your own--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, he became a partner with me on a deal I was doing. I went and asked him--I needed to do the deal. At that time I didn't have the economic wherewithal to do it, so I asked him if he'd be a partner, and that gave me the economic wherewithal to be able to do the deal, and he became a partner of mine. And he was always in a group that was trying to provide better affordable housing for the people in the inner city, whether it was with me or whether it was with someone else, because he truly believed in that. And he helped me do one of my early deals. And then we did a deal downtown in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] together. I didn't need quite as much help from him then, but he had been a good, good partner, and I thought this is something that I would like for him to be involved in, so I made him a partner there as well.
Story_ID: 636594
Speaker 1: So now you're, you're a young man, a young businessman in an era that has been called--where Chicago [Illinois] was called the mecca for black business. So, there were so many exciting things going on here, and any of us who--and all of us all over the country who read Ebony and Jet, you know, could see all of these things going on in Chicago; the pictures of the people, and the developments and all that. What was that like? Who were some of the people that you worked with, and knew and admired in those days? And what was it like being in that?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean certainly the Johnsons, George Johnson [sic. HistoryMaker Albert W. Johnson], I remember when he opened the first, his first dealership on South Halsted Street, okay. George Jones of Joe Louis Milk Company [Chicago, Illinois], I remember when George was a, he was a partner in a little inner city deal that we did. And that was, he was, the Joe Louis Milk Company is a result of his wife [Paula Jones] being associated with Joe Louis, and they had the milk company. John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], you know, we all know who Mr. Johnson was. [HistoryMaker] George Johnson with Soft Sheen [sic. Ultra Sheen]. I had an opportunity to watch that develop. And I mean those were, those were larger companies; retail companies, manufacturers. They took a different--they were--they took off, and they did great. And [HistoryMaker] Eric Johnson today, who is George's son, is in business. He probably does close to $200 million a year in supplying different products to McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] and the likes. The Black McDonald's Operators [National Black McDonald's Operators Association] came into being. Cirilo McSween had McDonald's.
Speaker 1: He's another track man.
Speaker 2: He's another track man. He ran, he ran for Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. He and I used to joke all the time, because he was there, like not too far ahead of me. He was a little ahead of me, but he was not too far ahead of me, and a tremendous competitor. Let me--those are just to name a few. Charlie Moore [Charles F. Moore, Sr.], who was in construction, C.F. Moore Construction [Charles F. Moore Construction Co., Chicago, Illinois], he did a lot of building of buildings. He built Lake Grove Village [Chicago, Illinois] over here at 36th [Street] and Lake Park [Avenue]. He owned a number of motels on the South Side of Chicago. He was in banking. [HistoryMaker] Jacoby Dickens of Seaway Bank [Seaway National Bank; Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois], he was there. I remember Jacoby when he had the bowling alley across the street in the shopping center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, just to name a few. I mean these people were pioneers. They, they, they, they made a lot of opportunity for blacks. Highland Bank [Highland Community Bank, Chicago, Illinois], George Brokemond, they were lending in the community, because other banks weren't familiar with it; they were afraid of it. As a result, after the rioting they were afraid of it because they thought that you might get rioting again. These individuals were there. They were the pillars of our community. They supported organizations like Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and Operation Breadbasket. Breadbasket started out at 79th [Street] and Halsted with Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. And these individuals would go to the reverend and suggest that he, that he apply pressure to certain areas in the business community that were foreclosed to African Americans, and open those doors. And that's what happened.
Story_ID: 636595
Speaker 1: We're just talking about the relationship between the activist community and the business community, the black business community. So, there was some, some level of organization then I guess in the business community to, I guess to determine like what we need--what you needed to support, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right. The business community would go to the activist community and say, "Look, these doors are closed to us. Can you help us here?" And the activist community would begin to start to do that. And that opened doors, okay? I guess the biggest issue with the activist community is, since that community is not doing something that generates income, it is always, it always has a challenge of how it's going to keep its structure and its organization together so that it can speak out for the business community or whatever community that needs to be--the activist community was made up of a number of the ministers from the different churches. [HistoryMaker] Reverend Clay Evans, as you well know, was out there in the forefront of many of these things. And really what it was, it was all about the quality, and providing a bigger and better opportunity for the community from which they came, from which we come.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, we all know Chicago [Illinois] is a political city. And when you came along, Mayor Richard J. Daley was mayor.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was, he's been said to have presided over a machine, a political machine. So, how was it doing business in that environment? Or--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean the machine, when you say machine, well, who was part of the machine? Ralph Metcalfe? Well, he looked like you and I. Who was a part of the machine? Bill Dawson [William L. Dawson]? He looked like you and I. These were people who worked with Richard J. Daley. These were people who helped and supported the development of Ro- Stateway [Stateway Gardens, Chicago, Illinois], and Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], and that sort of thing. And if I think--I think I'm correct about that. And what they were trying to do, is they were trying to provide a better opportunity for their people. They were supportive of Mayor Daley, because with his support, they could get these things done, and with their support he could get these things done. So, it was a mut- mutual support. He, so everybody was doing at that time what they thought was best for their communities. Were there inequities? Sure, and there's going to be inequities all the time. But working together, they got all of that real estate developed. Now, it's easy for us to say today that, oh, that was a mistake. You shouldn't have stacked all those people over there. You shouldn't have done that. But maybe the mistake was, is that they didn't recognize enough that we needed more entrepreneurs to come from this community. We needed to build more institutions in this community. We needed more social support or networking in this community. In other words, we needed to have better schools. People had to have better education. We needed a better job situation. But we needed to have some cottage industries that these people could work in. And in order to have cottage industries, we had to have people who would lead that activity and become entrepreneurs. Maybe we didn't have enough of those.
Story_ID: 636596
Speaker 1: Did the Daley administration make it--the, the Richard J. Daley administration make it easier to do business? 'Cause I've heard people complain about the housing code at some times and not. We have a housing code in Chicago [Illinois] that I think is ever changing. It's like the IRS rules [Internal Revenue Service] or something, like a phone book or something, with just entry after entry.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, listen, I'm in the real estate business, and I have to comply with the housing code. And what happens is every year inspectors come out and inspect your buildings, and you have to keep them up. And people will criticize you, because they say, "Well, the inspector came in on May 1st, and they found fifteen violations," without asking, "Well, what did you do about the fifteen violations?" Well, we corrected them, because housing is something that moves. It's kind of like a car. If you never take your car in for repairs, it's going to fall down. So, what happens is, that's moving. Were there, did we have codes that made the cost of housing more expensive? Yes, but those codes were set under the umbrella of safety, more safety for the citizens. And, and, and that's what happened. Remember we had people that were moving from buildings, one story buildings that had outhouses, and one story buildings that had substandard plumbing. We had people that were living in units where they were sharing bathrooms. So you take people from sharing bathrooms to the fact that they had their own bathroom. That should be considered progress. But along with that, I think there's other things that need to be done. There is absolutely no question in my mind in this country, can produce housing. We know how to produce housing, we have produced housing. You can see that by the housing crisis. The housing crisis today says we have too much housing. But what happened is, we did not bring along with that the support networks that people need in order to enjoy that. We didn't bring--when we said we wanted everybody to own a house, we didn't have adequate counseling to counsel people to say, "Look, you shouldn't own this kind of house with this flexible rate mortgage, because next year that interest rate's going to be at a level that you can't afford." But people weren't counseled in that area, people weren't counseled. We didn't say, "Look, you live in, you live in rental housing today. We're going to put you in a--we're going to make you a homeowner." But remember, as a homeowner you have to fix the screens, you have to paint the windows. You have to paint the building, you have to cut the grass. You've lived for fifteen years in rental housing where the landlord did all of that. So, you have a different level of responsibility as an owner than you did when you were a renter. And this is not to look down on anyone's intelligence, this is just to point out things. Because you point out things, does not mean that you think that person is any less or more intelligent than one person or another. You're just pointing out, saying, "Did you think about that. Did you think about this?" There are some people who when they think about it, they say, "Look, I'd rather be a renter. I don't want to have all that responsibility. I want to do something else with my life." And there's nothing wrong with that.
Story_ID: 636597
Speaker 1: What are some of the changes I guess for the African American community that have taken place since you've been in Chicago [Illinois] and involved in real estate, in terms of where we live and how we live?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly we have, we have more places that we can live, and we're accepted in more communities, more neighborhoods. We're spread out more over the total city than we have ever been in the past. I think that there may have been some negative things that came out of that change. I can remember when 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Street], when African Americans or black people weren't accepted downtown, 63rd and Halsted was where they shopped. They shopped at 47th [Street] and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]. Now that they're accepted downtown, some of those dollars are going downtown, which then has a negative impact on these community, community facilities. You don't have majority community people coming in shopping in those places as yet. It will happen, you will see--and you see it slowly happening in Grand Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois] and that sort of thing. So, you see improvement in certain areas. You see Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois], before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], black people weren't accepted in Marquette Park. They're in Marquette Park now.
Story_ID: 636598
Speaker 1: Any rate, '81 [1981], you said, about 1981 you really got started with East Lake [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 19--basically it was 1984, really.
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984]?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I left Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois] in 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, in, now--oh, well, the big thing before 1984 is the election of Harold Washington as mayor--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of the City of Chicago [Illinois]. Did you play a role in that at all?
Speaker 2: No, actually I did not. The first time, I did not. As a matter of fact, I was with Rich Daley, Richard M. [Richard M. Daley] at that time. And I was a real estate owner, and I thought that Richard M. over the long range would have a more positive effect on the city. However, I was wrong. Mayor Washington had a very positive effect on the community, and it, the interesting thing about it is its everlasting. And the reason it's everlasting, is because many of the initiatives that Mayor Washington started were continued by Richard M., like neighborhood redevelopment. Okay, prior to that, most of the stuff was being redeveloped in the downtown area. Well, what happened is, is that I guess Richard M. saw the benefit to the city of that sort of activity, and he continued it. Had it not been for Mayor Washington that may not have happened, I can't say whether it would or it wouldn't have, but it had not happened to that point. So, I would say that maybe it would--or it would have been longer coming. I think that the affirmative action, there was more emphasis on that in Mayor Washington's administration. That opened the door, and what it did was it developed, it developed a thinking among the majority communities that, "Well, you can do business with African Americans. You can do business with black people. This is good business." And some of those partnerships and relationships have continued. So, it made people know each other better. And so, I think that was a good thing. And I developed my, I developed a high rise building downtown under Mayor Washington, and he, had he not been mayor I probably would not have been able to develop that building. I would not have had the opportunity to do it. But I think that the continuance of those kinds of initiatives was important, and I think that's what Richard J. did--Richard M. did, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I've heard people say that, you know, of course Mayor Washington was criticized that he didn't give enough contracts to black people. And then some people say he gave too many, you know. But, do you think that he provided like a process by which black people could get involved at a higher level than they--
Speaker 2: He provided a process and an opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's good--look, a process is a process. But if there's a process and no opportunity, it doesn't mean anything. There's plenty of laws, but is there any opportunity? And that's what he did; a process and an opportunity, and that was continued. Now people will say, "Well, black people didn't get enough." Well, you know, you have to prepare--you have to be prepared to access an opportunity when it comes to you. Just because there's an opportunity there, it does not mean that you can access it. And sometimes we were not prepared to access those opportunities because of all the inequities that occurred in our society in the past. But now, when people know that those opportunities are available, they can prepare themselves through education, through partnering, through just plain raw knowledge, and they will then begin to access those opportunities. So, that process takes a while. If there's no opportunity, it's going to take forever. If there's an opportunity, the process begins to work; it begins to work and it begins to, to, to take on a life of its own.
Story_ID: 636599
Speaker 1: Can you kind of walk us through like what, what you did I guess with East Lake Management [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois], you know, in the '80s [1980s]. What you were able to achieve and what your goals and objectives were?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, now there's a good--there is a good example of developing--of a lack of opportunity and developing a process by which you develop an opportunity. Because there was not a lot of opportunity for me to manage properties back then, because they weren't necessarily owned by minorities, what I did was I began to develop my own properties. So, I acquired properties and I managed those properties. So, now what has happened is I've created an opportunity for myself, and I've provided a process by which I can expand East Lake Management's business. East Lake Management did not start off as a company that was managing third party properties. East Lake Management started off as a company that was managing properties that I or some of my partnerships owned and developed. Now, as a result of my background in financing, I was able to go out and acquire properties because I knew how to get them fi- get them financed. I would acquire those properties, rehabilitate those properties, and then bring them into my portfolio, or bring in partnership partners and put them in that portfolio. And then that gave me a basis, or a foundation of business that helps me meet my overhead on a continued and constant basis. Then I did development, and development is very cyclical, it's up and it's down. Right now, the development is down because there's a surplus of housing. So, I would do development whenever the opportunity presented itself. I was not, I was not a single focused company. I focused in two or three different directions. We got into the construction business because we were developing properties in the inner city where people, where we could not find competitive construction prices. And I learned this basically throughout my entire career, or throughout my entire life, by looking at my dad [Elzie Higginbottom] looking for opportunities to do business, and then bringing the business to that opportunity. And then what happened was, as time went by, I learned that there were places where other people were not willing to go, and I'd go there. I'm in the construction business because I couldn't find contractors to come into the inner city and give me competitive prices, so I developed a vehicle by which I could do that, a process. Now, that construction business has to have an opportunity, so as I developed a property I'd give them the opportunity to bid on it. Now, we're doing third party business, because people see that we can perform, so then we're able to go out and do third party business. And this is the same thing that I say to young people in the African American community today. There is a tremendous amount of opportunity in the community from which you come. You must be able to figure out how to access that community, you must be diligent, and you must be patient. Because you can't build a business in a week. You can't build a business in a day. I've been doing this for more than forty years with the same destination. If I worked at, when I worked at Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois], I had the same destination. When I'm working for East Lake Management, I have the same destination. So, for my entire, entire career, I had a destination of building an institution. Because now what happens is once you build an institution, if I'm no longer there, that institution runs. That makes an opportunity for other people to come in that institution and work, or come in that institution and take it to a higher level.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, there's a--you did a tremendous amount of development for the Chicago Housing Authority I believe, right? Could you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, we did one development, Rockwell Gardens [Chicago, Illinois]. We're doing one development as part of the transformation. We manage about thirty-five hundred units for Chicago Housing Authority; that's part of our third party business. But had I not been able to develop a track record of managing properties of my own, then I would not have had that opportunity. So, I had to create a system by which I could have an opportunity to get another opportunity. And the system was I'd buy buildings, I'd manage them when I purchased them, my management had an opportunity. And then I, now I can manage third party properties.
Story_ID: 636600
Speaker 1: What's the, the biggest deal I think you've had in terms of--what's the biggest real estate deal you've been involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, are you talking about in dollars, or are you talking about in numbers of units?
Speaker 1: Probably in dollars, because people, you know--
Speaker 2: People like dollars?
Speaker 1: Get gaga about dollars, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, let me say this. When I was doing financing at Baird and Warner [Chicago, Illinois], and the financing was about sixteen thousand dollars per unit, I was doing about $100 million a year in volume, okay. I would say that we have a portfolio of real estate that we run that's in excess of $300 million, okay. I'd say that the largest single deal that I've done is, I did 200 North Dearborn [Street], which is downtown Chicago [Illinois]. It's 310 units and some commercial. It's probably valued, it was probably--we sold it, and it was probably valued at somewhere around 75 or $80 million.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's, that's impressive. And this is--this is why people who are listening to this years from now--I don't know how much a million dollars is going to be worth--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in a hundred years. But it's--
Speaker 2: And I think that, you know, as a black person, I'm one of the first that owned property in the Loop proper [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't see that--I see that as something big, but I don't see that as something big because I don't know why we shouldn't have owned it before.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought at one time--now, you can correct me if I'm wrong. I know that Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] had a building in the '80s [1980s], at least he may have. I don't know how long he had it, but that was the first one I heard of that was actually owned--
Speaker 2: Well, that was downtown.
Speaker 1: Yeah, downtown.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was--mine was--his was an office building. Mine was a rental building.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: We've developed property on Lake Shore Drive North, both North and South, okay. We've developed property in other cities. So, the--what we try to do is we try to create an institution that has the ability to be able to reach out and develop all areas. Now, if you look at some of the hedge funds today and some of the real estate investment trusts today, our portfolio is probably not that big. But we manage fourteen thousand apartments, that's a lot. There may be some other people who have done it a different way, either through the hedge fund way or something that may manage more. But it's, each one of these entities builds--each one of these institutions builds a respect by the majority community of the minority community's ability to be able to participate in the economy of America, and that's what we're looking at.
Speaker 1: Okay. How many people do you employ [at East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: We employ about six hundred people.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they're in various--?
Speaker 2: In various--from janitorial to administrative to architectural to construction. We, we employ about six hundred people, and the majority of those six hundred people are black. I'd say we're probably somewhere between 75 and 80 percent black, and 20 percent to 25 percent other.
Story_ID: 636601
Speaker 1: Do you have a relationship with the black contractors organization (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, do you mean Black Contractors United?
Speaker 1: Yes, I think--
Speaker 2: I know those, I know them but we don't have a relationship with them. What we do is that we seek subcontractors, African American subcontractors, and bring them up into our jobs. We try to mentor them in any way we can. We also attempt to develop African Americans that can do a particular function, whether it's painting, dry walling, carpentry, and give them an opportunity to bid on our work. And that's how you--I mean we build the same way that every other community has built. This is not something new. Every community gets built by internal support. We support those that come after us, and with the idea in mind that we have to institutionalize, and we have to be here in the future, otherwise we won't be able to help anyone.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you're--from what I understand--okay, if I understand this correctly, then you're saying that you not only employ African American contractors, but you're actually able to help develop them to a stage where they can (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go out on their own.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right. And in some cases on some of the jobs that we do [through East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois], we have to carry their payroll for them. We have to help them do their paperwork. The construction business is a very, very tough business. I would encourage more African Americans to be involved more in retailing in the communities from which they come, than in the construction business. Because the construction business, if you think about, you're in the money lending business. And the reason I say that is because you have to work on a job for thirty days. You have to pay all your payroll, you have to pay your vendors, and then you have a draw from the owner. That draw takes fifteen to thirty days to get funded. So now you've worked for sixty days, for forty-five to sixty days, before you've gotten a dollar, but you've had to pay all these people. So, when you come to that--when you come to that opportunity, you have to come to that opportunity with a checkbook. Now--and then, you have to comply with all the regulations. Now, why do I say that I think retailing in the community is better than trying to do the construction business? And then I'll answer the next question, which should be logical. Well, if retailing is so good, why aren't you in it? But let me answer the next, let me answer retailing. If you come to the retailing business--if you're in a drycleaners, you can have a drop off place where people drop it off, and you can take your work to a plant and pay that plant on a wholesale basis to do your work for you. Then you can make a profit. If you're in the grocery business, you can go buy products as you need them, and bring them to your shelf almost on a just in time basis, which means that you put in on the shelf and twenty minutes after you put it on the shelf, it's going off the shelf. And when it goes off the shelf, at the checkout counter you're getting your money. You're not waiting thirty days. You've not waiting forty-five days. And there is plenty of need in our community for this. If you think about new populations that come into this country, they come to our community to do business, because that's--it's an easier start there. That's what we should be doing. We should be in the restaurant business. We should be in the clothing business. We should be in the jewelry business in our community. There's--and I'm--not to say that we should not be in the construction business, but I'm saying that there is plenty of opportunity. We should be in the hardware business. We should be in the home gardening and landscaping business. And we should grow those businesses and institutionalize those businesses. What I think that we have--that's lacking in the community--I think it's getting better, but what's lacking in the community is we have not institutionalized our businesses enough. What happens if the guy who started that business gets hit by a car? Is it institutionalized well enough to continue without that person? Look at your major corporations. Those major corporations are set up so that they continue to run. That's what we have to continue to drive toward in our community.
Story_ID: 636602
Speaker 1: I was just discussing, we were just discussing informally business training and readiness. And you made a very pithy comment here, I wish you would repeat it, about preparedness versus (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think that, I think that, that education institutions today prepare people to be able to deal with the mountains of paperwork that you have in order to business, be in business today. There's all kinds of federal regulations, there are all kinds of state regulations. Your lending institutions that may give you your working capital and seed money, they have all kinds of rules and regulations. And I think that the education institutions today prepare young people well to be able to deal with and address that. I think that the place that they--and it's really a little bit more difficult. The place that they need to put more emphasis on is really being an entrepreneur, saying, "I want to do this," and then listing why you want to do that. If you want to do it because you like to do it, then you might get a great deal of joy and self fulfillment out of doing that, and you might not make much money at it, because it may not be something that is in high demand, or it may be something that is extremely competitive. But if you pick a particular field, and if you--if you're more selective in what you look at, and say, "Well, I want to do this, and this is my destination and this is how I want to get there." As an example, a person can say, "Look, I want a McDonald's franchise." Now, you'll have one person that says, "I want a McDonald's franchise, and one is adequate for me." You may have another person who is just a real go getter, an entrepreneur, and he says, "I don't want to own just one McDonald's franchise. I want to own ten." Now, if you have the educational foundation that you need in order to do all the administration things that go along with that, meeting all of the franchise regulations, all of the government regulations and what have you. Then what happens is now you have the willingness and the burning desire to own ten franchises, and you're going to work sixteen hours a day, twenty hours a day, eighteen hours a day, whatever it takes to get you to your destination. Not everyone's going to want to do that. And there's nothing wrong with that. They're going to be satisfied with something else. But what should happen is that we should support and not criticize the people who want more, because those people are building a bigger institution. And remember, those larger institutions support smaller institutions. And it goes vice versa: smaller institutions support larger institutions.
Story_ID: 636603
Speaker 1: Tell us about the, the Harold Washington Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois]. I know it started off as the Lou Rawls Cultural Center, and it changed. But you supported that as a community effort, so tell us how, how you got involved in that.
Speaker 2: Well, I supported it as a community effort when Alderman Tillman [HistoryMaker Dorothy Tillman] was alderman. And I have to say that this was Alderman Tillman's dream, to build this cultural center and to build a theater. And I think it's a, I think it's a good thing. Our community needs those kind of things in it. I think what we need to do is we need to be more supportive of it. We--look, if you look around the country, many of the artists today are black. Why not come in and support an institution that is black run? And many of them came from neighborhoods that are just like the one in which the Harold Washington Cultural Center is located in. So, what would, what harm would it do them to say, "I'm going to play one show a year at the Harold Washington Cultural Center," if they're playing twenty shows? The people are, the people are following them; they're not following a particular building. But people will go wherever they go. If they go, if they go out and put a concert out in the middle of a field, people will come to that concert. So, why not put a concert on in a facility that's in the middle of a community that's like the one from which you came, and in the middle--in a facility that is owned by people that look like you? I didn't say that's the only place that you do a performance. I said that can be one of the places that you do a performance. And I supported that, because you know, one of the properties that we developed is 4747 King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], the Luther Terrace Apartments [Chicago, Illinois]. I tore down the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] to build Luther Terrace Apartments. So--
Speaker 1: I don't know if I'd admit that on camera (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I can admit that. I think that the building, it had outlived its useful life. And we built that, the Harold Washington Cultural Center, to replace it, okay. And the same artists that played at the Regal could play at the Harold Washington Cultural Center with modern acoustics, with modern seating, and in a modern facility.
Story_ID: 636604
Speaker 1: Back to the, the Regal. I know so many people that grew up in Chicago [Illinois] lament the passing of the Regal and the era that it was popular in. But I believe it was in the early '80s [sic. 1973] it was, it was torn down. But did you, was there any kind of a plan for the redevelopment of that? Because as you know, Ed Gardner [HistoryMaker Edward Gardner] redeveloped another theater to be the New Regal [New Regal Theater; Avalon Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman had this project to, once again, reconstitute the Regal on some level. Was it, when you look back on it, was that a, was that, you know, short sighted, to tear that building down?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, because the building was functionally obsolete. It was a landmark, but it was functionally obsolete. And so, it should come down and make way for the new. And as part of this whole process, at almost the precise location, there is another facility that does the same thing. So, I know it may be a little bit--people may not necessarily agree with me, but we just don't keep something just for namesake, okay. Is it useful? Is it beneficial to the community? Is it beneficial from the standpoint--from an economic standpoint, from a sociological standpoint? Is it beneficial? Was it beneficial? We house three hundred and fifty families at that location in a modern building [Luther Terrace Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. There is a fifteen hundred--a thousand seat--one thousand seat theater there today that you could play any venue on. You could have any artist come in there.
Speaker 1: This is the new, this is the Harold Washington (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The new--the Harold Washington Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois]. It has modern acoustics, modern stage, modern everything. To have renovated the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] and to bring it up to the current standards would have cost as much as it cost to build a new one. The new one can last for another forty or fifty years. You have to get people to come in there and play, and have their events there. You have to get artists to come there. I would ask the question, "Well, why are the artists not coming?"  And I would ask the question, "Well, why do they go to Merrillville, Indiana?" And then we can say, well, look at the theaters that we've renovated and tried to use over. How successful have they been? Some of them have been successful, I would not deny that. But for the most part, they've not been that successful. So, what we've done there is to do something to try to revitalize the community. And that new facility sitting on that corner looks a lot better than the old Terry's department store that sat on that location, with the Regal sitting to the south of it, with a, with a grocery store sitting further to the south of it, exactly where the building is standing today.
Story_ID: 636605
Speaker 1: Just--I don't want to belabor it. But there's--so many people talk about it, the--and they don't, they don't blame you for knocking it down, because I don't think they even know (laughter). But the historical, I guess, and sentimental attachment to it in an age when they're trying to revitalize that Bronzeville community [Chicago, Illinois], do you think that--is that something that would be worth, you know, letting stand today if you had that decision to make today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think if you made that decision today, there would be probably be enough outcry to cause you to have to save it. The question is would the saved product be successful? Now, everyone talks about the Parkway Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois], okay. And I can, I can list you any number of people who tell me that they had their prom there, they had their--they had an engagement party there, they had these kinds of things there. Cliff Rome [Clifford Rome], of Rome's Joy [Rome's Joy Companies, Chicago, Illinois], the catering company that operates the Parkway Ballroom, his calendar isn't filled up for the next year. So, there are people who say they don't even know it's there when he has an event and he invites people there. There are people that say, "Well, the venue is too expensive for the neighborhood, for a neighborhood facility." Well, I think when you check these things, you will find that it's not too expensive. He's charging no more than they charge in other communities for other community based facilities. The question is are the people willing to come there? Some of those same people will drive all the way to Merrillville, Indiana with gas at four dollars a gallon. So, the question is do you have a spirit of community? And when you have a spirit of community, it means that you have to support the community. Someone has to put the facilities there for you to support, and someone has to support it. Are you getting the support in the--from the community for that facility? I don't know that, and maybe it is. I don't know--because I don't run it and I don't have any contact with it--whether or not the Harold Washington Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] is booked every weekend or every night. And if it isn't, then the old Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] would not have been booked, because it was a huge, huge facility. Things have changed today. So, in order to renovate and retrofit the old Regal Theater to meet today's requirements would have been prohibitive. And it's easy to say, "Oh, you tore it down." And my response to that is, "Are you supporting the one that's there?" And it's easy to say, "Oh, we don't have a restaurant in our community." And I say, "Are you supporting the one that's there?" And if you're not supporting the one that's there, it's going to soon close, and you're going to be right, you're not going to have one in your community.
Story_ID: 636606
Speaker 1: Years ago we talked to Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis]. I was privileged to be in an interview with him, and he discussed what he thought was a long term prospect for black people in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. He said those professionals are going to be all right. He said but those who are poor are going to end up in Markham [Illinois], and Harvey [Illinois], and Dixmoor [Illinois] and the collar suburbs, mostly south of the city, like Soweto in South Africa, with nothing to do. And if they get a job, they have to catch a train to go into town to do it. That his scenario, and he saw that as coming the next twenty years. This was in 1981 when he was saying this. What do you think about that?
Speaker 2: I think he was correct, and I think Mr. Travis was a very wise man. I had the honor of being able to work with him, and had the honor of sitting and listening to him communicate his ideas, and I think that he's correct. And I think that--and I think we're all say- we all say the same thing; sometimes we just say it a little bit differently. The people who are not so well off really are not coming from the entrepreneurial group. We have to take the people that are not so well off and get more entrepreneurs in there. There's nothing wrong with Harvey and Dixmoor and Phoenix [Illinois]. And people wouldn't have to come down for jobs there if there were entrepreneurs out there that were creating jobs; they could have jobs in their own community. And this doesn't mean that they couldn't have factories there, and they couldn't do things like put things together; finished products and that sort of things. Everything doesn't have to be manufactured there. You can manufacture one part here, you could manufacture another part there, and you could assemble it here. And then it can go to market from here. So you can manufacture--you can manufacture a fencepost in Dixmoor, and you can manufacture one of the elements of the fence in Robbins [Illinois], and you can put them together as an eight foot section in Harvey, and you can ship it to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any--are you actually working in any way to, I guess facilitate some sort of entrepreneurial education in the public schools?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not doing anything in the public schools. We try to do what we can do here corporately, where we're willing to work with any of the not for profits that are doing that and showing some positive results. And listen, the positive results does not have to be a hundred. The positive results can be two, because those two can go out and build two more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we don't have to have the big bang theory and say, "Well, we have a hundred students in class, and unless we get eighty-five of them out as successes, we've failed."
Story_ID: 636607
Speaker 1: I guess since the '90s [1990s] I guess, you've been like appointed to various corporate boards. And tell us about that, and how that, you know, facilitates what you're doing and how it facilitates a better community.
Speaker 2: Well, I've been appointed to some corporate boards. And what that does is that gives me an opportunity to look at a broader picture. It gives me an opportunity to meet with other people who are basically from a business standpoint, my peers, and expose them to the fact that there may be institutions in the major- minority community that can provide them with the goods and services that they need, and they need to consider those. I think that what it does is that it helps extend the giant melting pot, because America is a big melting pot. And to the extent that everyone in that pot can make a contribution--and that contribution can be either in the form of doing something, or it can be in the form of convincing someone else in that pot that they can do something differently and better to make it a better place. That makes it successful.
Story_ID: 636608
Speaker 1: Now, I should have asked you about this when I was asking about the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois], but, now you fought the city over the demolition of the Supreme Life Building [Chicago, Illinois], right and?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, tell us about that. What is the Supreme Life Building, for those who don't know? And--
Speaker 2: Well, Supreme Life Insurance Company [Supreme Life Insurance Company of America] was started by, was started by an African American group of really, really, brilliant people. The names of the people who started Supreme Life and who were on the board of Supreme Life read like who's who in black America ['Who's Who Among Black Americans']. And I challenge anyone that looks at this, that they should go look up and get those names, and that's part of their education process. The Supreme Life Building, to me, represented part of the past, and represented African American or black entrepreneurs who were putting together and trying to institutionalize a business. Mr. Johnson was the last person who owned--John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson]--owned [sic.] the Supreme Life Insurance Company. And what happened is that over time that business changed. The individuals that were running that business were not able to change fast enough, and could not necessarily compete with the major corporations, insurance corporations that were coming in to take a piece of that market share. And so, it had a problem. But at the time that it was started, it served our community well, and it afforded people an opportunity to get insurance who would not have had that opportunity were it not for Supreme Life. So, you have to applaud the people that started it, and you have to applaud the people that ran it. You have to, you have to look and see why it wasn't better institutionalized so that it would be around today. Was it a lack of capital? Was it a lack of interest on the part of the consumer? Was it faulty management? All companies today suffer from those same ills. So, there's no fault there. It's just that we need to take a look at it and see why we couldn't have driven it further.
Speaker 1: Okay. But you were successful in saving it?
Speaker 2: I was successful with the help of the City of Chicago [Illinois] and some of the community based organizations. We were successful in saving it. We've renovated it. We have Seaway Bank [Seaway Bank and Trust Company, Chicago, Illinois] in it, which is an African American bank. We have a couple of neighborhood organizations that are there. We have the tourism bureau [Black Metropolis Convention and Tourism Council, Chicago, Illinois] there. And it is the gateway to Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 636609
Speaker 1: Oh, let me ask you about the Illinois gaming commission. Now, there are several black entrepreneurs. I think there's a guy named Ba- Barden from Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's in the casinos. So, are you, do you think that's a good idea for Chicago [Illinois], I mean, to be involved in the casino business?
Speaker 2: Well, Don Barden [Don H. Barden] passed away, but he did have two casinos. He had one in Detroit and he had one or two in Gary [Indiana]. I was chairman of the Illinois Gaming Board, probably during one of its--during some of its most controversial years. I am not, I am not a big fan of gaming. My position was, back then was that if you're going to have it, you might as well put it at the place where the citizens can get the most benefit and have the least pain. And that would have been there, because people are coming off, coming on and off the airplanes. And it's not the people from the, the citizens from the State of Illinois that's going there utilizing the facility.
Speaker 1: So, you proposed to have it by the airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I want it--well, yeah. When I was on the gaming board, the gaming board voted to have it at Rosemont [Illinois]. That was a controversial location. We could have voted to have it in Des Plaines [Illinois] where it is now, but our board felt at that time that that was a slightly better location, because it was located two miles closer, or a mile--two miles probably closer to really the convention center, okay. Now, whether that's right--the one that's there now, Rivers Casino [Des Plaines, Illinois], is doing great, and it's providing a great deal of revenue for the citizens of the State of Illinois. But I think that the basic problem is a philosophical problem. The basic problem that I have with gaming is it does not add value. In other words, manufacturing something adds value. Providing a service adds value. In gaming, you're just changing dollars from one person to the next, and I don't--but you know, it's been a, it's been an income producer for the state. And the cities in which these facilities are located have done well as a result of it. But as I said, I'm not a big fan of gaming.
Story_ID: 636610
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about, just kind of give us, I guess summarize some of your activities in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], and what you think the area is going to--you know, what's going to be the end result of all of the development focused on Bronzeville?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that Bronzeville is going to continue to redevelop and continue to improve. If you think about it, to the southeast of Bronzeville is Hyde Park and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. That's an institution that will likely grow more and more west and north. Even the University of Chicago hospitals [University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], they're running out of space. None of them can grow east, because of the lake [Lake Michigan]. Growing south can take them further and further away from the center of everything, which is downtown. So, it has to grow north and it has to grow west. It's difficult for it to continue to grow--for these institutions to continue to grow north because of all the housing in Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois]. There is an opportunity for it to grow west. And if it grows west, there's more access to the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway], which would be--from the standpoint of transportation, the public transportation that's on the Dan Ryan and vehicles that can go across 55th Street [Garfield Boulevard]. That pressure is going to continue to put pressure on Bronzeville and the Grand Boulevard area [Chicago, Illinois], and you're going to continue to see an upward climb from the standpoint of economics in that area. You already see it. You see redevelopment on King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. You see redevelopment pushing over along 47th, on 47th Street on to Michigan Avenue. One of the things that has inhibited that, in my view, in that development is the severe, severe, downturn that we've had in our economy over the last five years. As we begin to come out of that, and I think you'll see us coming out of that, I think you'll see more businesses begin to open and flourish on 47th Street and on King Drive. And I think you will see increased pressure for middle and upper middle class development in the whole Bronzeville area. You will see a continued push south. When I, when we relocated here, the area between 22nd Street [Cermak Road] and downtown was really old outdated industrial buildings. Today, it's filled with apartment buildings and condominiums. Now some of them are experiencing vacancies because of the downturn we've had in our economy, but that economy is coming back now. McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois] will do better as the economy gets better, because more businesses will continue, will have conventions there. So, you're going to see this push south. You see Lake Meadows Shopping Center [Chicago, Illinois]. You see IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] is expanding. You see--there's institutions in the area that now as the economy is going back, they're going to start to, to redevelop. And all of that is going to put an upward pressure on Bronzeville, and you're going to see improved values in Bronzeville.
Story_ID: 636611
Speaker 1: Do you have a major project that you're doing here in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]? That you, that you--I mean, I know you many, but--
Speaker 2: Well, we're doing a number of smaller projects in Bronzeville. And what we're trying to do now is we're trying to get those developments up and get them to be successful. I think our residential effort in Bronzeville is enjoying success. We want to get our commercial effort stronger than it is. We did the northeast corner of 47th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive]. We did a nice building there which has H-Dogs [Chicago, Illinois], and Uncle Joe's jerk chicken [Uncle Joe's Tropical Dining, Chicago, Illinois], and the Jamaican Consulate [Chicago, Illinois], and a number of other smaller businesses. We're going to, our next venture there is going to the northwest corner of 47th and King Drive. We want to open a sit down restaurant there. And we've gotten a clothing store there, and we have the Army there [U.S. Army recruiting army], and we have another community based drycleaners there. We have done the Parkway Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois], which bookings I believe--I was talking to the owner there, and he was telling me that bookings are up. And this is, this is after--we seem to be climbing out of this recession. We did the, we did the renovation of the building where the Chicago Defender is now. Even though the paper may be struggling a little bit, we think that's a wonderful addition to the neighborhood; it adds to the stability. Many people go there for historical purposes. We moved further north, as you mentioned earlier. The Supreme Life Building [Chicago, Illinois], we did that. And so, what we're going to do is we're going to try and make those locations successful locations. And those locations can become the anchor for the area immediately around each of those locations. And that then will spread out into the rest of the community as the larger institutions, like IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] and the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], you see Urban Partnership Bank [Chicago, Illinois] just located a new headquarters at 35th [Street] and King Drive, as those larger institutions come back into these neighborhoods and begin to start to expand, just based on the fact that they're, they're--they have more business.
Story_ID: 636612
Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004], there's a Tribune [Chicago Tribune] article and we, we were discussing off ca- camera, where you appeared as a caricature. And all the code violations and fines and court cases were lumped into the article as a critique of you and what you're doing. What, what's your response to this kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I and East Lake [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois] has a number of properties. First of all, you have to understand that we're in the affordable housing business. We're not in the housing business in which everybody wants to go. We don't necessarily develop or manage trophy buildings. What we do is we house people who are in need. We house many of the people that are people who have come from homeless shelters. But these are people who are in dire need of housing. We build units. Yes, you have code violations. There's not a building in the City of Chicago [Illinois] or anyplace else, for that matter, for which you can't find a code violation. However, the important thing is what do you do about the code violations when the officials come out and say you have a code violation? Do we correct them? Yes, we do. Do they fine us sometimes because they feel that we haven't corrected them quickly enough? Or do they fine us because it may just carry a fine? Yes, they do. We had, they changed the ordinance on porches, and that meant that all the older porches that we had on all our properties were in violation. Well, it takes a while to catch up with that. It doesn't mean that that porch is not safe. It means that it does not meet the current standards. So, what happened--and we have to bring it up to standards, and we worked diligently to do that. So, we're not just sitting on our hands and not addressing the code violations, and we're not sitting on our hands trying to make sure that people live in substandard housing or housing that has violations. We recognize the fact that this is a changing universe and there's always going to be something that's going wrong; and we are addressing it in a manner in which we think is professional and is positive.
Story_ID: 636613
Speaker 1: Now, there's another article that listed you as one of the city's wise men; okay, so, one of the people that is consulted--one of the--a person who's consulted by politicians and, and other people trying to do business with the City of Chicago [Illinois]. Chicago at one time had a reputation of having a closed set of wise men, where you couldn't--there weren't any black people in that circle. To be, to have you mentioned as one of the city's wise men implies a different kind of a city. Do you think that's true today? Or is it getting to be more true, or what? What do you think about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that there is a greater participation by all the citizens of Chicago, businesspeople, some of whom are African American or black, that participate in advising the elected officials as to what they think is good for business, good for the citizens and good for the City of Chicago. In the past, that group may have been smaller than it is today. I'm encouraged by the fact that that group is larger. And I'm encouraged by the fact that younger African Americans or black businesspeople are involved in that group. And I'm encouraged by the fact that I see that, that in the City of Chicago, more of your major corporations have black people as their CEOs. Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company] with [HistoryMaker] Frank Clark, a wonderful man, brilliant man, who has done nothing but worked to try to advance the issues in the Af- that affect the African American community, and who has worked to try to bring the majority community more closely aligned with the African American community on the issues that the African American community has to address. And I can go on, that there's other African Americans that are in other corporations that were working toward doing this. And you can see, in the City of Chicago you can see the positive--the positive progress that has been made. Have we completed the job? No, it's going to be a job that's going to be ongoing forever. And the next generations of--generation of young people are going to have to address that as well.
Story_ID: 636614
Speaker 1: You have been engaged, I guess as a, as a matter of interest, with track, as a--I mean the legacy of track in the, in the city, along with Dr. Conrad Worrill [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill]. Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes. Dr. Worrill, who I've known since high school, because he went to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And when I went to Bloom, we used to compete in some of the major track meets around the state with one another. He came to me and said, "Look, you know, you participated in track. It was good to you. I participated in track, it was good to me. I think track is something that we--there's not enough emphasis on today. What do you think?" And I agreed with him wholeheartedly, and both of us concluded that we should try to do something to generate more interest in track and field amongst elected officials as well as among young kids. Because what happened, track is a sport in which you can--if you're not fast, you can be good triple jumper. If you're not fast, you can be a good high jumper. If you're, if you're muscular, you can be a shot putter. If you have a great deal of endurance but you don't have a lot of leg speed, you can be a distance runner. So, it can address a variety of different types of people. More people can be involved in track than in basketball or football, because of the way--the different events that it has. So, we put together Friends of Track and Field, and we've been moving along. You know, to me it's terrible. I can remember when I was in high school out at Bloom Township High School [Bloom High School, Chicago Heights, Illinois], and we had a field house in which we practiced and ran. The City of Chicago public school system [Chicago Public Schools], those boys always ran in the hallways. Fifty years later, sixty years later, they're still running in the hallways. There are no track--there are no field houses in the City of Chicago [Illinois] in which track people can go and run. Something has to be done about that.
Speaker 1: Okay. So are you all making a--
Speaker 2: We're trying, we're trying to generate enough interest on the part of the public body to get some field houses built so these kids, so these young people can go practice and burn off some of this excess energy that they have.
Speaker 1: Okay. I remember the old days in Chicago, Mayor Daley track team [Mayor Daley Youth Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] and Mr. Robichaux [Joseph Robichaux].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Ira Murchison.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And people like that.
Speaker 2: He was a good friend, Ira.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right. So track--Chicago has produced a number of track, great track people. Willie May [Willie L. May], who is an Olympia- Olympic medal winner, just passed away here in Chicago. There's a number of people here. Willye White [HistoryMaker Willye B. White], an Olympian, right. So, and we don't have a field house, an indoor field house for them to practice.
Speaker 1: So, do you think like one, or a set of regional field houses (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it would be great, it would be great if we could strategically place field houses in different neighborhoods, because Chicago is a city of neighborhoods. And then we could have neighborhood meets between those different field houses. Well, the way we have it now with track and field, we have it broken up into wards, and we encourage the aldermen from those wards to have teams, and then we have a meet.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, is this being, you know, received well by the--
Speaker 2: Well, we started off--I think we have thirty-four teams this year participating. And this is our fourth year? Fifth year, this is our fifth year. And so, it's, it's, it's, it's gaining momentum.
Story_ID: 636615
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, one is I think that they should be more su- I would hope that they would be more supportive of our African American businesses. I would hope that the African American businesses that they support--that the leadership in those businesses would focus more on institutionalizing those businesses so that they would go on and serve the community beyond the life of the individuals that founded them. I would hope that the African American business community would be able to participate on a greater scale with the majority business community and their goods and services would be more widely accepted by the majority business community, and that they would get their standards up to the standards that are acceptable to everyone. And I would hope that the, that the economics in the African American business community would be such that it would be more supportive; we would have the ability to be more supportive of things that are important to the African American business community. This isn't to say that all communities aren't welcome to support these activities. This is to say that we need more support from the African American business community. Because when you go to the majority community and say, "We want your support." They say, "Well, how's the other support? How, what kind of support do you have now?" And when you can show that you have strong support from within your own community, it makes it easier to get support from outside communities. And listen, we all need to participate like a great melting pot. But in that melting pot you can have specific individual interests, individual community interests, and that's what we need to do.
Story_ID: 636616
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over your career to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Well, I could say maybe I could work harder (laughter). Or I could have worked smarter. But I think that it's, there's always things you can do better. And you need, you think about them at the point in time in which you said, "Well, you know, I should have done this and I should have done that." But, you know, I am fairly comfortable with what I've done, because I have to think about how far I came. And maybe somebody who started higher on the ladder would have been able to go further. Maybe if I would have done this a little differently, or that a little differently, maybe I'd have enjoyed more success. But I'm pleased with the fact that I'm able to provide housing for the community from which I come. And I continue, this company [East Lake Management and Development Corp., Chicago, Illinois] continues to strive to try to make that better housing, and try to improve the conditions in which the people from these communities live, and try to improve the conditions in the neighborhoods in which they are. I would think that if I would have--in the past, I should have put more emphasis on education, from the standpoint of being much more supportive of education, and much more supportive of community involvement. There are, those are two things I think that no matter how much support you put on, there's always room for more.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were listing some things, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I would like if at all possible for that to be one in which I showed great support from the community from which I came; and that I was able to build an institution that could outlast me.
Story_ID: 636617
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children. I know you've got some children (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--yes, I have four children, the oldest of which is fourteen and the youngest [Parker Higginbottom] of which is nine. That, so, that means that I'm going to have to work for quite a while (laughter). But I continue to emphasize to them the--for them to be good Christians, be good citizens, and always make a contribution back to the community; that's important. And that's important to me, and I want it to be important to them. And as they go through their life and as they enjoy the success that I hope that they are going to enjoy, that they never forget from where they came, and that they're always willing to give back.
Speaker 1: All right. And you're married right now?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife and I, my wife, Deborah [Deborah Higginbottom], and I support that 100 percent.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, your parents passed away not long ago, right?
Speaker 2: My mother [Katherine Skaggs Higginbottom] passed away a year ago this past December. My father [Elzie Higginbottom] passed away in 2001. So, he did not--I have four children. He was able to see his two older grandsons [William Higginbottom and Carter Higginbottom]. He did not see his granddaughter [Caroline Higginbottom], which I know he would have been very proud of, and his youngest grandson.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your parents think about your entrepreneurial ventures?
Speaker 2: Well, coming from a--from parents who were of modest means and started with great handicaps, sometimes they thought that some of the things that I was, that I was attempting were great challenges. But they were always very proud of the things I did; and they always encouraged me to do more and to be better.
Story_ID: 636618
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: It depends on what your last question is (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, it's, it's similar to legacy, it's--but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered as a person who was very thoughtful about the community from which he came, and was a very--a businessman that dealt at the highest levels of integrity in business, and a person who really felt that a great deal of his success is a result of the people that he met along the way on his journey.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
