Story_ID: 290038
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Adrienne Jackson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Adrienne Jackson.  Ma'am, could you please your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Maisha Itia Handy [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Maisha Handy], M-A-I-S-H-A, I-T-I-A, Handy, H-A-N-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story behind your first name and middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes, my first and middle name are Kiswahili. Maisha means life, and Itia means a gift.  It's actually inverted.  I was told the meaning is a gift of life.  And I was given that name because my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] had a couple of miscarriages before me.  And I was the only child of hers to survive.  And my birth was a bit stressed, so they named me a gift of life.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 20th, 1968, and I was born in Chicago, Illinois, Cook County.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a graduate school professor and minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I believe it's August 22nd, (laughter) 2005.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are on Auburn Avenue at The HistoryMakers' office in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 290039
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a hard question. I think two foods will tie for my favorite. I like sweet potatoes in various dishes, sweet potato pies, sweet potato casserole, baked sweet potatoes, anything involving a sweet potato, and salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Anything in the pink family--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at least in terms of attire.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, summer is my favorite season.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we're in it today, aren't we (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I would call it a vacation destination, but I love Bermuda. But I've only been there on business, so I look forward to going back to Bermuda as a vacation spot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? I don't recall who said this, but it's a phrase that I really like, and it states, most people who are considered geniuses--no, let me get it right (laughter). What many people perceive as genius is really just perseverance in disguise.  That's it.
Story_ID: 290040
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Handy] side of the family. But we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her full name is Clara, C-L-A-R-A, Theresa, T-H-E-R-E-S-A, maiden name is Johnson, current last name is Handy, H-A-N-D-Y, hyphen-Griffin, G-R-I-F-F-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 30th, 1941, and she was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  First of all, how far back can you trace her ancestors?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my great-grandmother by memory.  I do have a family tree that I sketched and wrote down.  I actually traveled down the Mississippi [River] two years ago with the intention of getting some more background on my family history and charted out quite a bit of that information.  Unfortunately, I didn't think to bring it with me. I probably should have or brushed up on that (laughter), prior to coming. But by memory, I know I can at least go back to my great-grandmother--
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and grandfather.
Speaker 1: --research you did, how far back does your research take you?
Speaker 2: My research still only takes me back to my great-great-grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I still have the intention of going back down and trying to get some more information, going to the courthouse to get some information.
Speaker 1: And where were they--where did they live and who were they?
Speaker 2: This particular set of people that I talked to--generally, most of my mother's family is in two places, either in Louisiana in the New Orleans area or in Columbia, Mississippi; Tylertown, Mississippi; McComb, Mississippi. These are all small towns that are in a cluster about thirty minutes south of Hattiesburg [Mississippi] and about forty-five minutes from New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what are the--did you discovery anything that your family was doing? I mean what were they doing to make a living down there?
Speaker 2: Most of the family there--if you go back, not even two generations, were sharecroppers, meaning they lived there on land that they eventually owned, but they worked as sharecroppers, most of them on land of a man named Fred Riley [ph.].  So, for example, I have an older cousin, Jennetta [ph.], who is probably in her sixties right now.  When she was a child, she worked on Fred Riley's land, she and all of her siblings, her parents, which would be my great aunt.  But most of the people in that area were sharecroppers.
Story_ID: 290041
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that they [Handy's maternal ancestors] passed down about life?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are lots of stories (laughter).  One particular story that I remember, particularly about sharecropping, is the fact that most of my cousins did not get to attend school on a regular basis because they had to work in the fields.  The only days that they really got to attend school were days of inclement weather, meaning it was raining or it was too cold to be out in the fields.  And I remember one particular story where they said it was raining, and they were on the school bus, and they were really excited that they would, would get to go to school that day.  And apparently, Fred Riley [ph.] drove up in his truck and demanded that they get off of the school bus because it wasn't raining that hard, and, you know.  I remember them being upset and kind of crying about that, and--because they had to go out and work in the fields that day rather than going to school.
Speaker 1: Now, this kind of--this paints a picture that's different from what most people would think that, I mean you work for somebody, but to have that person control when you go to school and when you don't--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that's not the typical life we lead today.  That's not typical of what we see, somebody--an employer is able to reach into your education and stop it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 290042
Speaker 1: Well, I mean sharecropping wasn't necessarily an honest system, from what I understand, and I know this through another story, my great aunt, Annie Lee Husband [ph.] had fifteen children.  And, of course, they were very poor.  I remember when I was a child, when I would go down and visit--I spent quite a few of my summers in Mississippi on various relatives', you know (laughter), staying with them.  And I remember they lived in, I guess what we would call today a shack or a shotgun-type house with, you know, all her children, but, you know, rarely had enough money even to buy shoes for that many children. And so what Fred Riley [ph.] would do, is that he would have them work, and supposedly--was supposed to pay them for, I guess, a certain amount for a bale of cotton. They mostly picked cotton. And when Christmastime would come around, he would agree to buy gifts and buy shoes for all of the children if they would agree, again, to work off the debt, and, of course, would always charge more than they could ever pay off. So it was kind of a cycle of, you know, debt, if you will. So, because of that debt, he could control and manipulate what they could and could not do.
Speaker 2: Now, is there a story about how they got out of that situation with Fred Riley?
Speaker 1: You know, I'm not absolutely sure. I know he's dead (laughter), so that may have something to do with it. I do remember a story about him calling for my great aunt on his deathbed, I guess to make amends for some of the things that he had done. I never really got a sense of whether she forgave him or not at that point. But I really don't know what happened to alleviate that situation. I would think that some sense of modernity may have had something to do with that. I remember when I was a child, there were no fast-food restaurants in Columbia [Mississippi] (laughter), no Walmart, nothing like that. There was a J.C. Penneys, fred's, which is kind of a convenience store.
Speaker 2: Fred's, named after Fred C--
Speaker 1: I don't--that's a good question (laughter). I don't think so.  We had a Piggly Wiggly grocery store, and that was about it.  Now, of course, there's McDonald's, Walmart. Columbia is a pretty big, little town.  And, of course, Hattiesburg [Mississippi] is a big, college town now. So maybe with the influx of other job opportunities, they had other options.
Story_ID: 290043
Speaker 1: Now, you said you knew your [maternal] great-grandmother. What are your recollections of her?
Speaker 2: None. She died well before I was born as did my mother's [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] mother.  I've never met my grandmother [Virgilee Johnson].  She died when my mother was sixteen. She died of food poisoning, but my grandfather's mother, I've heard stories about her.  Her name was Belle Johnson [ph.].  And from what I understand, she was killed outside of a juke joint in Mississippi. I can't recall the name of the town right now. But apparently she got into a fight with a gentleman outside of a juke joint, and she pulled out a razor blade, some kind of razor, to him, and he shot her and killed her.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a--yeah, had some rough juke joints in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, from what I understand, my great-grandmother was (laughter) a rough customer, if you will. So, yeah. And it was at that point that my grandfather was sent to live with my great-grandmother's sister, Granny Reese [ph.], as I know her.  And she raised him along with her other sons. So my family last name--while his last name is Johnson, it's also Husband, and I'm kin to most of the Husbands in Mississippi and in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, so the last name is Husband?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Spelled, H-U-S-B-A-N-D?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So when we have our family reunion on that side, it's actually called the Husband-Connelly family reunion.
Speaker 1: That can be confusing with a name like that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, that's, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I guess we all understand it (laughter).
Story_ID: 290044
Speaker 1: Any other stories from that side?
Speaker 2: No, again, I've seen pictures of my [maternal] grandmother.  We look exactly alike because I have pictures of her. She died when she was thirty-two, which is younger than I am now. So I have a picture of her and myself right next to each other on my living room wall, and we look quite a bit alike.
Speaker 1: What was her name, your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Virgilee, V-I-R-G-I-L-E-E, Johnson.  And her maiden name is Connelly, which is how you get the whole Connelly-Husband connection.  But apparently, she ate something from the stove that she shouldn't have, and my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] at the time rushed her, I guess, to the hospital, initially, from what I understand, took her to a white hospital. And they refused to admit her. And by the time they got her to a hospital that would see her, she was already deceased.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was at that point that my mother moved to Chicago [Illinois]. And she's been in Chicago since she was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was raised until she was sixteen down in Columbia [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: No, she was in New Orleans [Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: New Orleans, okay, New Orleans--
Speaker 2: --in New Orleans at the time, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandparents lived in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother get a chance to go to school very much in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My mother's life was very different, apparently from that of her cousins in Mississippi. In fact, she was considered, I guess quite privileged even though she was poor as well. But New Orleans was considered the big city, I guess, to people (laughter) who lived in Mississippi. So, yeah, she attended [Walter L.] Cohen High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is still in existence in New Orleans, and studied music.
Speaker 1: It's called Cohen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, C-O-H-E-N--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --High School.  In fact, from what I understand, she was in high school with one of the Neville Brothers, and Garrett Morris, he used to be on 'Saturday Night Live.'
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Apparently, they were in school in the same class there at Cohen High School. She studied music, was a singer and moved to Chicago and attended Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] where she studied music and was a singer, Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] first, from what I understand, and Roosevelt University. And that is where she met my father [Charles Handy].
Story_ID: 290045
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] have relatives already in Chicago [Illinois]? Is that why she came to Chicago or--
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not quite sure how she made that, that connection because she moved to Chicago with my [maternal] grandfather.  So I guess he knew some people there. She did not live with him when she moved to Chicago. She lived with some other people, a woman named Mrs. Clark [ph.], and her family kind of helped, I guess, finish raising my mother, even though she was, you know, sixteen at the time, and only had, I think another year of school left. So (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, is there a story about how your parents met, that they tell?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, let my father [Charles Handy] tell it, it had something to do with a blizzard (laughter). It was back then.  I mean they met in school [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois]. My father, Maurice White, a couple of the guys in Earth, Wind and Fire--
Speaker 1: The Satterfields?
Speaker 2: Satterfield, Louis Satterfield, Joe Savage, who actually just moved to Atlanta [Georgia] recently, they all were a part of a jazz ensemble at Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]. I don't recall the teacher's name. But all of these guys studied under the same music teacher who recently had a reunion for them earlier this summer. If his name comes up, I'll, I'll recall it.
Speaker 1: Is he black--
Speaker 2: And apparently, my mother was the only--
Speaker 1: Is he black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It wasn't Vandy Harris, was it or--
Speaker 2: No, but I know Vandy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's in a wheelchair now and is ailing. I cannot recall his name, but my mother was the only female in the class, apparently, and was a singer. So my father played the trumpet, was the horn player.  And that's where they met.
Story_ID: 290046
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles Handy, H-A-N-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Also known as Ki--K-I.
Speaker 1: K-I, okay. Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm going to get the year wrong probably, but his birth date is April 13th, probably have to be 1938, and he was born in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he was born in Little Rock. What do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Not much. His mother is still living. She lives in Chicago [Illinois]. Her name is Dorothy Davis [ph.]. She is, I believe eighty years old now.  He has a sister, Mary Tolbert [ph.], who also is in Chicago, and lives with my grandmother.  He has a brother, John Handy [ph.], who's assistant pastor of a Baptist church in Little Rock, and apparently, I have quite a few cousins, Handys, who live in Little Rock and quite a few in St. Louis, Missouri area also; don't know much about that side of the family. We have never attended a family reunion.  My parents divorced when I was three years old. I would still go and spend, you know, quite a bit of time with my father who was living with my grandmother at that time, but never ventured outside of the Chicago area to connect with that side of the family. The only story I have heard about my father is that apparently, one of the Little Rock Nine that integrated [Little Rock] Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] was a girlfriend of my father's, and grew up in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you know which one?
Speaker 2: --that same neighborhood.  I don't (laughter). I don't know.  I'm sure I knew that at one point, but I don't remember who she is.
Speaker 1: Okay, we've interviewed a lot of them, you know, so it would be interesting--
Speaker 2: Oh really (laughter).
Story_ID: 290047
Speaker 1: You know, a Handy name is a famous name in black music.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You got W.C. Handy, a trumpet player.
Speaker 2: Right. And apparently, he's a cousin of ours.
Speaker 1: Is he?
Speaker 2: I haven't traced that direct lineage yet.
Speaker 1: So the story is, he's a cousin from your father's [Charles Handy] side?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: W.C. Handy (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And I'm sure the Handys in St. Louis [Missouri] would know.
Speaker 1: And then there's, of course, John Handy, who had the song "Hard Work," back in the '70s [1970s], you know, the album titled 'Hard Work,' you know. It's kind of a bluesy jazz kind--I mean a bluesy, jazz kind of album, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So, but those are two Handys I know that are in music. I just wondered if they're--
Speaker 2: Apparently, there's someone even now who's a musician named Handy who's pretty popular in the jazz area. I can't recall his first name but never made any connections there with him. And then there's--I actually had a Bishop Handy who was my professor at Candler School of Theology here at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia]. And he and I were never able to make any direct connections.  He was from Louisiana, from New Orleans, but would have been no connection there to my father. But he would always call me kinfolk anyway (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a United Methodist bishop.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bishop Handy.  Okay, all right, yeah, well, that's something, that's, you know, W.C. Handy was a--they called him the Father of the Blues--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know.  Yes.
Speaker 2: And he wrote the song 'St. Louis Blues.'
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Okay so, are there any stories from your father's side of the family about his ancestors that you know?
Speaker 2: Well, what's something (laughter) very interesting for me, I went home last Christmas, and I always try to see my father when I go home, saw him a couple of weeks ago when I was there, but noticed that he had the obituary of his father sitting out on one of his shelves. My father tends to disclose information in spurts for some reason, like years long spurts. But I opened up his obituary. My grandfather's name was Major Handy [ph.]. And I opened that up and discovered that his father was a preacher in the early 1900s. His name was Major Columbus Handy, actually.
Speaker 1: So this is the, the father of your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Right, my great--
Speaker 1: So he's your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: --grandfather.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a minister.
Speaker 1: What denomination was he?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: So, okay, his name was Major Columbus--
Speaker 2: Major Columbus Handy.
Speaker 1: --Columbus Handy. Is there any reason why his name was Major that you know of or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: There was a tendency at some point or used to be kind of, that used to tickle people on some level that people would--in the black community, name their kids, Lawyer or Major or, you know, there's a Lawyer Tillman that played wide receiver [sic. tight end] for the Cleveland Browns at one time.  And names--
Speaker 2: Give a name of importance.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the name of a title, you know, would be your name, so it would--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So there's no story about how they decided to name him Major (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I know of, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  He was a Baptist minister, you said.  Any other stories from that side?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  I'm afraid not.
Story_ID: 290048
Speaker 1: Well, your father [Charles Handy], did he talk about growing up in--did he grow up in Little Rock [Arkansas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he grew up in Arkansas.  I had--
Speaker 1: That's right, well, you said his girlfriend was one of the Little Rock Nine.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I have not heard the story about how he made a transition to Chicago [Illinois]. I do know that my grandmother remarried after my grandfather died, remarried Jack Davis [ph.], which is why she ended up with the last name, Davis.  So I'm assuming that perhaps they made that transition to Chicago somewhere around that point. Maybe Jack lived in Chicago. I'm not sure, but that's how my father, I guess ended up at Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] which is now Crane High School [Richard T. Crane Medical Preparatory High School] on the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, he would have went to, I guess [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School in Little Rock. I believe that was the black high school there.
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: And then the Little Rock Nine, you know, left to go to [Little Rock] Central [High School, Little Rock, Arkansas]--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --from Dunbar. Did he know--I won't ask--this is kind of a wild question, but, you know, the great jazz saxophone player, Farrell Sanders, is from Little Rock, too. They're about the same age.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I'm sure he knows him.  My father knows (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he ever mention--
Speaker 2: My father knows about everybody, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I don't ever remember him mentioning that name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Farrell Sanders is--they call him Pharaoh, but his name is Farrell, F-A-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 2: I'm sure he, I'm sure he does.
Speaker 1: And then being involved in, later on at Crane, he was involved in a group called The Pharaohs, you said.
Speaker 2: Right, my father was. In fact, he and Maurice White started--
Speaker 1: P-H-A-R--
Speaker 2: --that group.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, The Pharaohs, they produced some albums (unclear) Chicago--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'The Awakening' was their first album.
Speaker 1: I've got it at home (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So how did he, he did--did they ever tell about how he got involved in music?
Speaker 2: My father?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I don't even know when he started playing.  I just know my father is--was and still is quite a brilliant musician, has composed music quite a bit. I did hear some stories even last December when they had this big musicians' reunion with their music teacher about how my father enrolled in, I believe it was a master's degree program at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] in music and was taking a music composition course, orchestra composition. And whoever the professor was, required the students to write a major orchestra piece where they had to score out all of the different parts for every instrument as their kind of final exam, end of the semester assignment.  And the story is that my father came back a couple of days later with his entire composition with all parts scored out.  And the professor said, (laughter) you know, there's nothing that I can teach you.  You pretty much already have this, this master's, and passed him on.  So that's one story that I heard last year.
Story_ID: 290049
Speaker 1: Now he [Handy's father, Charles Handy] came along in the time when people were talking about--well, what they called that period like the, like a Black Arts Movement, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you have any stories about those days that he--
Speaker 2: No I was a baby when they opened the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  The story that my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] tells is that I didn't like loud music, apparently (laughter) because whenever somebody would start playing, I would start crying and yelling, et cetera.  She would have to carry me out.  But I do know that my father and several, Don Myrick, Louis Satterfield, Maurice White, Verdine White, all those folks started and opened the Afro-Arts Theater 'cause it was on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And they played there quite frequently, I guess until it closed down.
Speaker 1: On the West Side?
Speaker 2: Was it on the West Side?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: No, the Afro-Arts, 39th [Street] and Oakland [sic. Drexel Boulevard], yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, the little Comiskey [Park, Chicago, Illinois] kind of area, okay.  But like I said, I was a baby, so I really have no recollection of the Afro-Arts Theater.  I do remember Transitions East [Chicago, Illinois] because I was a little older then, I'm probably about six or seven years old.  I remember going there and hearing--well, at that point, my parents were apart.  But my mother, singing with Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]--
Speaker 1: Now, Phil Cohran, his name is spelled--how do you spell Phil Cohran's last name?
Speaker 2: P-H-I-L, is it C-O--
Speaker 1: H-R-A-N.
Speaker 2: H-R-A-N.
Speaker 1: Is that right, okay.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I just wanted to confirm it because people transcribe this, and they have to get the name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A name like Cohran, you know, could be spelled different ways.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 290050
Speaker 1: So what was Transitions East [Chicago, Illinois]? Can you describe it from your--I know you were a little kid at the time, but--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter). It was kind of, maybe like another version of, a smaller, scaled-down version, I guess of what the Afro-Arts Theater [Chicago, Illinois] was. People would come to listen to music. It was very much a part of the whole Black Power, Black Arts Movement. It was very much focused on holistic health, so I do remember when I was a child, we were vegetarians, didn't eat meat, seemed like there was a lot of, kind of influence from the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 1: Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] was a member of the Nation of Islam at one time in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Right, and my parents [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin and Charles Handy] were as well.  So, in fact, I remember my mother saying that she wanted to teach at [Sister] Clara Muhammad [School, Chicago, Illinois], which is the Muslim school there on Stony Island [Avenue]. But that's pretty much all I remember is, you know, just health food and music and drama, my mother singing and me kind of running around playing a lot, I guess (laughter), with the other kids.  And I remember myself dancing. I started African dance probably when I was about three or four years old. I can remember that from a very early age. There was--
Speaker 1: Was that with [HistoryMaker] Darlene Blackburn or--
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, I studied with Darlene Blackburn for years. And I danced with her daughter Ayana [ph.] probably all the way up through high school when I was in Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois]. So, yeah, I took dance lessons from Darlene Blackburn. They had some other cultural arts center where we used to have different activities. I remember we always had Kwanzaa celebrations because that community was the first community in the City of Chicago to do Kwanzaa celebrations. Apparently, Dr. Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] traveled to Chicago at some point in the '60s [1960s] and introduced them to that. And so, yeah, we weren't Christian. We celebrated Kwanzaa.
Story_ID: 290051
Speaker 1: We were talking about celebrating Kwanzaa. So you were part of the first group that celebrated Kwanzaa in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right. And did you, I mean what are your memories of Kwanzaa in those early days?
Speaker 2: I remember a lot of celebrations, a lot of dancing, a lot of singing. I have a picture of myself. I probably was about four or five years old, and I remember being dressed in kind of African attire and dancing as part of a Kwanzaa celebration. Of course, remember the daily candle lightings and the celebrations and learning what the different elements on the table meant as well. And, of course, I remember getting presents on January 1st rather than on December 25th (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did that make you feel left out or did you feel okay about that or--
Speaker 2: I think when I was really young, I did.  As I got older, I think I began to feel left out because we didn't celebrate Christmas.  My mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] would actually keep me home from school on Halloween, so I never--for a couple of years there, I didn't put on any costuming.  A little bit later I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what were the thoughts about Halloween?
Speaker 2: I don't recall other than--I don't know if it was perceived as a Christian holiday, or if it was attached with some form of paganism.  I'm really not sure what the situation was with Halloween, but I just know that we did not celebrate any of the kind of national recognized holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas, Halloween, any of that.
Speaker 1: As you reflect on it now, what do you think was the purpose of that--
Speaker 2: I think the purpose--
Speaker 1: --why not just do what everybody else does and follow all the--
Speaker 2: Because they were in a kind of iconoclastic movement.  I mean there was, that was the intention of the whole Black Arts [Movement] and Black Power Movement is to create our own kind of Afrocentric celebrations, holidays, et cetera.  So I think the whole purpose was to not participate in what the mainstream society was doing.
Speaker 1: And for what end?
Speaker 2: Supposedly, I guess, for the empowerment of black people to restore a sense of the African self, African identity.  I think that was why a lot of people in my generation began to have African names, names that connected us with the continent because of this whole reemerging sense of black identity and African consciousness around the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 290052
Speaker 1: You mentioned like vegetarianism and the emphasis on health food, I think started in the black community.  It seemed to--well, one of the earliest, you know, groups that pushed that was the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know--'How to Eat to Live,' Elijah Muhammad's book and so forth.  So why do you think that, that emphasis was such a part of the Black Arts Movement?
Speaker 2: I think probably because of the influence of the Nation of Islam on the Black Arts Movement and the affiliation of that movement with figures like Malcolm X, excuse me, like Elijah Muhammad.  I'm sure there were quite a people who were a part of the Nation of Islam that were a part of the same Black Arts, Black Power movement.  So you really had a lot of kind of intersection going on between various movements and whatever those movements--however they understood holistic health. I'm sure they read Elijah Muhammad's books on health, and just saw the importance of not only being healthy and prosperous financially and having a greater sense of black consciousness and identity, but also taking care of our physical selves--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --seemed to be a very important part of that as well, cooking our own food, perhaps growing our own food and eating those foods are healthy. I don't remember when the book 'The Jungle' [Upton Sinclair] came out, which, of course, was about Chicago [Illinois] stockyards and meats--that may have had some kind of impact on that whole movement as well.
Speaker 1: I think that was in the late '20s [1920s] or early '30s [sic. 1906].
Speaker 2: I remember reading that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago was the meat capital of the world for a minute (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 290053
Speaker 1: Can you describe your parents' [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin and Charles Handy] personalities to us and tell us who you think you take after--or what parts of them do you take after?
Speaker 2: I think the musician in me probably takes after both of them.  Of course, the instrumentalist in me probably takes more after my father, though I feel like I don't have half of his genius (laughter) in that regard related to music theory, et cetera.  I largely play by ear, play very well by ear, read music at a fundamental level, but nowhere near the way he does.  But I think the artist side of me takes after my father.  And maybe the, the vocal side of me, somewhat after my mother, but probably after neither.  My mother sang mostly classical music, anthems and opera music.  She was actually the first black person to sing with the Rockefeller [Chapel] Choir in Chicago [Illinois].  And my vocal styling is a little bit different from hers.  But musically, I think I probably take after both of them.  Personality wise, I don't know.  I mean you asked me.  I don't take after either one of them (laughter).  My mother always kind of came across--she loved to socialize.  She's a person who loves to have people over at the house.  My mother loves to cook.  Cooking and feeding people is her livelihood and she enjoys that very much.  She's very much kind of a businessperson.  She was a teacher, so I understood--she was like a strict disciplinarian from my perspective, a kind of serious person for the most part.  I'm actually a lot like my stepfather who, my parents didn't marry until I was fifteen years old.  I was in high school [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], but I knew my stepfather since I was about six or seven years old and interacted with his kids a lot growing up.  And he and I are a lot more alike.  He's very funny, kind of laid-back guy, very funny and, yeah, I think I'm a lot more like my stepfather than like my mother or my biological father.
Speaker 1: And what's your stepfather's name?
Speaker 2: Burdett, do you want it spelled? B-U-R-D-E-T-T, Griffin, G-R-I-F-F-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's had a lot of influence on you, I guess, on some level?
Speaker 2: Yes, somewhat.
Speaker 1: And it's good to have a stepfather that comes in and, I mean someone that comes in that's not related to you that brings something that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Story_ID: 290054
Speaker 1: I had, I guess, two simultaneous introductions to Christianity.  After Ile Iwe Ominara [ph.] is the school that I attended, elementary school.  And then I attended a school called Faulkner [School for Girls, Chicago, Illinois] for a year.
Speaker 2: Can you spell Ile Ominara for us?
Speaker 1: Oh, I'll make an attempt.  Ile, I-L-E, Iwe, I-W-E, Ominara, O-M-I-N-A-R-A.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's Ile--
Speaker 1: Iwe.
Speaker 2: Ile Iwe, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ominara.  Don't ask me what it means because (laughter) I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think Ile is school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ile Iwe, it sounds Yoruba.
Speaker 1: It's Yoruba, Yoruba.  But I know Iles now in Brazil are kind of--they're spiritual, religious sites and centers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Nigeria, too, Ile-Ife--
Speaker 1: Right, Ife-Ile.
Speaker 2: --you know, different, you know, so.  Okay, so, you start off at Ile Iwe Ominara.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And where was that?
Speaker 1: It was located in Hyde Park in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't remember the exact address.  But this was a school that was started by several Chicago Public School [CPS] teachers, including my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] who, again, were a part of the whole Black Consciousness Movement, and felt that Chicago Public School system was not providing the kind of education that they wanted their children to have in terms of learning black history, African history, et cetera.  So they would go to their various jobs and destinations during the day and teach.  And at times, I would go to school with my mother.  My mother was my pre-school and kindergarten teacher.  And then in the afternoons, I would go to Ile for school and did that, I guess up to the third grade.  And then I attended a school called Faulkner, which was on the South Shore area, not too far from Lake Shore Drive in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Now, Faulkner is a private school, too.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's a black school, but it's not African-centered.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, but Faulkner, yes, was a private school, considered to have an advanced curriculum.  I do remember the principal's name was Ms. Johnson [ph.].  I don't recall her first name, but I think she was one of the persons who started Faulkner.  And I was there--they placed me in the fifth grade when I started that school because of my test scores.
Speaker 2: So you were like the age of a third grader, but you were--the age of a fourth grader, but they put you in the fifth grade?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you were nine when you went to fifth, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so that's--
Speaker 1: And I was there for a year.  And then I transferred to St. Felicitas [School, Chicago, Illinois], which was on 83rd [Place] and Blackstone [Avenue] on the South Side of Chicago and was there from sixth to eighth grade.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, the consistent theme here is that you didn't go to public school at all.
Speaker 1: Right, no.
Speaker 2: But you went from an African-centered school to an independent black school, achievement-oriented type school, to Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 290055
Speaker 1: By this time was your mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin], had your mother become a Catholic or a Christian?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), well, at St. Felicitas [School, Chicago, Illinois], of necessity, you had to attend family Mass once a month.  That was one of the requirements for having your child in that school.  And because of her connection, both with St. Felicitas and my godparents who were members of St. Felicitas--they were Catholics, the Kelly family.  Most of the Kellys attended St. Felicitas and were Catholics.  My mother started attending family Mass and because my godmother was also her best friend, she got involved with the choir at St. Felicitas.  And she still sings with them.  She's been singing with that choir probably for twenty-five or so years.  At the same time, that is when she reconnected with my stepfather [Burdett Griffin, Jr.] who was Baptist.  And he was a member of First Baptist Congregational Church on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois].  So we would both attend St. Felicitas for Mass once a month but would also attend First Baptist Congregational on the South Side [sic.] of Chicago and that is when we joined First Baptist and became Baptist, Protestant, Christians.
Speaker 1: Okay, about what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was when I was in the sixth grade.  What year was that?  That would have been '79 [1979], '78 [1978] or '79 [1979].
Story_ID: 290056
Speaker 1: Did you live in the same place most of your--or did move around a lot?
Speaker 2: No, we lived in Jeffery Manor [Chicago, Illinois] on 97th [Street] and Crandon [Avenue] until I was fifteen years old.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember we lived on Colfax [Avenue].  This was when my parents [Carla Johnson Handy-Griffin and Charles Handy] were still together.  I don't recall what area on Colfax, something--and that was in the like 82nd [Street], something like that, block on Colfax.  And I remember we had some neighbors named Debra [ph.]. They had sons named Tommy [ph.] and Virgil [ph.] who I would play with when I was little. And I do remember that Chaka Khan was babysitter. I think her name was Yvette [Marie Stevens] back then before she changed her name to Chaka Khan.
Speaker 1: It wasn't--was it Johnson, wasn't it--
Speaker 2: Smith.
Speaker 1: Smith?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yvette Smith, okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was Yvette Smith [sic.].  I could be wrong, but, yeah, she was my babysitter.
Speaker 1: Okay, was she--did she sing then?
Speaker 2: From what I understand, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't remember--
Speaker 2: I don't ever remember her singing, but (laughter).  I was far too young to remember that.
Speaker 1: Was she a good babysitter?
Speaker 2: I guess so. I turned out all right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was just in Chicago [Illinois] last week at Ravinia [Festival, Highland Park, Illinois], I think, or some place.
Speaker 2: I have not seen her since I was about that age. So I would, I would love to see her and just to see if she even remembers me.
Story_ID: 290057
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Like I said, a lot of music.  I was always around musicians and musical folks. I can remember this woman named Sister Shanta [Nurullah] who played a sitar.
Speaker 1: Shanta Nurullah.
Speaker 2: Shanta Nurullah, I remember always being fascinated with her playing the sitar, and the sounds of the sitar, Garrett's popcorn [Garrett Popcorn Shops] (laughter), definitely, one of the smells of Chicago [Illinois], good pizza, polishes from Maxwell Street, of course, when I got older and ate meat.  Sights, a lot of bus rides, the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] and the "L" [elevated train].  I used to have to take two buses and the "L" to the West Side to attend high school at Whitney [M.] Young Magnet High School [Chicago, Illinois]. So, you know, just kind of a lot of the sounds of city life, street life, public life. I was a dancer.  As I told you, I took African dance with [HistoryMaker] Darlene Blackburn and when I was in high school, branched out into modern ballet and jazz classes and took ballet classes down in the Fine Arts Building on Michigan Avenue at Dancespace and also took classes at Joseph Holmes Chicago--what later became Joseph Holmes Chicago Dance Theatre was just Joseph Holmes Dance Company back then up on North Sheridan [Road].  So I was very much involved in the whole performing arts movement.  I remember the movie 'Fame' came out back then, so, you know, everybody wanted that whole kind of Debbie Allen (laughter), fine arts type lifestyle.  And that was a big, big part of my development.
Story_ID: 290058
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school or--was it music or art or--
Speaker 2: You know, you would think.  I sang with the high school chorus [at Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], and I danced, and I'm sure I very much enjoyed the dance classes, but on the more academic class, anything related to English and reading was my preference.  I very much enjoyed English, English literature, enjoyed writing.  Also, kind of simultaneously, became interested in psychology, took a psychology class in high school.  So all those interests I developed simultaneously.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of books in the home when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] was and still is an avid reader.  So I was always surrounded by books, always encouraged to read.  From what I understand, I started reading at a very early age.  I can remember my [maternal] grandfather, who I spent a lot, a lot of time at his house--he remarried, and my step-grandmother's house, and he used to always tell me stories, bragging about how I would read the newspaper at a very early age (laughter).  So, yes, I was always reading, and my father [Charles Handy] was also an avid reader.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite teacher in school or were there--or favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: I can remember Ms. Brunious [ph.].  She was my modern dance teacher, and I had her for Modern Dance I, II and III.  And Ms. Brooks [ph.] for stage dance.  Flora Robinson was my chorus teacher for four years who was also a best friend of my mother's and considered to be like an aunt to me.  She was the maid of honor when my mother married my father back in the '60s [1960s]. So I remember them quite a bit.  And that's pretty much it. I remember Mr. Aider [ph.] who was an English teacher. I think I remember him because he was known for being particularly tough, a tough teacher. But I did well in his class.
Story_ID: 290059
Speaker 1: Were there any other figures in the community that you remember that, you, you know, were impressed by?
Speaker 2: Like I said, I think I was impressed with Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran] because he was always just a very nice person, had a lot of kids, so I spent a lot of time with him and his wife and their kids, and just remember him being just a very nice person who would always take time to teach kids and young people and kind of never had a problem with us being around while he was doing whatever it was that he was doing.  When my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] remarried, my grandmother on my father's side, my stepfather's [Burdett Griffin, Jr.] side became an important figure because she was a minister.  She was the pastor of the children's church there at First Baptist [Congregational Church, Chicago, Illinois], and became kind of a central figure to my spiritual development as well.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Ruby Griffin.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, Phil Cohran, and--I know it's been discussed around Chicago [Illinois]--well, I don't know if anybody's really pinned it down.  The story is that he mentored like Earth, Wind and Fire, the people in Earth, Wind and Fire, which would include your father [Charles Handy] at that time--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my father, he and my father probably had a close relationship.  And he may have assisted my father even with writing a lot of the music that they were doing back then because Earth, Wind--The Pharaohs had very, kind of African, Afro-Caribbean stylings, probably infused with some jazz stylings, and I'm sure Phil Cohran may have had something to do with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so did your father like become a part of the band of Earth, Wind and Fire touring (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, apparently, he and Maurice White had a big falling out at some point before they moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  And my father made the decision at that point--I don't know if he just--my father taught public school also.  I get conflicting stories on why he decided to stay behind and didn't go with them.  But from what I understand, Maurice White took a lot of his music with him to L.A. and developed some of that music.  But I do remember us keeping in touch, particularly with the Satterfields, Louis [Satterfield] and Blondell [Satterfield], and I remember us traveling out there to see them on a couple of occasions.  But, no, my father decided to stay in Chicago, and he's been there ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he taught public school from--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And supposedly, he quit because they wouldn't let him teach black history.  So out of protest, he quit public school and never went back.  He just did music.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's been kind of like an independent musician since--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah.  And he actually got The Pharaohs back together recently, and they went back into the studio and remastered a lot of that old music and old CDs.  I know they've done several blues festivals.  Apparently, my mother won--my father won a blues festival competition about ten years ago in Chicago. So he's still writing and performing and doing what he does.
Story_ID: 290060
Speaker 1: When you were at Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], were you involved in clubs and activities in the school and did you--
Speaker 2: I was a pom-pom girl (laughter), which is kind of the parallel, if you will, to cheerleaders, but we didn't, we didn't cheer; we danced.  We were the half-time show.  Again, anything related to dance, I was into it.  So I was involved in that.  I was also a part of--I can't remember exactly what it was called. I think it was called the jazz swing group, which was a branch of concert choir where we sang kind of more jazzy tunes and danced. And we would go to different choral compositions and compete. So I was involved with that group as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mostly things, again, related to the arts (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a strong arts background here then (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you run for student office or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I was on the track team and the swim team also.  So I was pretty much athletics (laughter), if you will, and performing arts, but, no, I never ran for any student government offices or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were, let me see--what year did you graduate? It was--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985] from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 290061
Speaker 1: You were in high school [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] during the [Mayor] Harold Washington years?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have any recollections of the Harold Washington years?
Speaker 2: I do. I mean I remember his election being a really, really big deal in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  You know, of course, the African American community was extremely excited about Harold Washington being mayor and considered him to be an excellent mayor after the [Mayor] Jane Byrne period.  [Mayor Michael] Bilandic, if I'm not mistaken, Bilandic ran into some trouble after the blizzard of '79 [1979] and the whole clean up around that.  And then Jane Byrne took over after him, but, yeah, I remember Harold Washington being a big deal.  I don't remember the year that he was killed, but I do remember, of course, that being significant in the history of the City of Chicago.  And his funeral, I believe was at Johnnie Colemon's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon] church, Christ Universal Temple [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That was 1987 when he died.
Speaker 2: Right, so I was, I was away in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it's interesting what you said--
Speaker 2: --in undergrad at that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it's interesting that you said that you remember the year he was killed, when he supposedly died of a heart attack.
Speaker 2: Well (laughter)--
Speaker 1: But it seems the--now, was this--
Speaker 2: I can't even blame that on a Freudian slip, can I (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: So do you think that--I mean, a lot of, some people think he was killed, but do you share that?
Speaker 2: I think there was a lot of speculation around it. As a person who attended law school, you know, there's no substantial evidence to support that, of course. But there was a lot of speculation that that may have been the case. And I think that just kind of became part of the rhetoric of black folk around his, his death.
Story_ID: 290062
Speaker 1: Were you a good student in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was all right (laughter).
Speaker 1: I guess you had to be to be at Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  First of all, you had to be bright and pass a test to get in a magnet school.  We know that.  But when you were there, were you really concerned about grades and--
Speaker 2: I was concerned.  I don't think I was as concerned as I should have been.  I felt like, you know, I could have done much better, but, you know, maybe I'm just being a tough critic on myself.  I struggled, particularly with math and probably could have done better there.  Again, anything related to language arts, verbal, English and kind of behavioral sciences were my forte. But I was, I was okay.  I was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Better in some things, I guess, than others as is generally true.  I mean I grew up in the era of I.Q. tests and very rigid notions of intelligence.  I have my own kind of soapbox about that, if you want to hear that later.  But I grew up in an era that favored logical, mathematical intelligence and verbal intelligence.  So, you know, we were evaluated according to those kinds of standards.  And, now, you know, of course, we have theories about multiple intelligences, and learning styles and the different ways that students learn and different aptitudes.  But that wasn't a part of the 1980s educational conversation.
Speaker 1: So in that context, how would you describe yourself, your own, I guess talents?
Speaker 2: I think I was considered to be very talented, particularly, again, as a dancer. I was known as probably one of the best persons in the dance program in high school and the fact that I studied at Joseph Holmes [Dance Company; Joseph Holmes Chicago Dance Theatre] and took classes there--that was considered a big deal to us during that time.  It's interesting you ask that questions because I just attended my twenty-year high school reunion last weekend in Chicago [Illinois].  And it was interesting to hear kind of the different comments twenty years later about what other folks' perceptions of me was at that time.  I thought that more people would be shocked that I was in ministry, but they were not. In fact, I had one classmate who I danced with who said, "You were everybody's friend.  And everybody liked you.  You got along with everybody, so I'm not surprised that you're in the ministry." So I appreciated that comment because I don't think that was my perception of myself (laughter) at that time.
Story_ID: 290063
Speaker 1: When you were senior, what were your prospects in terms of college, you know, and going to Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, it's presupposed you're going to college.  So--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  I was clear that I was going.  I didn't have an option.  My mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin], of course, was an educator herself for twenty-six years, Chicago Public Schools [CPS].  So she insisted, of course, that I go to college.  But there were a few kind of interesting other issues surrounding that.  I graduated at a young age.  This mean that my mother would be sending me away at sixteen.  And she had some concerns about that, of course.  I wanted to attend Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and some schools that were kind of far away. But my mother, that was not her desire for me. She wanted to be in a place--if I went away where I could have some guardianship.  So several members of our church, as well as the pastor's daughter--the pastor [Reverend Dr. Arthur Griffin] is my great uncle on my stepfather's [Burdett Griffin, Jr.] side, his daughter was living in the same town where Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] was.  They had a really good dance program as well.  So she was able to take me down there the summer after I graduated to meet the dance instructor, Theresa Ferguson who became a really, really big figure in my life for a good, long time.  And so my mother decided that I would attend Lincoln University.  During that same summer, I acknowledged my call to ministry when I was sixteen years old and actually went to the pastor of that church to tell him that I was called to ministry.  And he was interested in me attending Moody Bible College [Moody Bible Institute, Chicago, Illinois] and getting a bachelor's [degree] in theology then.  My mother was not in great support of that (laughter) at that time.  So I kind of put that on the back burner and attended Lincoln University instead.
Story_ID: 290064
Speaker 1: The summer after your senior year [at Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], you felt as if you were called to the ministry?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did this happen, and what does that mean?  I've heard people say they're called and it takes various forms, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What happened to you?
Speaker 2: I was actually in worship service at what was then my church, First Baptist [Congregational Church] on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois] and probably had been kind of wrestling with and having this sense of wrestling with vocation around that time.  But I distinctly remember being a worship service, and it was a women's worship service.  And there was a woman, Reverend Brenda Piper Little, who was preaching in this service. She was one of the few--probably still is one of the few black, female pastors in Chicago, even now in Chicago. And she was preaching and I just remember kind of this euphoric (laughter) type feeling coming over me and me just really kind of hearing the voice of God within myself saying this is what I want you to do.  And at the time, I just remember kind of running out of the service, if you will.  And I was crying, and my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] kind of ran out after me. And, you know, people were asking me what's wrong with me. And I couldn't really articulate it at that time. And I guess due to a season of reflection after that, I realized what was happening to me and went and talked to the pastor and shared with him that experience and what was happening to me and what I felt God was calling me to do.  And after him hearing my, my explanation, he, I guess, accepted that call story, and wanted to put me in the pulpit.
Speaker 1: Okay, so his initial reaction was positive.
Speaker 2: It was, it was positive.  So that was a good thing (laughter), I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, 'cause when women decide to go into the ministry, and especially in those days, that's like twenty years ago, it wasn't always, you know, received in a positive way.
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.  In fact, I was very fortunate to be at a church that had ordained women for quite some time.  The pastor of that church, Dr. Arthur Griffin, as I've stated, is my great uncle.  And he has been ordaining women since the 1950s.  Our church was originally Mozart Baptist Church on the West Side of Chicago, and then moved to the corner of Ashland [Avenue] and Washington [Boulevard] and purchased that building.  That building once housed Union Park Congregational Church [and Carpenter Chapel, Chicago, Illinois].  And so what we did is we became duly aligned, both Baptist and United Church of Christ [UCC].  And we became United Church of Christ because the National Baptist Convention at that time did not ordain women to the gospel ministry.  And our pastor was very strongly in support of women in ministry, and wrote a book called 'By Your Traditions [But Not by God's Word: A Theological Perspective Against Arguments and Actions Opposing and Hindering Women in the Gospel Ministry,' Arthur D. Griffin] in support women in ministry.  So we became aligned with Chicago Metropolitan District [Chicago Metropolitan Association] of the United Church of Christ [Illinois Conference, United Church of Christ] so that women could be ordained through that denomination.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the denomination changed from Baptist to United Church of Christ?
Speaker 2: No, we're both.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're both, okay.
Speaker 2: Both Baptist and UCC.
Story_ID: 290065
Speaker 1: You're right out of high school [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], and you feel called to the ministry--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you've got to go to college somewhere, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and so all, was that a time of a lot of pressure?
Speaker 2: No, I think, like I said, I just backed off of it from a while--for a while, but actually, I think Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] turned out to be one of the best things that happened to me.  They had a very strong, Baptist Student Union, campus ministry.  And my involvement in what we called BSU really enabled me to get my feet wet, if you will, and to get some ministerial training. Reverend Chris Jackson [Reverend Dr. Christopher Jackson] was the campus minister at that time, and he really kind of took me under his wing and mentored me.  I shared with him at that time that I had the call to ministry.  And so I can remember my sophomore year in college, they appointed me to take over the bible study.  They would have bible study there for college students every Tuesday.  And the attendance was scarce, you know, maybe four to six people.  I took that over because I was very interested in biblical teaching at that time, had studied the Bible quite significantly as a young person growing up in that church [First Baptist Congregational Church] in Chicago [Illinois].  And I think even then I was very in tune to the difference that educational methods make in, in our approaches to teaching.  So I took kind of a different methodological approach to that bible study.  And it grew quite significantly by leaps and bounds.
Speaker 1: You say you took a mythological approach, you said, or--
Speaker 2: A different--
Speaker 1: Different--
Speaker 2: --educational methodological approach.
Speaker 1: Oh, methodological.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, methodological, okay.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't have called it that then.  I'm not sure that I knew that that's what I was doing, but I definitely know that one--now, as one who teaches in that, in that area.
Speaker 1: Now, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: Educational methods?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It just means that it's not only important what we teach, meaning content is important, but it's not the only thing important.  It's not just what we teach, but how we teach and oftentimes, it's easy to get so bogged down and focused on content and on classical approaches to teaching, like lecture styles, in fact.  Generally, think, if you're a college professor, well, what you do is, you lecture, but as most people know at the graduate level and even at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], our courses can last for two hours and forty minutes. So who's going to get up and lecture for two hours and forty minutes? So you have to have other kinds of approaches to teaching other than just making the teacher and that teacher's voice kind of the sole locusof authority and teaching.  And so what we do is we apply different approaches to communicating content.  For example, you can use visual aids.  A lot of people are big on PowerPoint presentations.  Now, that's another methodological approach to teaching, for example.  Small group discussions, creating dialogical classrooms where students are talking to each other around subject matter.  Those are all different educational methods that can make a classroom more interactive and can be inclusive, more inclusive of people who have different types of learning styles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody can't sit through a two-hour lecture and (laughter) digest all of the information.
Story_ID: 290066
Speaker 1: When you were at Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri], what was your major?
Speaker 2: My major was criminal justice (laughter) interestingly enough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now, this is--hello. Well, now, what happened? How did you become a criminal justice major? Now, here you are, you're a physical, athletic young woman--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You're involved in dance, and you ran track in high school [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you feel called to the ministry and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and so how did you become a criminal justice major?
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, I pretty much put the call to ministry thing somewhat on the backburner as a profession, if you will.  Out of high school, before I dealt with this whole call-to-ministry thing, it was my intention to be a lawyer.  So, and Lincoln University didn't have a dance major anyway, so, and I didn't, I didn't think that my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] would go for that. Being a dancer, a professional dancer, she was supportive, of course, of me being in the arts, but dancing don't pay the rent (laughter), so to speak. I mean, I needed a dignified profession, if you will, that would--I would be able to support myself as an adult. And I was, like I said, in college I was interested in English, and I enjoyed reading and writing, but also became kind of interested in psychology, why people do the things that they do. And somehow became interested in criminology specifically, and wanted to be a criminal lawyer. So that's how I ended up in the criminal justice department because it was my intention to go to law school.
Story_ID: 290067
Speaker 1: Now, you told me something during the break that I thought was interesting. You said that your uncle, I believe, owned the building--
Speaker 2: My grandfather.
Speaker 1: --on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois].  Your grandfather owned the building.  And your grandfather, which grandfather is it?
Speaker 2: Burdett Griffin, Sr. My father is junior [Burdett Griffin, Jr.], and my brother [Burdett Griffin III] is the third.
Speaker 1: Okay, he owned the building on the West Side that Fred Hampton and Mark Clark were killed in.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Yes, my grandfather owned quite a bit of property on the West Side of Chicago [Illinois], and several buildings on Monroe Street, in the 2300 block of Monroe. That is the building where that whole raid happened by the police and Fred Hampton was shot and killed.
Speaker 1: Now, that happened when you were a baby, but--
Speaker 2: I'm sure, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was '69 [1969].  That happened in 1969--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just born, right.
Speaker 1: --but did you, did the stories--I'm sure your family told stories about it because everybody in Chicago--
Speaker 2: You know what's so interesting (laughter) is that--and maybe this is because it was my stepfather's side of the family, and I didn't really start interacting with them until later, but I didn't hear a lot of stories about it.  You know, I think once I became older and more aware, maybe around high school, you get the influx of the whole preppy era, Chicago, you had this whole kind of bourgeoisie, move towards upper mobility in the black community. It seemed that a lot of people were becoming disillusioned, if you will, by the Black Power movement and the Black Consciousness Movement because perhaps it didn't reap as many benefits as, you know, persons of the older generation thought that it would.  So it seemed like people were really beginning to disassociate themselves from that, from that whole movement.  You know, Huey [P.] Newton and the whole Black Panther [Party] movement is dismantled at this point.  So people didn't talk much in the '80s [1980s] from what I remember, particularly mid-'80s [1980s], about those days.  And I don't remember hearing too many stories about that actually.
Speaker 1: I just wondered because that was like, like one of the, I guess, a cardinal example of injustice, you know, in Chicago, and the police, you know, out of control, and the city--
Speaker 2: The riots.
Speaker 1: --government trying to cover it up.  You know, they lost a big lawsuit to the widow of Fred Hampton [Akua Njeri].  They had to pay her a lot of money, you know, and a trial that took, you know, the suit like too over ten years to resolve.  I was just wondering if any of that had anything with your--and that, plus the fact that you had relatives in your family who were in the [Chicago] Police Department, if that had anything to do with getting involved in criminal justice as a major?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  My father actually started in the [Chicago] Police Academy my junior year in high school at Whitney [M.] Young [Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: That was right across the street--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --from Whitney Young.
Speaker 2: --it's right across the street from Whitney Young.  I remember going to his graduation ceremony there at the academy across the street.  And then the next year, I was, I was gone.  So I don't think that so much had anything to do with it.  I do remember seeing a play about Fred Hampton at Kuumba Theater [Chicago, Illinois] when I was a child, recollecting those events. But like I said, I was a baby when that happened, so.
Speaker 1: So what did you think about the play when you saw it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember (laughter).  To be honest, I just remember going to Kuumba Theater quite a bit as a child and seeing those events. I do remember the shooting scene very vaguely, and, you know, as a little kid, that's something that would grab your attention. But that's really all I remember about it.
Story_ID: 290068
Speaker 1: Did that remain your major at Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I have a bachelor of science in criminal justice.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--who were your, I guess, primary mentors, I guess in your major that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was a woman named Carolyn Atkins who was my primary mentor. I took most of my classes with her, spent, I guess, quite a bit of time in her office, and she really kind of took me under her wing as a student, saw me as a really good student in that area. I remember that she recommended me for a quite a few things. I won an award in criminal justice, which was a top award that was given to criminal justice students and I remember traveling to St. Louis [Missouri] for that award ceremony and receiving that. That was a monetary award for tuition. She also helped me to get an internship with the Department of Probation & Parole [Division of Probation & Parole, Missouri Department of Corrections, Jefferson City, Missouri]. And so I interned with that department for a summer, and--
Speaker 1: This was in Missouri?
Speaker 2: In Missouri, and Jefferson City was the state capital so there were a lot of state offices there. And Missouri State Penitentiary [Jefferson City, Missouri] was several blocks away from the university. So as a part of the criminal justice classes and training, I spent some time down at Missouri State Penitentiary, getting training. And the summer after my junior year, she connected me with Senator John Bass, and I worked as his intern as well for a year.
Speaker 1: And that was a state senator?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he was also a great mentor. I mean he was, of course, in session quite a bit, but he would take out a lot of time just to talk to me about what it is that he was doing. I would write and respond to, you know, the letters from his constituents, and, you know, spend a lot of time with his administrative staff, probably more so than him. But he was really, really a good mentor. He was very supportive of me going to law school and very encouraging.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is he black?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, his district was in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But he was--and I worked with him while he was in session in the state capital.
Story_ID: 290069
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other activities on the campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said, I was--I danced with Lincoln University's [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] dance company for four years.  That was a big, major, extracurricular piece of my life because we rehearsed probably five out of seven days a week, and had big recitals that were a big deal around the campus.  I also pledged a sorority, Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, pledged in the fall of '87 [1987] and was involved in my sorority my junior and my senior year. I ran track my freshman year also, but kind of put that down (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you run?  What events did you run?
Speaker 2: I was a sprinter. So I did the 100, 200 and four-by-one relay.  I did the long jump in elementary school, and a little bit of high school [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois]. But after I realized that I was gonna be a relatively short person, I gave that up (laughter). But I was a sprinter.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you were really active (unclear) really active, (unclear) college. Well, so when you were a senior, you were on your way to law school [University of Missouri School of Law, Columbia, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I was. My senior year was very busy. I probably had about eighteen--I think I had eighteen hours both semesters.  Like I said, I was involved with the sorority and dancing.
Story_ID: 290070
Speaker 1: Was also elected the national president of the Baptist Student Union that year, which held a really big convention every year. And the year I was president, which was 1988 to '89 [1989], the Baptist Student Convention was actually held here in Atlanta [Georgia]. So that was my first trip ever to Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Now, is the Baptist Student Union an African American organization?
Speaker 1: No, no, it's a multicultural organization.  There are Baptist Student Unions on hundreds of college campuses around the United States. So depending upon the, the demographics of the school, it may be predominantly white or black, but because I was at a HBCU [Historically Black College and University], ours was predominantly black.
Speaker 2: So you were elected national president of--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I attended a convention in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  And it was my intention actually to run for vice president (laughter), pretty interesting. And they allowed each person who was running for office to have what--you know, a campaign manager, which would be a student from a school not of your own. And they allowed you to make two speeches. They allowed your campaign manager to stand before the electoral body and state why they felt you should be in that office.  And then they would give you an opportunity of several minutes to also make your, your speech.  And as a campaign strategy, oftentimes, people would run for the office above the one that they wanted so that if they missed that, they had an opportunity to speak twice, if you will (laughter). So I actually ran for president with the intention of being vice president because I was up against a young man from Texas, Prairie View [A&M] University [Prairie View, Texas], and as you know, Texas is a large state. And the delegates were based upon the number of participants in the convention. So people from Texas would almost always win because they had more votes, if you will. And I ran against this guy from Prairie View A&M University, and I won and ended up being the president (laughter), and he was my vice president.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is--what year is this?  This is--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to '89 [1989].
Story_ID: 290071
Speaker 1: Anything else from college?  Now, you--this is a--
Speaker 2: No, college--those were probably four of the best years of my life.  I really had a great time in undergrad.
Speaker 1: Did you do any singing in college or--
Speaker 2: A little bit. I sang in the choir, took that class at Lincoln [University, Jefferson City, Missouri], but I sang in the Baptist Student Union choir on a regular basis for four years.  And we would travel around, you know, to different churches and conferences and sing, and would sing at those national conventions [Baptist Student Convention] as well. But I, I was a pretty shy singer then. You would have to twist my arm really hard (laughter) to get me to sing by myself.  I did join a group. There were six of us, six young ladies that formed this group called Visions of Praise [ph.], and we got our own musicians. It's a young lady, Denise Tichenor, who became a gospel artist after that who was kind of our head person and soloist, but I had a good time singing with them for about a year.
Story_ID: 290072
Speaker 1: Had you applied to law school at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I applied to law school, and was accepted and attended law school at the University of Missouri [School of Law] in Columbia [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1989?
Speaker 2: Yes, all of '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about that.  What was that like?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My first year of law school was a very interesting experience.  As you know, the University of Missouri, also known as Mizzou, is a predominantly white school.  There were a few black students in the law school when I was there.  From what I understand, they had a very poor retention rate amongst minorities.  When I started to school my first year, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was actually there investigating the school, apparently for some racial allegations. So it made for a very tense experience, if you will, being in law school that first year. And I remember taking, you know, some of the basic type, first-year classes and forming study groups, et cetera.  But my first year, I actually became interested in property law because I had this property law professor, Dale [A.] Whitman, who actually wrote the book ['The Law of Property,' Roger A. Cunningham, William B. Stoebuck and Dale A. Whitman] that we used in the class.  And he was just a very exciting professor and just made property law come alive.  So I kind of got interested in that, but the summer after my first year, went back home to Chicago [Illinois] and interned with traffic court [Traffic Division, Circuit Court of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] downtown in Chicago, like right off of Wacker Drive (laughter) and interned in the public defender's office at traffic court for a summer and decided that I didn't want to be a public defender (laughter) and a criminal lawyer as a result of some of that experience.  But--
Speaker 1: What was it that discouraged you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think, you know, I should ask, are you taping this (laughter), but, excuse me, some of the lawyers that I worked with, I just felt that they just really didn't have a passion for the people that they were defending. And I think I became a little disillusioned by some of that. I mean there were a couple of good lawyers there, really good lawyers there who were, I guess interested in what they were doing. But largely, just kind of became discouraged by that and maybe just thought, this is not the kind of atmosphere that I want to be in for the rest of my life.  And a large part of it too was that the whole call to ministry thing was really heavy on me again and was reemerging and I was wrestling with that, and, you know, what I really want to do with my life.  Do I want to be a lawyer or do I want to go into ministry?
Story_ID: 290073
Speaker 1: I actually only did a year at the University of Missouri [School of Law, Columbia, Missouri], and moved--ended up staying in Chicago [Illinois] with the intentions of perhaps trying to transfer to a law school there, but again, still wrestling with the call to ministry; went back to that same pastor [Reverend Dr. Arthur Griffin] six years later, after my first year of law school and told him once again that I was called to the ministry.  And this time, I decided to go forward with that.  So I became involved with the ministry of the church.  He put me in the pulpit, preached my trial sermon in '91 [1991] and that same year started my first year of seminary at Northern Baptist Theological Seminary in Lombard, Illinois and ventured up to Butterfield Road on a weekly basis and started my first year of seminary while I worked part-time at Black Light Fellowship publishing company on the West Side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you preached your first sermon in Chicago and where was it at?
Speaker 1: At First Baptist Congregational Church [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: First Baptist, okay.  And then you started school--
Speaker 1: And I was licensed to preach then.
Speaker 2: And you started school--
Speaker 1: That same year.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, what's the--now, so you were ordained there at the church before--
Speaker 1: I was ordained in '94 [1994].  I was licensed in '91 [1991].  It's a three-year process.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  So, that's--
Speaker 1: So your license first, and it's kind of a, you know, three-year probationary period where you get your training, et cetera, and then I was licensed--ordained in '94 [1994].  But I was here, I was living here, but I went back to Chicago for their ordination service.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So I did that first year of seminary, and that is when I heard about a joint degree program here in Atlanta [Georgia] at Emory University where you could get your Juris Doctor degree and your Master of Divinity degree in seminary, simultaneously, and finish that in five years. So I transferred to Emory University, and that's how I got to Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did you know anybody here before you--
Speaker 1: I did not, other than a young man that I was dating at the time who I met through Baptist Student Union.  He was the Baptist Student Union national president two years before me in '87 [1987].  And I knew him through that, and he was in seminary at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center] here in Atlanta at the time.  So I knew him, and that was about it.
Speaker 2: That's all you needed to know then (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just packed up my life and moved to Atlanta.
Story_ID: 290074
Speaker 1: What did you think of Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] when you got here?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I thought, I was very impressed.  Emory is an Ivy League school, of course, a big school with a lot of resources and Candler School of Theology [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] had a really good reputation there at Emory University.  So I was excited to be there, excited to be--I transferred in and started my second year of seminary at Candler.
Speaker 1: This is like ninety--this is 1992 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1992 at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yes, I was taking classes in the seminary, still working through the whole law school issue, but did take a class at the law school also, church and state relations course.  And that second year of seminary, decided to give up the whole law focus, just knew I wasn't gonna be a lawyer.  That's not what I wanted to do and with the help of a professor there, James [W.] Fowler [III], Dr. James Fowler, who's actually now the director of the Center for Ethics at Emory, was able to make that very difficult vocational decision and get up enough courage to call my mother [Clara Johnson Handy-Griffin] and tell her I was dropping out of law school (laughter). But by that point, she was very understanding, and understood that I was serious about ministry.  So she was very supportive at that point, and it was during that year that I decided that I wanted to teach as well as get involved in church ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So who were--well, let's see, so--well, who were--did I ask you who some of your teachers were that really--
Speaker 2: I assumed when you asked that question, you were referring to high school [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois].  So I didn't--
Speaker 1: Well, no, well, now, in terms of the seminary, who were--who was important?
Speaker 2: I worked closely with several people.  I just mentioned James Fowler who was, was very, very significant to my development at the master's [degree] level.  And he was one of my recommenders for the Ph.D. program.  I had done directed study work with him and had done some writing with him around shame theory, particularly, but I worked with him, and he ended up being a member of my dissertation committee at the Ph.D. level. But [HistoryMaker] Robert Franklin, Dr. Robert Franklin was probably most instrumental to my development at the master's level. He was a professor of ethics, Christian ethics, and also the director of the black church studies program at Candler.
Story_ID: 290075
Speaker 1: So you're at Candler [School of Theology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] and you were talking about [HistoryMaker] Robert Franklin just before we broke.
Speaker 2: Right, right, Dr. Robert Franklin, the director of black church studies at Candler when I was there. And I became his program assistant during my last year of seminary. And so he was very instrumental in my academic development and was one of my recommenders, also, for the Ph.D. program at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] in the graduate division of religion.  And, of course, later, he left and became the president of ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, now in terms of the black church studies, I mean did you--does anything stand out as something that you didn't know before you got involved in--I know in the--by the time that you were born, theologians like [HistoryMaker] James [H.] Cone and others were writing books about, you know, the uniqueness of the black church.  Did you--
Speaker 2: Right, Candler was definitely my introduction to black theology and womanist theology. [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. Jacquelyn Grant who is known as, you know, one of the mothers of womanist theology was teaching at ITC across town.  And I cross-registered and took her womanist theology class.  And that was my whole introduction to womanist theology, and, of course, in Dr. Franklin's class, I was introduced to black theology. Also Noel [Lee] Erskine, who teaches in the area of systematic theology at Candler. I took two courses with him and studied James Cone and Jacquelyn Grant and Katie [Geneva] Cannon and some of those other pioneers in the area of black and womanist theology.
Story_ID: 290076
Speaker 1: What would characterize black theology from just regular theology?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, black theology, a lot of it--the name says it.  It focuses, focuses on the importance of black perspectives on theology. Traditionally, in theological seminaries, we studied largely white, classical theologians, white male theologians as we called them, you know, the Karl Barths, the Jurgen Moltmann, [Terrence W.] Tilley, things like that, or professors like that. But [HistoryMaker] James [H.] Cone, of course, in the '70s [1970s] with the influence of the whole Black Consciousness [Movement], Black Power movement, influence of the Civil Rights Movement, really felt that we needed to construct theological categories from our own perspectives, even down to understanding God and seeing God as black and as one who is a God of the oppressed and who identifies God's self with marginalized and oppressed peoples.
Speaker 1: Now, some might ask, what is wrong with black people having a white God?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, a lot of people, I'm sure, ask that question, but I think what theology, and particularly, what black theologians and womanist theologians do is to help us to understand the importance of the relationship between theology and self-image and self-understanding and show some of the danger, if you will, of seeing a God as white when you come from a history of a people who have had other authority figures--slave masters, plantation owners--who are also white to articulate theologies that support enslavement and that support the subjugation of certain types of other ethnic groups and black peoples particularly, so that when you see God as white, then, you know, those things that are valued by white culture become equal to God, if you will (laughter), so that those things that are black and that are important to black people and ethnic groups are devalued, if you will, because they don't have God's support.  So it is important, and I think it's just important on a basic self-image level, to be able to see blackness in God because then that affirms you as one who was created in God's image and in God's likeness.
Story_ID: 290077
Speaker 1: Some would also say, well, to make God black now, you're becoming--hold on, you're becoming separatist.  Now, that we realize that we were wrong in making him white, we'll just have no color and God doesn't have a color.  I mean have you ever heard people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that gets a little tricky--
Speaker 1: --say that?
Speaker 2: --when you start talking about the person of Jesus because Jesus, you know, was a human being, of course, of a particular ethnic group.  But I mean if you look around the world at images of Christ, images of God, if you go to different places in Asia, their images of God are Asian. If you go to the Greek Orthodox Church, even here on Clairmont Road [Atlanta, Georgia] and look at their images of Jesus and of God, very Greek-type features.
Speaker 1: So no blonde hair or blue eyes or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no, none of that. So, I mean this is nothing new. If you look at the shrines of the Black Madonna that have existed for, you know, over two millennia, that have come--
Speaker 1: You're talking about the shrines in Eastern Europe and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --not the ones of Detroit [Michigan] so much, yeah?
Speaker 2: Well, the same thing, really (laughter). You know, they're images of the Madonna and the child that are black. So it's nothing new that a person of a particular culture would define or would understand or would depict God in ways that are relative to their own ethnic group.  So I think the issue here, particularly in the United States is, you know, don't take a white God and then make that normative for everybody but that everybody should be able to, you know, to depict God as they will. Now, of course, when you get down to the person of Jesus, [HistoryMaker] Asa Hilliard [III] and many other scholars will tell you that we need to be historically accurate.  So it's not simply a matter of trying to associate God with who I am, but it's a matter of being historically accurate and understanding that Jesus could not been--have been a European.  He was a Palestinian Jew, an Afro-Asiatic person (laughter).
Story_ID: 290078
Speaker 1: In terms of womanist theology, now, what is that?
Speaker 2: Womanist theology, [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Jacquelyn Grant actually studied with Dr. Cone, [HistoryMaker] James [H.] Cone, for her Ph.D. work, she and several other persons also.  And what womanist theology does is it--it does two things.  I think it critiques two main movements, meaning one, it offer a critique back to Dr. James Cone in saying, in his articulation of black theology and of his understanding of the black church, he was very sexist and did not include the sisters, if you will, and their contributions to theology and to the church in some of his analysis. And, you know, he has since, of course, evolved in that, but when his books, 'God of the Oppressed' [James H. Cone] and 'Black Theology & Black Power' [James H. Cone] and all those books were coming out in the 1970s, it still maintained a lot of the sexism that was found largely in the black church.  The second movement that I think womanist theology speaks to is the feminist movement.  Womanism and feminism are not the same.  The feminist movement, of course, emerged, again, around the 1960s and '70s [1970s] when women were wanting equal work for equal pay and, you know, really interested in getting involved in the public sphere and in the job force.  And, of course, black women felt that a lot of the concerns around the feminist movement largely again centered around white women and their concerns.  And the issue of race, particularly, was not addressed.  And so what womanist theology says is that you can't talk about sexism and gender issues without also talking about racism.  And you can't talk about sexism and racism without also talking about classism in the ways in which class affects women, and particularly, women of color, but that those areas and those different isms, if you will, form a matrix or an intersection.  And you have to analyze them simultaneously rather than as separate issues.  So whereas black theology dealt only with race and feminist theology largely only dealt with sex and gender, womanist theology deals with racism, with sexism, with classism, with homophobia and with all of those different types of oppression simultaneously--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the purpose of liberating everybody and not just one particular group.
Story_ID: 290079
Speaker 1: What did you--informed by these two, you know, theological movements, I guess, or fields of study, what did you write your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Okay, you want the (laughter), the 234 page answer (laughter)?  I'll give you--
Speaker 1: Well, the boiled down answer, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A synopsis.
Speaker 1: --but, you know.
Speaker 2: I entered the Ph.D. program at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia], it was separate from the theology school [Candler School of Theology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], the department--Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and particularly, the Graduate Division of Religion [GDR], which housed several sub-departments in the area of religion.  And the department that I entered, at that time, was called Theology and Personality. And it dealt with the intersection of issues related to psychology and human development and theology.  You know, again, I had this bachelor's degree in criminal justice [from Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], had taken psychology classes, criminology classes and was always interested, not just in what people do but why they do it, if you will, at a very fundamental level. And so this department really enabled me to combine those two foci, if you will.  So in our department, you had to have both a theological focus, but also a focus related to personality theory.  At the master's [degree] level, I became very interested in psychological theories on shame.  And so I wrote a paper at the master's level analyzing the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] riots, through the lens of shame theory and wrote that paper for Dr. [James W.] Fowler [III] and kind of carried that over into the Ph.D. program, but became really interested in how black women experience shame as a result of experiences in the black church.  So I decided to write my dissertation on that, talking about different psychological theories on shame.  Again, as a classical tradition, most psychological theories on shame had largely been written from a white, male perspective with the exception of a couple of white females, Helen Block Lewis, who studied with Sigmund Freud and some others and Ed Wimberly [Edward P. Wimberly] whose academic dean at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], had started to do some writing on shame theory from a black perspective. So I wanted to look at shame as a socializing mechanism, and look particularly at how black women experienced that in the black church and how, as a Christian educator, in the area of Christian education, which is where I ended up, how we can teach or educate against negative, shaming experiences.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I used the autobiographies of two women, Jarena Lee, who was the first ordained minister, female minister in the African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E.] church and Rebecca Cox Jackson who started out also in the A.M.E. church, and eventually broke away from that denomination and joined a few others, and looked at their religious autobiographies in order to construct something positive for women in church settings.
Story_ID: 290080
Speaker 1: How is shame used to control behavior in the--
Speaker 2: Well, it all relates to, you know, even to the conversation we just had about images of God (laughter), for example. Shame--well, let me explain the difference between shame and guilt. Guilt is often more easily discharged. Guilt is about what I do. It's about something that I've done that I feel wrong, you know, is wrong or convicted about, and I can, if you will, in church terms, repent of having done something wrong that caused me guilt. So guilt is about what I do.  Shame is about who I am. It's a sense--and shame can be positive, meaning you need a certain basic level of healthy shame in order to have conscience, you know, and not be a psychopath, if you will.  But there are also toxic shame levels that a person can have related to their own self-concept and self-image so that if I feel shame around being black, how do you repent for who you are? You don't. It's very difficult to do. So, you know, and then when you add on to that, I feel shamed because God says thus and so, because God says, you know, women shouldn't be preachers, you know, because God says, women need to keep quiet in the church (laughter), you know, and all of the other scriptures that we like to use to subjugate women, then that shame, you know, becomes a part of a person's psyche. And so, particularly, in looking at the black church, particularly around the area of sexism, black women have experienced shame around being a woman. And that becomes a socializing mechanism used to dictate women's faiths, women's office, women's roles in that particular institutional organization.  And, of course, you know, you can go outside of the church and see that as well.
Story_ID: 290081
Speaker 1: I just wonder, I mean back in the--we were talking about the Black Arts Movement and why people decided to--
Speaker 2: That was a counter-shaming movement.
Speaker 1: --to break away from certain, well, you know, if you read the Bible and the text and stuff, it says a lot of things that really do like, if you believe it, I mean, you would be ashamed, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right, it says, slaves be obedient to your master.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, so a lot of people, because of that rejected Christianity, said, "Well, I don't want to be a part of it."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But a theologian, I mean, so how do you as a reverend and a theologian, a theological student reconcile a text that actually speaks, that if you believe it, you would be ashamed?
Speaker 2: I think that was really the power of black theology and the womanist theology, you know, what [HistoryMaker James H.] Cone was doing and what [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. [Jacquelyn] Grant was doing is that it took really these theological categories and, and biblical text and turned it on its head, if you will, and brought a critique to it.  What we like to talk about in seminary a lot, two things.  First of all, it's historical context, meaning you have to read the Bible as an ancient text, (laughter) you know. This is a text, which some of its scriptures are thousands of years old, largely relegated to Judaic culture and Judaic practices.  And, you know, you can't take every text and read it literally, first of all, because I think that's been one of the problems in a lot of our churches is that we read every biblical text literally.  But you also can't take that and impose that upon a modern and now post-modern culture and think that everything in it is going to work.  It's just not going to work.  There are many things that the biblical text says that, of course, none of us would ascribe to today, even around what you should eat and what you shouldn't eat, for example, you know, or how you should worship.  There's nobody in the black church that's preaching slaves be obedient to your masters, you know, so that that's a part of our history as an African American people is that even on the slave plantations when blacks were allowed to go to church and to hear preaching, from both black and white preachers, and those texts were used, you know, to keep slaves in their place, it's very clear that they really didn't buy into it, and that they embraced--the second thing that we talk about in seminary which hermeneutics. Hermeneutics is simply a mode of interpretation and how we interpret text. And based upon your hermeneutic of the text or how you understand or analyze or interpret text, you come out with your biblical worldview as well.  And so what we do in seminary as professors, and particularly people in biblical studies, which is not my area, but of course, I've studied it, is to say, it's very important that as we embrace text, biblical text, that we also critique biblical text and see that there are some things in the Bible that are liberative, but there are also some things in the Bible that are very oppressive and that have been used and interpreted in ways that have oppressed certain groups of people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 290082
Speaker 1: I don't know if you saw 'The Piano Lesson' with--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Charles [S.] Dutton and, well, it's written by August Wilson. But in the play, Boy Willie, who is one of the leading characters, you know, challenges his sister [Berniece Charles] who claims to believe in the Bible, says, "Would you believe everything in the Bible?"  And she said, "Yeah."  And then he points, said, "Well, look, there's different things in the Bible.  Can you believe half of it and go to heaven or part--which part are you gonna leave out?  Now, if this is the word of God--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --then don't you have to believe all of it?  Or if you do believe all of it, then you're in a--you've got another problem 'cause some of it is not constructed in your favor."  So I mean, so how do theologians (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's the intention of hermeneutics.
Speaker 1: How do theo- I mean know how the people in the Black Power movement, they dropped it. They said, "We're not going to deal with it."
Speaker 2: And I'm not clear that's the answer either.
Speaker 1: But a theo- well, it works. I mean if you drop, you know, it can work for people and they just say, "Well, I'm not going to deal with that.  I'll deal with something that does have a code, you know, I mean a straight ahead, and, I don't have to worry about saying one thing or another," you know--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --just, let's just deal with one thing, you know.  But why, but I guess what's puzzling me is why theologians think they have to like--I mean, how can you say, don't pay attention to this part, and pay attention to another part?
Speaker 2: I think we do it every day. I think it's done in Muslim culture.  I think it's done in Judaea culture. If you can find any religion, major or otherwise, that doesn't do it, I'd be (laughter), happy to know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but they all do it, yeah--
Speaker 2: --what that is.
Speaker 1: --you're right, they--
Speaker 2: That's the part of critique.
Speaker 1: They all do it, but--
Speaker 2: --and living with the tension of a historical document that was developed over thousands of years, with different writers, you know, writing within a book or writing different books, and knowing that no writer--because first of all, the Bible is inspired.  It's inspired.  It's not dictated, you know, so we have to teach our students, God didn't kind of, you know, stick God's finger out of heaven and start writing a book, if you will, but it was mediated through culture and through people, so that if you look at the writing of the epistles by the Apostle Paul, Paul through his own experience and his own worldview.  And you can't divorce the text from his own worldview.  Even in Paul's evolution, in certain places Paul may be saying, you know, "Women keep silent at a church," or, "Be submissive," or "Cover your heads," and in another place, he's saying, "There's neither male nor female, Jew nor Greek but we're all one in Christ."  So that was a part of his own theological development and evolution.  And so what we would say is that first of all, it's important to study the text, you know, and to not just say, well, you know, God said it, I believe it, and that settles it, type, you know, mentality, but to really understand the biblical document, understand the time periods and the different eras in the Bible, understand the different people who were writing those books, and what their theological perspective was, you know, in order to, first of all, be just accurate (laughter) on a very basic level. Some churches believe that the Bible is, you know, the infallible, inspired word of God. I would dare say that even in most of those contexts, again, if you open the text and say, "Well, do you believe this literally," there are some place--some point in that where you would catch them, and they would say, "Well, no."  Well, that, too, doesn't mean that you take the whole thing and throw it out in the garbage can. I believe that the, the inspired word of God can be discerned in the biblical text, and that God does speak through that biblical text in certain places. But it's like with most things in life. You know, it's like with the people who are trying to find, you know, the perfect church, if you will. You kind of have to take the meat and leave the bone (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but can you really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's probably true for the Koran [Qur'an] and perhaps some other texts.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I guess, my question is, can you really do that with, I mean to rely on a text that has, you know, that can go either way like that? I mean--
Speaker 2: I think you absolutely can. I think you absolutely can. If you're interested in teaching for liberation, then you teach those texts that speak to liberation, and point in direction toward redemption. That also does--but that also means that you can still wrestle with the problematic text and say, "This is here, and this is problematic, you know, and let's explain why so that we don't repeat this particular pattern."
Story_ID: 290083
Speaker 1: As long as it's canonized as a text of the Bible, aren't there going to be people that come along and say, "Well, this is the word of God, too"--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --that women should shut up, and, and cover their head and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and that's when the dialogue begins.  You know, theologians love--it's about dialogue, I mean really.  You know, if you live in a space as we do in this country where we're respectful and the people have a right of freedom of speech, of freedom of religion, you can't force anybody to do anything. But what you can do is invite people to come to the table and dialogue around their differences and hopefully, at the end of the day, you know, if there's not a meeting of the minds, we can at least say, well, I respect where you are and you respect where I am, and that's okay.
Story_ID: 290084
Speaker 1: Black theology, they were trying to find a part of these texts that address--that positively address the issues that we face in the world.
Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. You know, in order to empower, I mean, again, this is all simultaneous to the whole Black Consciousness Movement.  It's not separate from it. I think [HistoryMaker James H.] Cone was influenced very much by that movement, and that, that shaped his worldview and his hermeneutic in the ways in which he was interpreting texts and theological categories.  So, yeah, I mean the purpose of it was to ultimately empower black people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there any, in the world of black theologians today, the Christian theologians today, is there any room for African religion, religious ideas or--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, I think so, and I'm speaking from a personal perspective. I'm by no means speaking for the church, universal, if you will. But I have a colleague at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], Reverend Dr. Mark [A.] Lomax, who's the pastor of First Afrikan Church here in Atlanta [sic. Lithonia, Georgia], and he's--his church would definitely reflect kind of the fusion of both black church, Christian tradition and African traditional religions, the inclusion of Yoruba, the pouring of libation, if you will, in the worship service. He has an African rites of passage that's a part of his Christian education curriculum at the church that the young people are involved in, naming ceremonies, you know, teaching African and African American history, and it's all very much a part of the worship life of the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm very interested in such communities. [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.] in Chicago [Illinois] at Trinity [United Church of Christ] has been very inclusive of African tradition in his, in the development of his church and his church ministry. I personally, even as a Christian educator and theologian, am also an elder in a rites of passage society here in Atlanta [Georgia] called Ndugu and Nzinga, which is largely for college students and older. And so that's a place where I, too, have been able to fuse both Christianity and traditional African rituals.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't see any contradiction in, in dealing in one or the other at the same time or--
Speaker 2: No, but, again, you're talking to a person who grew up in an African-centered community in Chicago.  I mean, I think Kwanzaa is an excellent example of the fusion of African spirituality, you know, and African American traditions.
Story_ID: 290085
Speaker 1: What was the upshot of your dissertation in terms of shame and how it's used in the text and--what was the, I guess the--what was your statement, I mean, I guess about that?
Speaker 2: Well, the first statement is that black women still experience that, I think.  I mean we've come a long way, but we still have a long way to go. If you look at the constituency of the black church, the church is comprised largely of 65 to 75 percent women, and yet, we only comprise about three percent of the leadership. So there's still a lot of work to be done around there. There's still a lot of churches who don't recognize the call to ministry of women; there are entire denominations, black denominations who do not, to-date, ordain women.  So I think it's important to state that, yes, women still are on the--in the back seat, if you will, in regard to the leadership decisions of the church and that, that that still causes shame, particularly when you associate it to God and to biblical text and those texts are used to hold women in those positions. And, of course, that was largely, again, Dr. Grant's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jacquelyn Grant] argument from the very beginning. But also to say, even in the midst of that, you know, it's not all gloom and doom, but that women have also been resilient in the midst of that, have also created their own traditions, their own cultures. Women like Jarena Lee preached anyway, without being ordained, preached thousands, you know, over a thousand sermons, traveling around, you know, the continental United States. So, and those are what I call counter-shaming practices, practices that work against the kind of socializing mechanisms that would, that would keep women subjugated. So that was my largest statement and how--this was what I pointed toward in the last chapter, how then can people in the area of Christian education, who are a part of the teaching ministries of the church, help to empower women and help to, help pastors and leaders to go back to the biblical text to critique it, to analyze it and to come out with a more liberative message for women.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--this is--that is--you--
Speaker 2: It's not published yet, but I'll be working on that--I'll be on sabbatical next year.  So that's the purpose of my sabbatical (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is deep.  It really makes me think about, you know--and I've thought about this in different ways, but I never thought about it in terms of the shame. We--there--we're on a verge of a second Million Man March. The first Million Man March brought a million or two to Washington, D.C., and [HistoryMaker] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan said we were there to atone.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, I don't know--I found that kind of disturbing to think that as a race, we should atone. I don't know what--I mean individuals might have to atone for something they did, but--
Speaker 2: Wasn't he asking the men to atone?
Speaker 1: Yeah, just men.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Men as a race, though, as black men.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Atoning for--
Speaker 2: You know, I have mixed feelings, just as there have been mixed reviews, I guess, about the Million Man March, meaning some people have argued that it was very significant for men to come together just amongst themselves and deal with issues relative to manhood, relative to family life, et cetera. I think a lot of the rhetoric around the Million Man March turned out to be men, you need to go back and take your rightful place in the home as the head of the household and get--basically, get control of your women and do what you're supposed to do. I realize that it was, you know, a response to the absence of the father in the home and some of the other issues around black male life, unemployment, underemployment, et cetera. But I think a lot of it just turned into a bunch of, into a lot of sexist rhetoric, kind of problematic rhetoric, similar to the whole Promise Keepers movement, if you will.
Story_ID: 290086
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your career and what you've done since--when you--shortly after you finished your Ph.D., you had a chance to work with Bishop Desmond Tutu, right?
Speaker 2: Actually, I worked with him while I was doing the Ph.D. He was teaching, a visiting professor at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] for two years at the Candler School of Theology. And my advisor, Charles [R.] Foster, who I was working with in the area of religious education, recommended that I be Bishop Tutu's teaching assistant. So he came, and he taught a course, kind of Intro to Theology course that first semester.  We had 175 students in that class. Because, of course, the response was overwhelming to have such a great figure teaching at Emory, but I was one of three teaching assistants in that class. And then he taught a course the next semester on forgiveness and reconciliation and around the whole TRC, Truth and Reconciliation Commission.  And he asked me if I would be his TA [teaching assistant] in that course.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's important because, now, this is 1999 and 2000?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, the whole issue of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, you know, the African Americans really wrestled with that one.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And we really were fired up about South Africa independence and really appalled at the cruelty inflicted upon the South African people over these many years.  And people, a lot of people have, you know, don't understand it. Do you have a, something you could share with us about what Desmond Tutu was trying to do with that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I know he's received quite a bit of criticism, I think, from the African American community around the whole model, through the whole Truth and Reconciliation model, and the notion that persons who committed such atrocities against the African people could come and basically, simply tell the truth and testify at a commission hearing and be exonerated, if you will, for their crimes and receive amnesty.  And, you know, it really caused, I think, even in, in teaching students, Christian students, it really challenged their theology of forgiveness, in terms of what does forgiveness mean? Does it mean forgive and forget? You know, does it mean, you know, I forgive you and therefore, you receive amnesty and don't have to be punished for your crimes, or can I forgive and still punish (laughter) the defendant? So, had a lot of interesting conversations around that. It was very clear to me, and let me just state that, you know, Bishop Tutu was really a phenomenal mentor; I was really blessed and fortunate to be able to sit at the feet of such a great elder and learn so much. His understanding of forgiveness and reconciliation is absolutely phenomenal, and, of course, you know, he was selected to head up the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and those efforts by Nelson Mandela when all of that started. But he, he did receive quite a bit of criticism. And it was very interesting even in the classroom to see the difference of opinion between black and white students around that whole structure, whereas, you know, black students clearly felt that it was not radical enough and that, you know, the oppressors should have been brought to justice for their crimes. And some of them were, but largely, they were not. And they're the same conversations now, even around the situation in Rwanda and the fighting between the Hutus and the Tutsis and, you know, how folks were punished there as opposed to, you know, what happened at Nuremberg [Germany] with the Nuremburg Trials and people being brought to justice, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they were all hung there pretty much--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because they were guilty, they were hung.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 290087
Speaker 1: Most of the examples around the world when we have trials of war criminals, those criminals are dispatched and these are, we're talking about many fine, Christian countries that say that they're Christian and, you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But it seemed like [Bishop] Desmond Tutu's model was the most Christ-like of--has that been discussed in that context of the--
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what Christ-like, what you mean by Christ-like (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of--you can't, it's hard to measure in Christ of the Bible, like hanging someone, you know, for a crime.
Speaker 2: As opposed to the God of the Old Testament (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, who would burn 'em alive (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right, right, and, you know, that, that's the question, you know, is--as a Christian, as a follower of Christ, would you support punishment, do you support capital punishment, you know?  Can we say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, many do in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --that Christ did not support any forms of punishment? I'm not quite clear about that. I didn't see Jesus out protesting, you know, punishment. I didn't see Jesus largely out, you know, fighting the Roman government at all (laughter). That wasn't his intention and his purpose, even though a lot of--that is why he was ultimately crucified. He was crucified because he went against, you know, the political system and went against the Judaic system. But, you know, I think it depends upon what your understanding of Christ is. I think there are some communities that consider themselves Christ-like and followers of Christ who very much believe that, you know, punishment is in order. I don't think that most Christians in this country would say that people can, you know, steal from the grocery store or rob a bank and, you know, we should just forgive them and let them off the hook.  But they believe that, you know, they should be punished to the full extent of the law for their crimes.  So I think it depends upon the nature of the crime and what you're talking about and then when you're dealing with. Black Christians, we deal with the fact that the criminal justice system is often the criminal injustice system (laughter) because racism and all that factors into who gets justice there. So there are a lot of questions. You know, sometimes the questions are even more important than the answers, if you will, in just being willing to sit down and to ask the questions and to wrestle with the questions. But I did find, in my conversations with Bishop Tutu and with students, they, they felt like he was a bit too benevolent and just allowing people to come and to tell the truth.  And, you know, there was significant value in that truth-telling process, particularly for the victims, meaning being able to come to those commission [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] hearings and say this happened to me, you know, or my son or my husband or my daughter was killed, you know, and was deemed a terrorist, you know.  I mean I think the commission hearings raised important questions even for how we define terrorism in this country and who's a terrorist and who's not.  But, you know, when you start talking about what's Christ-like and what's not, that can get case specific, based upon, you know, what group of Christians you're talking to.
Story_ID: 290088
Speaker 1: Is there a black theological answer to that, to what is Christ-like?
Speaker 2: That depends upon what black theologian you're talking to (laughter).  I mean again, I don't think there's any blanket answer anymore. You know, we make references to the black church, but we have to be clear that the black church is not monolithic. All black churches don't believe any one thing, you know. It depends upon what denomination you're talking about. It depends upon the class status at times in particular churches and denominations.  So I don't think there's any one statement that can be made. I would guess that if you asked [HistoryMaker] James [H.] Cone (laughter) what it means to be Christ-like, and what justice is, you'd get a very different answer than perhaps from some other black theologians.  So I think, again--
Speaker 1: You think James Cone would be different from Bishop [Desmond] Tutu as a--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of the Truth and Reconciliation [Commission]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think his understanding of justice would be different.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in an age when people are shot for, sometimes mistakenly for reaching for a cell phone or something.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: To think that someone could confess to torturing and killing hundreds or thousands of people and, and be forgiven just carte blanche for it.
Speaker 2: And, you know, you look at Bishop Tutu and you say, you know, 'cause there were places where he and I disagreed.  And I'd say, you know, "Bishop, I don't know if I can go that far with you," (laughter), you know.  I mean Bishop Tutu would always say that he believed in the very end, even, you know, the devil would be saved (laughter), you know, and would be converted. So he and I had some differences of opinion. But, you know, I would always step back and say, you know, maybe his, his position is the higher one, but I'm just not there yet.
Story_ID: 290089
Speaker 1: Walk us through your career over the last, I guess, we're only talking about the last five years, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: As a Ph.D. student [at Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], after I completed my comprehensive exams and defended my dissertation proposal, you become what's called ABD, All But Dissertation, and at that point, you're marketable and free to start interviewing for teaching positions. And so I did exactly that. A position opened at the Interdenominational Theological Center [(ITC), Atlanta, Georgia] in the area of Christian education, and was also at that time courted to become the director of lecturer studies at Emory at Candler School of Theology [Atlanta, Georgia] for [Dr.] Alton [B.] Pollard [III], who was going on sabbatical for a semester. And I decided to take that full-time, tenure track position at ITC in the area of Christian education, and I've been teaching there--I'm starting my sixth year this semester and been teaching, as I said, Christian education and also administration and leadership development courses. So I've been doing that for about five years at ITC in a tenure track position. And I very much enjoy teaching.  I've enjoyed teaching, enjoy doing some work, and in the past two years have really been able to merge my interests, both in womanist discourses and womanist approaches to religion and the area of education. So last year I taught a course called Womanist Approaches to Christian Education as a pilot course.  And response was very positive. So that course is now a permanent part of ITC's curriculum and I'll be teaching that again this fall. And that is a course that has afforded me the opportunity to invite scholars like [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Jacquelyn Grant, [Reverend Dr.] Renita [J.] Weems, [Reverend] Melva Sampson and other persons who are doing womanist work to come and be guest lecturers in the course and dialogue with students.  And also enable me to have them do some different kinds of reading so they read Alice Walker and Toni Morrison, '[The] Bluest Eye' [Toni Morrison] and some other texts, and talk about how we can go back to Sunday school classes, how we can go back to bible studies and other educational ministries of the church and focus on those issues that impact black women.
Story_ID: 290090
Speaker 1: In terms of today's church, black church, we have a lot of big--real big churches developing, we have these megachurches with thousands, of hundreds, sometimes tens of thousands of members.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about the megachurches?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, a lot of people have thoughts about the megachurches and Atlanta [Georgia], of course, has several megachurch type communities. Again, whether you're affirmative or critical, I think, again, it depends upon what you're talking about. Some people, apparently, a lot of people enjoy the megachurch phenomena, and I don't wanna be stereotypic and make any blanket statements about what all megachurches do. I think megachurches apparently market themselves very well, offer a diversity of programs that appeal, particularly to family life, to people with families who want their children involved in various types of ministries in the churches. And people apparently enjoy kind of mass-meeting type energies and atmospheres. And so I think they probably have a certain appeal in that regard. In regard to, for example, in the black church, music is very important and central, you know, as we say in the black church, you gotta have good preaching and good music (laughter). And so they have a certain appeal there in terms of the variety and the level of professionalism, I guess, that they offer there. I know that many of us have been critical of a lot of the prosperity theologies that we hear coming from quite a few megachurches in terms of this notion of, you know, God calls us all to be prosperous, and it's very--a heavy focus on materialism and on kind of a capitalist consumer culture, and really, you know, kind of using that as a major platform to kind of galvanize resources and, and monies of many people who are poor and who are struggling. And I think, again, back to hermeneutics, you know, this kind of hermeneutic of prosperity that interprets biblical text in ways that are very similar to kind of a get-rich-quick type scheme, you know, kind of name it and claim it. And God wants us all to be rich and have lots of money and houses and cars and, you know, I think really grossly misinterpreting the gospel and what, what Jesus was really all about.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, the one pastor I heard issue an edict that no raggedy cars should be parked in the lot of the church.
Speaker 2: I've heard that. And I think that's very problematic. I think it's very problematic when you have preachers who are getting rich off of--on the backs of poor people who are struggling to pay their bills, you know. And again, when you begin to attach these type of mandates to the very voice of God and say, "This is the word of God, and this is what God says and God says, you know, you need to give this, so you need to do this. Or God says, you know, you need to pay this offering so you can be healed of, of various infirmities and diseases." It becomes very problematic, and I think a pimping of the gospel in ways that are very problematic.
Story_ID: 290091
Speaker 1: This idea of womanist theology, and anybody that looks at the black church knows that the, that the majority of members are black women these days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and increasingly, you know, most of the members of the black community have responsibilities of black women these days because there's so many men in jail or--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --that are not even here anymore, you know, they're killed or died in some way or another.  Does a womanist theology then like become a way to make the black church more progressive in a lot of other ways, do you think?
Speaker 2: When it actually reaches the black church (laughter), and I think that was one of the critiques even of black theology, is that it was largely an academic enterprise, and it never really reached the large masses of people who are worshiping in churches every week and never heard of [HistoryMaker] James [H.] Cone, you know, never heard of black theology, never read any of his books or any of what he espouses.  And, you know, at times that's true, for womanist theology as well.  I think Dr. Renita [J.] Weems has done an excellent job of writing texts that are largely accessible to people in, in the masses, you know, of our churches who are sitting in the pews.  She wrote a book 'Just a Sister Away[: A Womanist Vision of Women's Relationships in the Bible,' Renita J. Weems], which is a really good bible study resources that can be used in anybody's, you know, bible study or Sunday school class. But that has been one of the criticisms, but on the other side of that, I don't want to strictly say, you know, it hasn't reached the church because it's largely an academic enterprise.  I think on the other side of it, the church has not been largely been open to radical theology, liberation theology because, again, you know, when you've been kind of socialized into one form of thinking of, you know, largely classical, Eurocentric theology, it's very hard to move people beyond that. And so anything that is seen antithetical to classical Eurocentric theology is seen as heresy (laughter), so to speak. So it can be very difficult to kind of break in, into some of those classical traditions, which is why it's very important to have people like Jackie Grant [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jacquelyn Grant], you know, Renita Weems, Katie [Geneva] Cannon, myself and other persons who are not only academic theologians and professors, but who are also preachers, you know, who are involved in the life of the church so that when we preach, we bring womanist theology and womanist perspectives into what we preach.  When we teach, we bring that to the church and make it accessible to--and translate it, if you will, translate the academic language and in ways that people can receive it and understand it and begin to shape their, their religious practices around those different perspectives.
Story_ID: 290092
Speaker 1: What churches are the hardest to change or move, the major denominations, major black denominations like the Baptist and the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] and--or would it be the smaller, I mean the smaller denominations, storefronts and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The answer to that question is, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: All of them.
Speaker 2: You know, again, you know, it's very difficult to make blanket statements about any one denomination or any one storefront movement because they have their differences there, they're diverse even in and of themselves. And you can always lift up examples out of any denomination where persons are more progressive than in others.  But I just think it's a struggle across the board.  You know, now, there are some that are more progressive than others, you know.  Even in the Baptist denomination, you have, you know, six, seven Baptist conventions, black Baptist conventions under that one denomination, you know.  So, you know, it's very difficult to point any one, you know, mainline church or any one, you know, non-denominational church and say that I think the places where it's most difficult are the places where you have persons in leadership, and particularly pastors who don't wanna share power and authority.  And I think that's the bottom line.  All of this is usually about issues related to power and authority and governance, and persons who don't want to share that with women.
Story_ID: 290093
Speaker 1: When we look at, you know, two of the major, I guess movements that black people have gotten involved in, in terms of religion and then the Nation of Islam or Islam, period, and Black Christian National Church, especially here in Atlanta [Georgia], it took a whole different kind of turn on theology, do you have any--what, is there any dialogue going on between the women and the womanist theology and the women in Islam today? I mean--
Speaker 2: Actually, it's interesting that you asked that question, I received a grant through ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], through the Black Women in Church and Society office [Office of Black Women in Church and Society], and they have what's called the Womanist Scholars Program, which is directed by [HistoryMaker Reverend] Dr. Jacquelyn Grant. And every year, they bring in two womanist scholars during their sabbaticals and award them a grant so that they can do research and writing around womanist issues.  And this year, along with myself, we have Dr. Debra Mubashir Majeed, who is actually a Muslim scholar.  This is the first time we've had a non-Christian scholar to come and to be in residence at ITC. And she is actually teaching a course next semester on gender and women in Islam. And two Christians at a Christian seminary also.  So we're very excited about that.  There're some people who are entering that, you know, classroom with a lot of trepidation.  There are people who are wondering why she's there (laughter), of course, but ITC has opened up that dialogue and that's something that's very exciting.  And I'm sure there have been other kind of Islam and Christian conversations as well around the City of Atlanta.  Of course, you have Shrine of the Black Madonna, which is kind of black nationalist. Actually, they're Christian Orthodox though, Protestant Orthodox church who I'm sure has been involved in a lot of those conversations in (unclear). If you look at the West End area, which is where the Atlanta University Center [Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] exists, you have a lot of kind of intersection between Christian and Islamic culture.
Story_ID: 290094
Speaker 1: Where are you now in terms of your teaching? You've been there six years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm into my sixth year.  I'm teaching this semester, two courses, Womanist Christian Education and Administration and Leadership Development, which is a course that deals with leadership theory and Christian education administration. And then in January, I will be on sabbatical. So I will be off for the entire year of 2006. Because of the Womanist Scholars Program, I am required to do a public lecture, which I'll be doing in January at the ITC around some of my research interests. It is my desire to travel to Ghana next semester. It looks like I will be doing that now at the end of the semester, to be in conversation with some women at Christ Presbyterian Church in Akropong, Ghana. We have students at ITC from Ghana who I've been in conversation with around what life is like for Ghanaian women and what are some of the issues they wrestle with, what is their life like in the church there in Ghana. So I've been conversation with the pastor of that church and look forward to going over there and doing some research and just really learning from some of the women in that, in that Ghanaian community. And then again, the fall semester of 2006, I'll be on sabbatical as well so that I can do some research and writing and publish a book.
Story_ID: 290095
Speaker 1: You were talking about the rites of passage program that you're involved in.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what--well, tell us a little bit about it, more about it (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Okay, Ndugu and Nzinga is a group that was started by Dr. Daniel Black who is--
Speaker 1: It's, the name first, what is it?
Speaker 2: Ndugu, N-D-U-
Speaker 1: N-D-U--
Speaker 2: --G-U.
Speaker 1: Okay, Nzinga.
Speaker 2: And Nzinga, N-Z-I-N-G-H-A [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Rites of Passage, started by Dr. Daniel Black, who is a professor of English and African American studies at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia], and he started this group twelve years ago, initially as a rites of passage for males.  And the next year, they started Nzinga, which is the female component.  This is really one of the only--the only rites of passage groups that I know of, at least in Atlanta [Georgia] that involves males and females together, journeying together rather than separately.  And again, this is an African-centered group. It's not a religious group. It's a cultural group.  While the majority of the people in the group are Christian, we have persons who are Muslim, Buddhist, Agnostic and that group basically centers around five principles: humility, wisdom, spirituality, nurturing and forgiveness. And anybody who wants to engage in a process of self-mastering and of learning African traditions and principles is welcome. There have been probably over two hundred people who have gone through this rites of passage group at some point or another over the past twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is something that a lot of black communities are trying to develop and start because we, you know, is there a, I mean is this a big movement in Atlanta or is there another--
Speaker 2: I know of a couple of other groups.  Like I said, at Reverend Dr. [Mark A.] Lomax's church [First Afrikan Church, Lithonia, Georgia], they have a rites of passage group.  There is a young woman named Michelle White who's in the area.  She's a Ph.D. student in Christian education, who just published a book on female rites of passage.  I can remember years back, Mary Lewis wrote a book called 'Herstory[: Black Female Rites of Passage,' Mary C. Lewis]. And she was from Chicago [Illinois], and actually published that book through Black Light [sic. African American Images, Chicago, Illinois] publishing.  And that was a book on female rites of passage.  So I think, you know, particularly--it's not a, as big of a movement as I would like to see.  I think that that can really revolutionize some churches and some Christian education programs where people begin to implement some rites of passage programs so that you're not just dealing with just the teaching aspect in a, in a classroom-type setting, if you will. But rites of passage programs tend to be more holistic and deal with the entire life of the person and actually engages those persons in, in the practice of what it is that they're trying to teach. And I think that that could be really helpful, particularly for this young generation. Young people are really disillusioned and frustrated with the church right now.  The whole fifteen to thirty-five-year old age group, we're losing them on a daily basis in the church, you know, because they have these critical questions. They're coming from a whole hip-hop culture and hip-hop generation, and, you know, churches don't wanna open up to accommodate where they're coming and oftentimes don't want to deal with the very real issues that they're wrestling with. So I think a rites of passage program can be one of those avenues that can deal with that, that can deal with the issues around identity, around location that a lot of the hip-hop generation is dealing with.
Story_ID: 290096
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I have a lot of concerns (laughter), if you will.  This is probably a big soapbox for me, and I actually preached somewhat about this yesterday. I really feel like the black community is in trouble.  We're in a state crisis, in a state of emergency as far as I'm concerned. I mean you already mentioned the absence of black men, either, you know, we have more men in prison and jail than in colleges and universities. That's an epidemic. In terms of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], black women are being infected at, at rapid rates, more than any other group in the United States, you know, black women are being infected with HIV and are dying of AIDS. That's a serious issue of crisis. We have a whole generation of young people that are very angry and very resentful, you know, in terms of their parents and the adults because of a lack of mentoring, you know, because we have not really mentored this younger generation, I think, the way that we should. That's, you know, a serious issue and a point of crisis, and, of course, still dealing with the intersection of racism and classism and sexism. The black church largely has not dealt with issues around sexuality the way I feel like it should, you know, in terms of really being a place where people can dialogue around these issues, you know, related to homosexuality, heterosexuality, gay marriage. You just don't hear that enough, being addressed, and that has caused a crisis because what it does is, you know, kind of leaves people to fend for themselves in terms of, you know, getting some understanding of those issues and resolving those issues or like we saw with the Black Power movement in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], they just deem Christianity irrelevant to the everyday issues that they deal with in life, and just don't want to deal with it. So those are just really, really major concerns that I have right now. I've, deal with--I am co-program coordinator of a program called the Youth Hope-Builders Academy, and that is a year-round program that has a residential academy in the summer. And we live with forty-eight high school students for thirty days. We actually live with these kids in residence at a retreat center and have them in an academy program for theological reflection.  These are high school students within a 150-mile radius of Atlanta [Georgia]. Some come from Alabama, Birmingham [Alabama], South Carolina who come to dialogue around issues related to theology and whatever other issues they have. And I've really seen this program just, just be transformative and allows young people who have never had an opportunity to hear their own voice.
Story_ID: 290097
Speaker 1: Oh, I just think, just really engaging our youth is an important issue right now for our community.  And I think the survival of our community really hinges upon our engagement of youth and youth culture and hip-hop culture, particularly from a church perspective, the infusion of hip-hop into church, into our theology, and our ministry we do.
Story_ID: 290098
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done up to this point, and you're fairly young by the standards that we use to interview people, what would you consider--or is there any major thing that you would do differently now, I mean if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What would I do differently?  That's always a big, big question. Probably I could think of a million things in terms of the little things in life. In terms of the major things, I think just the whole marriage between African-centeredness and church and church theology, Christian theology. I like, I would have liked to have begun that journey a lot sooner, I think. I'm very interested in seeing more churches that are unapologetically black and unapologetically Christian at the same time, and that incorporate the African rituals and traditions that I grew up with as a child into the church, some of which, you know, that whole communal ethic, I think our churches are so heavily focused on the individual, so individualistic, even in our notions of salvation and what it means to be saved is highly focused on the individual, and I think we need more of a community in our churches and more communal ethic, a more communal understanding of salvation, you know, that none of us is saved until all of us are saved (laughter), if you will.  So I think I would have liked to have perhaps started that journey early and engaged that sooner even in my ministry.  I am very clear that I have a call to pastor as well at some point, which is something I've never, ever wanted to do (laughter), but I know it's coming somewhere down the road.  I think it will look distinctly different from what a traditional pastor looks like.  And I would say that I am pastoring in some ways, even though right now, my title at my church [First Iconium Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] is minister of Christian education.  I'm also the church organist right now, two Sundays out of the month.  But I'm very interested in this new, kind of hip-hop, African-centered church and would have liked to have started that, maybe even sooner than now, even though I am still relatively young.
Story_ID: 290099
Speaker 1: So tou see yourself in the future, like, starting your, having your own, pastoring your own church and really--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I believe that that, that will happen at some point.  I don't know if I should say that on tape (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, describe your church--
Speaker 2: Ignore that.
Speaker 1: --now, you said you wanted to talk about your, you wanted to describe your church, too, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm currently at First Iconium Baptist Church on Moreland Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] here.
Speaker 1: First what?
Speaker 2: Iconium, I-C-O-N-I-U-M--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Baptist Church.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, what does Iconium mean?
Speaker 2: Iconium [Konya, Turkey] was actually a city in the Book of Acts [Acts of the Apostles] that was visited by the Apostle Paul on several occasions, part of the Greco (unclear) instruction, in New Testament. But that church is pastored by Reverend Timothy McDonald III. He was formerly the president of Concerned Black Clergy of Atlanta, still an active member there, known as the bullhorn preacher, just very evolved, activism, and in protests in civil rights and human rights initiatives, is often in Washington, D.C., heads up an African American ministers' coalition there in D.C.  And they work around issues of social justice.  And I've been there for six years.
Story_ID: 290100
Speaker 1: When you look over your life, what would you consider at this juncture, and it's still early, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think one of my most significant legacies has to do with the young people I've mentored, and even at times parented in the absence of their own parents. I think that that has been one of my most significant legacy, you know, young people who are now in college, and, you know, and charting their own course, young people who, you know, I've fed and clothed, and, you know, helped, you know, their guardians with mortgages, who I've taught in bible studies, you know, and ministered to in various shapes and forms.  I think that's a very important part of my legacy and probably something that I'm, I'm most proud of is just all the many, many, many people who I've had an opportunity to walk with in various contexts and settings, whether it's rites of passage or church or, you know, just on the block (laughter), if you will, so that I think is important.  I also think, and this is ongoing, even my contributions in the area of Christian education I think are important. I've had many students who said that their lives have been transformed in my classroom. And a couple of years ago, I received one of two teacher of the year awards from my honor society at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I think that that's been an important part of my legacy as well.
Story_ID: 290101
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Do you have children, or--
Speaker 2: No, I'm unmarried and no children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never had any, I must say (laughter) in that regard.  But--
Speaker 1: So the people you've mentored basically and your church and other associates constitute your extended family, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so.  I've had some wonderful extended families.  Even pastor and wife of the church where I was before First Iconium [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], I went to the United Methodist church, were very much like a surrogate family to me, with their two daughters who I used to babysit, who are now in their twenties and living their own adult lives. So, yes, my extended and that whole village has been very, very significant for me.  In a couple of weeks, I'm actually going to have temporary custody of my nephew who will be moving down here from Chicago [Illinois].  So I'm about to inherit a fourteen-year-old who will be living with me.  So I'm sure that will take my, my work to another level as well (laughter).
Story_ID: 290102
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't mentioned that, that you think we need to address before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I mean I think we've covered all the aspects of myself. I'm a very eclectic person. I keep, you know, I enjoy performance arts and worship arts. I enjoy teaching. I enjoy ministry in its various manifestations. And I enjoy being youthful as well.  There are a lot of things that I enjoy that are outside of so-called traditional Christianity, I guess. I'm a big fan of Buddhism, Tibetan Buddhism, particularly, and have done, you know, some reading and some study there and on life of the Dalai Lama. That has been, I think an important piece for me as well.  I enjoy hip hop culture and some of its different manifestations and music and all that in particular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have favorite performers or--
Speaker 2: Oh, I like Jill Scott (laughter), I like Erykah Badu, I'm liking Common a lot right now.  So those are probably the top three, right now, yeah.  I really enjoyed the documentary 'Rize,' which was out recently, which had to do with the whole new hip hop style of dancing that I thought was absolutely phenomenal.  And I'm very interested in doing something with that in the near future.
Story_ID: 290103
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I really would like to be remembered as a person who really made a mark in, in the life of our community, really made important a significant contribution to the lives, particularly of African American people in assisting us in the process of being liberated and empowered and, and just really made a contribution to social justice.  I don't know fully what that is right now, but that's how I would like to be remembered, and as a person who was kind and caring and was really there for other people when they needed it.
