Story_ID: 564347
Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: John Leonard Harris [HistoryMaker John Harris], J-O-H-N, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 4, 1961, and I was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, what is your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm currently a instructor of African American studies at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln [Lincoln, Nebraska] and the president and founder of Encouragement Unlimited [Encouragement Unlimited, Inc.], a nonprofit, faith based organization in Lincoln [Nebraska] as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 6th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Omaha, Nebraska.
Story_ID: 564348
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone that only require (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's fine.
Speaker 1: --a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, chicken and dumplings.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not yet (laughter). Well, I love going back to St. Louis [Missouri], so I mean, so back home is all, is always a good time to go and visit.
Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or a saying?
Speaker 2: Yes. It's by a missionary, Jim Elliot, who was a missionary to the Aucanians [Huaorani]. He said, "He is no fool who will lose what he cannot keep to gain what he cannot lose."
Story_ID: 564349
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and, and your father's [Eugene Harris, Jr.] side, but, but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is Maeola [Maeola Wilson Blanchard], M-A-E-O-L-A; maiden name was Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 28th, 1932. She was born in Inverness, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How, how far back, first of all, can you trace that side? Can they go all the way back to the, to Reconstruction or slavery, or, or--
Speaker 2: I do know that my mother, her moth- my mother's grandmother was part Native American, she tells us, Choctaw or Chickasaw. I, I can't remember which, I think it's Chickasaw, and not a lot in terms of memorization about that. My mother lived with my grand- her, her grandfather. Her mother [Mattie Abbott] had her when she was about fifteen, and so she didn't necessarily live with her mother. She lived with her grandfather. And he was a descendant of slaves, worked on rural, a rural part of Mississippi. She grew up on a farm and did a lot of farm labor, walked several miles to school, at least two miles to school--but not as familiar with the depth of that side of my family as I would love to be.
Speaker 1: Are there stories on that side of the family about the Civil Rights Movement in Mississippi, all those little towns, Inverness, and Carthage [Mississippi], and--
Speaker 2: Well, the stories that mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Philadelphia [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: --tells me about her, her grandfather, her, her grandfather was a strong, strong black man. He would not be threatened. He would not be intimidated. And in the '30s [1930s] in, in Mississippi when she was a girl, you know, Depression time [Great Depression], tough time all across the United States, her, her grand- her, her grandfather, who she called dad basically, was a guy who kept a pistol with him and was a strong man who would not be intimidated by anybody. And so she would recount to us oftentimes how white men would come toward the, the place where they lived with various threats of, of injury and harm to him, but he would have none of it. He would often run off the porch, she would say, with his gun and shoo them away at the point of a gun with, with his own threats. And so she, she got a real tough streak from her grandfather, who is, who was the man who raised her. And, and in that, the challenge for me and my brothers [Chris Harris and Timothy Harris].
Speaker 1: Okay. Are, are there any stories from that side of the family about--
Speaker 2: Not, not a lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) about a life in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Not a lot of, just other than, other than her, her accounting to me the obvious racism of the time, how she would walk to school when the, the white kids rode to school, how there was an obvious ineq- inequity in the life of Mississippi at that time, and how it, it created for, for them the, the kind of awareness of the time, even as young kids, that, that made sure they knew their place, if you will, in, in society, in Mississippi at that time. And so it was clear, and there were, there were certain things that they knew they shouldn't do, places they knew they shouldn't go. And, and she shared with, shared that with, with me particularly. In, in my later year--in my older years, it made me definitely aware of the struggle she had as a girl and her family had just trying to make it and survive in, in segregated, racist Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Now, now did she go to high school there?
Speaker 2: She went to elementary school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she didn't necessarily say high school there, but yeah, she was in Mississippi most of her, her young life.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she--I mean how old was she when she--I guess she moved to St.--did she move to St. Louis [Missouri] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did move to St. Louis after she married my dad as an adult. But most of her time, elementary, and most of her early schooling was in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: She did not attend college.
Speaker 1: Now, let's see, well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Let me, let me, re- re- re- retract there. I think my mother did, did go to St. Louis--go to high school in St. Louis because they had a, a reunion I think not very long ago. And so she, she did go to a school I think called Tech. That's the only name I can remember of it, St. Louis Tech [sic. Booker T. Washington Technical High School, St. Louis, Missouri] or something like that. And she had a, a reunion not long ago of classmates. And so I think, yeah, she did move and did do, do some high school in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had to (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right. So she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No need for a reunion if you're not doing ha- if you--if, if that's not the case.
Story_ID: 564350
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now my dad's side, my dad's name is Eugene, E-U-G-E-N-E, Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S. And he is a junior [Eugene Harris, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His father was Eugene H. Harris, Sr. [Eugene Harris, Sr.].
Speaker 2: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: His date of birth is July 17, 1932. And he was born in Hughes, Arkansas.
Speaker 2: How do spell--is it H-U-G--
Speaker 1: H-U-G-H-E-S.
Speaker 2: Okay, Hughes Arkansas, okay. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 1: Little bit more. I got a chance to talk to my aunt [Margaret Harris Franklin] a little bit in depth about this on a trip to Chicago [Illinois] some years ago. My father's great-grandfather was a slave. His name was Elliot. There's some cer- there are some bone of contention as to whether his name was Elliot or Ellis. My aunt tells me it was Elliot Harris [ph.]. He was a slave in Arkansas. And the--he, he, after he was freed, he got a plot of land in Arkansas and established the home that would be the home of my father's father and the, the Harris family there in Hughes.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now so he had his own, his own home?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Any, any stories passed--
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) down about how--
Speaker 1: Well, they were--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were--my, my grandfather was a, a preacher.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm not quite sure if Elliot Harris was a preacher, but there was the, the lineage of, of, of Christian faith life in that area. And not--they lived, again, in a, in a more rural area. My father had eight sisters and one brother. Again, they, they were a rowdy bunch (laughter), if you will, in that they, they just lived life on, on--in, in, in that rural area. I don't have a whole lot to, unfortunately, to, to impart about that.
Speaker 2: Now is Hughes near Little Rock [Arkansas] or--
Speaker 1: Near Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: --or--
Speaker 1: It's right on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) near Memphis, right across the
Speaker 1: --near on, near the, the Arkansas mem- Tennessee border. And my, my aunt imparted to me. My dad didn't share a lot about--of this with me. But my aunt did, did share. You know, they were a close family. Again, the, the--my father is, I believe, the fourth or fifth child in this family. So his, his sisters all were strong, strong, strong women. And I think he's, he's right in the middle. He has--his brother, Henry [Henry Harris], was the last of the, the lot, last of the, the ten children. And so there, there was the legacy of, of religious teaching, a lot of churchgoing, if you will.
Speaker 2: Now what denomination?
Speaker 1: Pentecostal I believe, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was a Pentecostal preacher.
Speaker 2: Do you know the name of the church they attended there?
Speaker 1: No, I do not, no.
Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, okay. So did your father have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he did, he did, he did elementary school; he did high school, and then he went to seminary. And I, and I don't have the name of the seminary unfortunately. He went to a seminary and became a ordained minister himself--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in following the footsteps of his father.
Speaker 2: But you don't know the denomination that they--
Speaker 1: It was Pentecostal denom--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Pentecostal denomination. Yeah, that was, that was, that's the basic.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so, so did he take his--did he practice in the same church that, that his father was in--
Speaker 1: No, he actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or did he establish--?
Speaker 1: --he moved to St. Louis [Missouri]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and established several churches in St. Louis, Pentecostal churches. I do remember as a child myself attending one of his churches in, in north St. Louis as a young boy. And he did establish several other smaller congregations across the city.
Speaker 2: Okay. What, what are some--the name of some of the churches? Can you tell us?
Speaker 1: I know--all I--one was--I know one had, had to have the name Holiness (laughter); it was Holiness. It was all about holiness, so, if, if I'm not mistaken. This was when I was really a, a young kid, so my job was just to go (laughter), was just to be there, and so I'm, I'm not really sure what the names of these churches were.
Story_ID: 564351
Speaker 1: Is that--now what is a Pentecostal?
Speaker 2: A Pentecostal person, or a person in the Pentecostal denomination is a, is a person who is a Christian who believes--there are several different branches, if you will, of the Pentecostal denomination. One is, is what we'd call a Jesus-only denomination. And the g- and the Jesus-only Pentecostal denomination, or oneness, if you will, subscribes to the, to the premise that Christ is not only in, in--he was, he was in the, in the, in the Acts [Acts of the Apostles] claimed--he claimed to be not only the savior, but also God. And so the, they kind of subvert the trinity, the, the idea of the trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit. They take all of those, that trinity, and, and put them, condense them into one person, Christ. And so, as you're baptized, as you accept Christ in the Pentecostal church, there is this idea that to accept Christ means that you also receive the Holy Spirit. And that Holy Spirit comes in, in the manifestation of speaking in tongues, as it did, as it happened in Acts, where people were saved, and they began to speak in tongues, if you will, as a sign of their salvation. So there's one branch of the Pentecostal denomination that's, that says the Father and Son and Holy Spirit are all one, that is Christ. And to be saved, if you will, from your sins is to accept Christ and Christ alone for the salvation of your soul. The other branch, there is the other branch of Pentecostalism that does not necessarily subscribe to the idea. There is a, a trinity, if you will, and the, the speaking in tongues is not a manifest--is not a, a concrete evidence of your salvation, is best I can explain it to you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right. So, it's, it'll be interesting I guess to--I don't know the origin of Pentecostalism and don't know, you know, it is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --it's origin--
Speaker 2: --it go--
Speaker 1: --in the black community I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I, I just, I'm just--you know, some of the others are more familiar. Like, I know more about Baptist or how the Methodist got started with the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] and the C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] and stuff. But I--
Speaker 2: Well, if you go back, if you go back into the, the early 1900s, even into 1912, 1920s, you have the, the, the ma- major Pentecostal movements in the United States. You have the Azusa Street movement [Azusa Street Revival] out in, in California where William Seymour [William J. Seymour] started this revival, if you will, in a, in a church house. That chee- that church house bloomed and blossomed. That revival went on for years. And there was a, the understanding that the spirit was, was so prominent there. And, and that, and out of the Pentecostal denomination, you have the origin of actually three branches of what we call a Christian denominations now. You have the Church of God in Christ, which was founded by Charles Mason [Charles Harrison Mason] I believe down in Memphis [Tennessee]. You have the Assemblies of God [World Assemblies of God Fellowship], which is a derivation among the Pentecostal church as well. And then you have what we call the, the PAW, or the Pentecostal Assemblies of the World. And so you have those three particular denominations under the Christian umbrella that, that find their origin in the early Pentecostal movement in the United States, and, and not just in the United States but around the world.
Story_ID: 564352
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you mentioned the, the Azusa ministries [Azusa Street Revival] in California 'cause Reverend Rivers [HistoryMaker Reverend Eugene Rivers] we were talking about before we started this, he was doing youth work a lot, just as you are, you know, has presided over the Azusa ministries in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he, he, you know, studied in California, you know, with people involved in that same administration.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the unfortunate things about this, the Azusa Street ministry in California and the, the then break off of, of the other denominations is that William Seymour, of course, was an African American gentleman. And those people who did not want to follow him as an African American men--man, decided that they would branch off. And, and, and actually that is one of the, I believe a gentleman named is, is Durham, Charles Durham [sic. William Howard Durham], is now, was considered the founder of the Assemblies of God [World Assemblies of God Fellowship]. He and, and some, some women were involved in the Azusa Street movement decided that Seymour was not the person they wanted to follow for whatever reason. And some would say it was racism; some would say it was just a doctrinal conflict. But out of Azusa Street came the, again, the Assemblies of God and the Church of God in Christ, which, which, again, is, is, is bent on the fact that Jesus Christ is all you need to be saved and that speaking in tons--in tongues--as it was in Acts [Acts of the Apostles], as it fell down in Acts, is a, a evidence that you indeed are, have received the Holy Spirit. You, and you can't do it unless you speak--unless you have the Holy Spirit in you; then you are saved. And many churches continue to, to preach that today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That shed some light on this. And I didn't know that the founder of the, of, of, of--so you say the founder of Pentecostalism, William Seymour, was an African American?
Speaker 2: Well, William J. Seymour, Seymour was, he was--he wasn't the founder--he was the gentleman who was the leader of the Azusa movement.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that movement spawned not only the Church of God in Christ, which is a predominant African American denomination today.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But also the Assemblies of God, which is not a, not a predominantly--it's more predominantly white than anything. But the Assemblies of God stretches all across the world now as a Pentecostal denomination.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Well, that is good information. I didn't, I didn't know any of that, okay. I know, I've heard of the different pieces, but I have never had--I've never heard it, you know, pulled together.
Story_ID: 564353
Speaker 1: So your father [Eugene Harris, Jr.] had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my dad was a part of all of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so he had various churches in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: And, and what do you--I mean was it a succession of churches, or, or would he start a church and then move--start another church? And did, did they, did they sustain themselves, or did he start one and it would go down he'd start another one, or how--
Speaker 2: Well, my dad was, you know, like many African American pastors, you, you are bi-vocational. Oftentimes, the church itself cannot sustain you because of the resource, the resources are, are small, or you're in, in a, a poverty community, if you will, unlike the megachurches we see today. And so, he, he could not be sustained by the, the tithes or the offerings of the church. And, and my dad, he worked at McDonnell Douglas, the aircraft company in St. Louis. He worked as a cab driver. He worked as, as--in a bakery. And so he did a number of different jobs along with pasturing. And so, and in, and in the process, yeah, he did open several small congregations--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --over that time.
Speaker 1: --so it's more of a missionary kind of a thing. I mean he would open a congregation and--
Speaker 2: Well, you, you, you started with it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to try to build a, a ministries and then--
Speaker 2: Well, you started with the, with the idea that, that it's going to be sustainable. And then when you find out that that's such is not the case, and that's, you know, that, that's what it, that's what it was. His calling he felt was to preach the gospel, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so his job was to, was to do that at all cost, and he, and he basically did. I mean oftentimes, and to, to, to the chagrin of, of our family oftentimes, because we would, we would lose electricity sometimes; our water would be cut off, as my dad was simply trying to follow his mission. And we didn't--you know, I didn't understand it as a kid at that time why these things were happening. I see it a lot clearer now as an adult. But he, he was bent on doing the thing he believed God put him on earth to do and that was to, to be a pastor, to preach, to shepherd a flock, if you will, and he did that in a number of different locations in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay. So were these, these mostly storefront churches?
Speaker 2: Most storefronts, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so he'd move.
Speaker 2: He'd move from, from one place. And then when, you know, maybe the rent got too high in one place, he would move to another place and try to find another locale to set up shop, if you will.
Story_ID: 564354
Speaker 1: Now, is, is there a story that's handed down about how your parents met? Did they talk about how, how they, they initially got together?
Speaker 2: Act- it's a story I don't know, actually. It's a story (laughter) I actually don't know, unfortunately. Maybe I--and I know I, I know I've heard it. This is a bad way not to be able to recount it. And I'm sure my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] has told me about it. But, but what I do remember about, about their meeting is that my mom was, was, was drawn to my dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.]. He's a charismatic guy. I mean he, he was a military man. He was a sergeant in the [U.S.] Army. He was a boxer, re- very much like a Smokin' Joe Frazier, left handed, power, power packed. I remember getting a couple of those power packed punches periodically. We don't wanna do too much on the history on that one (laughter), but so a power packed guy, very charismatic, very, very handsome man. My mom was, was, was drawn to him and, and would have followed him anywhere--Korean War vet. And so, you know, again, how they met, I'm, I'm not totally clear about. But again, she, she spoke very, very highly of her regard for him as a, as a man, as a, a, a religious man, and as a man who kind of swept her off her feet.
Speaker 1: Is your father still alive?
Speaker 2: He is still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He is, he's had a series of strokes over the years and is now in a nursing home in St. Louis [Missouri], in a VA [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] nursing home.
Story_ID: 564355
Speaker 1: Well, when you consider the personalities of your parents and their, their traits and talents and, and even their weaknesses, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I'm more like my mother [Maeola Wilson Blanchard], for sure. She, she modeled for me. She's, you know, was the first lady of the church, if you will, a solid Christian woman. And, and, and her, her challenge often--my folks got divorced when I was in the seventh grade. That was something that really threw me for a loop as a young man, but that, that challenged my mom to ascend to a different kind of leadership. Of course, now she is the breadwinner in the home; she is the person who is responsible for every aspect of our survival, if you will. And she took that, that, that role, worked multiple jobs for as long as I can remember but, but had a real heart of compassion. I remember in one situation a gentleman for, from our church was displaced. And again, for some reason I just couldn't understand why he couldn't find a place to be. Nobody would take him in, but my mother took him in. And, and in the small house that we had, it wouldn't be reasonable to move another person with, with space needs, with food needs, with all kinds of needs into our home. But she did that and with, with no strings attached other than, you know, you just follow the rules of our house. And, and, and, and as an adult male, adult man with my own family now, I've had the occasion to do the very same thing for people who have been displaced, who were in various situations. And, and I, and I believe that's because I saw my mother do that. She wanted to exhibit a genuine--she wanted to live out her faith. It wasn't just enough for her just to believe. It's like it says in James, the Book of James, "Don't be hearers of the word; be doers also" [James 1:22]. Don't just take it as an intellectual reality; take it as a heart reality. And she took that reality and, and lived it out. And so, if there's any doubt about who I'm like, who I think I'm like--now somebody--my, my, my siblings might say, "Oh, you're like dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.], you're like dad," but I would say more like my mother for sure.
Story_ID: 564356
Speaker 1: This had to be somewhat disruptive. You're twelve years old. Now do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have four sisters and two brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All still alive.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so when you're twelve your parents split up.
Speaker 2: They split up.
Speaker 1: And now did this, does this mean--did, did you all stay in the same church afterwards?
Speaker 2: No. We, we had been attending--my dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.] did have a--I think one of his storefronts did close, and in the process we started attending a, a, a bigger church, Pentecostal church, in St. Louis [Missouri], Bethesda Temple [Bethesda Temple Church of the Apostolic Faith], which was located in north St. Louis--actually more south St. Louis and near, near, near Forest Park area [St. Louis, Missouri]. So we had been attending another Pentecostal church. And there was a, a Pentecostal family of churches. Bethesda was one of them. My father grew up and knew a lot of the ministers in that church, particularly the, the main pastor, Bishop James Johnson [James A. Johnson]. And the, the--we were a sister church to a church, a Church of God in Christ called Lively Stone [Lively Stone Church of God, St. Louis, Missouri]. And their pastor, Bishop Phillip Scott [Phillip Lee Scott], was one of the main religious leaders in St. Louis. If you knew Bishop Johnson or Bishop Scott, you know, you, you, you were in, in the loop, if you will. And so we started attending Bethesda Temple. And, and so when, when my dad's storefront church died and then when my folks got divorced, we stayed at Bethesda.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did your father stay a member of that church too, or did he--
Speaker 2: No. He, he, he continued to seek his, his own path, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He continued to seek opportunities to start. And he, he did my--he did remarry. Actually, my dad remarried, and he married a woman pastor, and he became a part of a church she was pastoring--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --another Pentecostal church.
Speaker 1: All right. So did, so, so, so did you see your father a lot afterwards? Was he still in your life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, he was around, and he didn't live very far away. And, and so as we had opportunity and as he came around, so it, it was--there were frequent opportunities to, to communicate and so forth.
Speaker 1: And what did your mother [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother at that point was a cook in the school district where we lived, the Wellston School District, a little small suburb, municipality in the St. Louis County [Missouri] area. And so, she was a cook initially at the elementary school and then ultimately at the high school. And she be--went from being one of the main line cooks to the supervisor of the cooks at the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now--
Speaker 2: And, and the, and then her second job was that of a cleaning lady. She did do clean, office cleaning in the evenings. She'd up--she's up at 5:30, off to the school, come home, sleep for about an hour, hour and a half, maybe two between, and then off to Clayton [Missouri] for office cleaning until about 9:30, 10:00, and then the same thing every day for as long as I can remember.
Story_ID: 564357
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you about growing up. Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember way back when I was, I believe, as early, around five years old. I grew up in, in Wellston [Missouri], again, in that municipality. It's was about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: W-E-L-L-S-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, Wellston, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wellston is a, was a, a municipality in St. Louis County [Missouri] of about three thousand, four thousand people in the, in the big scheme of things in St. Louis [Missouri] and a real close knit community of, of, of neighbors. All around in St. Louis there are communities like this, Jennings [Missouri], Kinloch [Missouri] and so forth in that area, Normandy [Missouri], Pine Lawn [Missouri], on and on and on. They're all, all connected together. And, and I lived in the southern part of Wellston, a street called Etzel [Avenue], E-T-Z-E-L. And I remember, you know, just, just being a kid, playing on the street. And I remember being home one day with my mother [Maeola Wilson Blanchard]. I think my younger sister who's right under me, Chrystal [Chrystal Harris Greer], and this is back in the days when they had these nice big cars. And my dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.] had a nice blue, powder blue--I can't--may--I don't know if it was a Chevy [Chevrolet] or whatever it was. I think everything was a Chevy back then. And this was a time steering columns did not lock. And so, yours truly hops right into the driver's seat. We had a nice little slope driveway. And I get in the car like I'm driving, and I pull the lever, and there goes the car right back down the driveway. Oh my goodness (laughter), it was not, it was not good. And we, we go out and cross the street right onto the curb on the other side, and I'm in trouble (laughter); I'm in big, big trouble.
Speaker 1: Well, you didn't hit, hit anything.
Speaker 2: Didn't hit anything, but here I am, you know, trying to drive at five years old and created some big problems for myself (laughter). Fortunately, the car didn't get any major damage. But, yeah, it was those kinds of things that I remember. I also remember something I guess from whoever's gonna see this (laughter) in my family. I remember one time my, my brother [Chris Harris]--there was a, there wasn't a whole lot of fights I remember when I was a kid, but I remember my brother got into a fight one time after school. You know, we rode school buses and so forth. And he was down--we were down at the edge of the street, and this guy did something. I can't remember. My brother would have probably, would've never initiated the fight, but some reason he was involved in this fight. And he had the guy on the ground, and the bus was about to roll away, yeah. And the guy's head was down by the tire where the bus was about to drive off. And if I remember correctly, something happened. My mother, who's not, not the smallest woman, came and grabbed both of them and just hoisted them off the ground into the air. And I remember that image so vividly.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And, and you know, she was, she was talking about you, you know, you--she's such a meek, meek spirit. But boy, I'll tell you, down in there, again, like her--like my--her, her grandfather, who was just a courageous man, a man who just would not be intimidated, she got some of that from (unclear), and her mother was pretty feisty too, Mattie Abbott. Mom- her mother was pretty feisty. I stayed with her in East St. Louis [Illinois] during some summers as well. She kept a .22 [.22 caliber rifle] with her.
Speaker 1: Just, just for the record, what was your grandfather's name, her, her grandfather that raised her?
Speaker 2: She never told me his name. She always just called him Papa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She never, she's never said his name. She just called him Papa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all we know of him, Papa. That's his name. And, and so, so, but, but I remember her just, you know, grab--you know, everybody screaming. There was a big throng of, of kids right at that, at that bus stop, and she just hoist the kids up in the air. I think she might have popped the kid who was fighting my son--fighting my brother and (laughter), you know, (makes noise) and sent my brother on his way. But my, my brother wasn't initiating no fight. I mean that's, that's not the kind of person he was and not the kind of person he is. But I remember that, that very vividly.
Story_ID: 564358
Speaker 1: Were you raised essentially on Etzel Street [sic. Etzel Avenue] the whole time, or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, we moved around. We moved around--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to--we, we left Etzel I believe when I was in elementary school, moved onto a street called Derby [Avenue] just not very far from Etzel, maybe ten, twelve blocks.
Speaker 1: So the same community--
Speaker 2: Same (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) basically.
Speaker 2: Oh, we always stayed in the same community, always stayed. Wellston [Missouri] was, was just a, a place of, of humbly camaraderie family life. When we moved to Derby, Derby was probably a place where I have some of my, my fondest memories, because we were really a neighborhood. I mean on, on Etzel, we had the Jones family [ph.] and a number of other families, who I can't really remember right now. The Jones family, a friend, a friend of mine now, Lester Jones [ph.], is a part of that street. I mean we've known each other from the very, very beginning of our lives, our lives period. But on Derby, we were more of a neighborhood of people. And I can remember--I can just go right down the street right down the street right now and tell you all the families. You know, we have the Rameys [ph.] on the corner, the Harrises, which as our home here, the Perrys [ph.] down here, the Denmans [ph.] down here; across the street you got the Carols [ph.]; over here you have the Waffords [ph.] here; you have the Spite [ph.] family here, the Dorseys [ph.] down the street. So I can, I can, could go right down the street and, and remember each and every family on, on that particular street. It, there was such kinship. We played in the street. We had a, a little confectionary store right on the street corner. We used to--it was a street that, that was a, a steep street, and I used to throw the ball, a football, from my house some maybe fifty yards as a kid or more down the street. And I remember the owner of the, the confectionary was a, a grown man. He challenged me to a football throwing contest one time. The kids told him how far I could throw a football. He said, "Ah, I'll give you--I'll give all you all candy if John [HistoryMaker John Harris] can throw this football farther than me." And he was a big guy. And he took the ball, and he threw it, and it, it went, you know, maybe forty-five yards. And then I'm here; I'm a little kid, you know, but a big, a big guy. And, and I took the ball, and I, I had to throw it about sixty-five yards, you know, down the hill, and all of us got candy (laughter). And everybody wanted me to keep challenging him in football throwing contests. But, but you know, that, that was just, I just have such fond memories of Derby, and, and the kinship, and the family life, and just the, the joy of, of, of all of us living on that street.
Story_ID: 564359
Speaker 1: What are some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, one, one of the--let me, let me start, start with the sounds. One of the sounds is my mother [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] yelling down the street, trying to get us to come home. You know, it's interesting how kids today, you know, with video games and all that, you know, you can't get them outside to play. But you know, being outside was one of the great things that we enjoyed. We played baseball; we played, we played stickball, or corkball we called it, with a, a skinny bat and a tennis ball. When I was a young guy, I was really, I was a, a good catcher at that time. I didn't pitch a whole lot, but I caught. And, and at an early age I got a, a love for baseball. St. Louis [Missouri] is a big baseball town. And so, being down the street and hearing my mom yell down the street was one of the, one of the sounds that, that you could count on hearing every day, trying to get us to come home. One of the sights is the streetlight, because we had to be home before the streetlight came on. And so, what you would see is that flicker of that light. As, as we got to a certain point in the night, that light would come on and just start to flicker, flicker, flick, flicker, and you had to be home before it came on full bright. And so, soon as we would see it, somebody, I don't care what you were doing, somebody would--I think it actually created a sound as it was coming on. And when someone would hear that sound, they would know. And I could remember us, one of the other sights is us running up the hill, up the street to get to the house. We had to be on the porch before that light was full on. And so, another sound of, of that early time was one of the games we loved to play, and that was hide and go seek. And I remember so well on Derby [Avenue] someone against the light pole, down in front of the Perry [ph.] house counting, counting, counting, and then, all the places we were able to hide in between cars, behind trees, on and on, and then our running out from those locations to the pole before the person could, could find us. That was such, such an unbelievable time. And (laughter) I mean I just, I just love reminiscing about it even now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of the smells, when you think about--
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) some of the smells, just cooking, just cooking. I mean, you have some of the, the--my mother is obviously, she was to me, she was a, a great cook, but you know, just, just the smell of her telling us there's a pot of neckbones on, and neckbones, beans, you know, all the stuff that I grew up with, corn bread, just those smells, and the opportunity to, to go from house to house to, to enjoy those, the food from every house. I mean we, we had an open, open door at every house on the block. And so there was no, really no barrier for me as a kid in that neighborhood. And you could go--everybody in, was a, in relationship with everybody else. I remember the--one of the smells that I, I can probably remember was the smell of a dog. This is interesting. It wasn't even our dog. The Perrys had a dog named Champ. He was a German Shepherd, and, and, and I used to spend a whole lot of time with that dog. It wasn't even my dog. But I remember one time just sitting on the floor. We were watching cartoons or whatever, and I was just leaning on Champ. And Champ was a dog that chased cars a lot, and he died chasing a car. He would find himself, you know, chomping at the front tires. As a tar- car came down the street, and Champ would just take off and start chasing the car, snipping at the tire. And I remember on a couple of occasions him getting actually rolled up in the tire, and oh, that was it for Champ, we thought, oh, Champ is dead. Here comes Champ running out from right under the car, alive, again, but one time, alas, once, one too many. But I remember just laying there, laying on him as we were watching TV and just reminiscing about, you know, that dog, Champ.
Speaker 1: Now did dog (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Did dogs roam the neighborhoods in those days when you were--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there were a lot of stray dogs. We had a dog, our family, called Brownie. Brownie was the scared, the most afraid dog you could ever--Brownie walking around with his tail between his legs. We think he was the wimpiest dog you could ever possibly want. And I think Brownie ult- ultimately ran away, and I don't think anybody cared (laughter). But we do remember Brownie. Brownie, Brownie had emotional issues.
Story_ID: 564360
Speaker 1: You said spor- sports were big when you were growing I guess you--
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) spent a lot of time outside.
Speaker 2: Very much so, a lot of basketball, a lot of, a lot of corkball. I mean, again, you--we didn't have any real fields. We had vacant lots. And so, between the Denman [ph.] home, and the Perry [ph.] home was this vacant lot and you know, a lot of bumps, it was, and there was a house there. They didn't, they didn't clear them flat at that time. They just, whatever was there, they knocked it down and, and took the debris away, and so we had a number of vacant lots that we could play on. We played hardball on this lot; we played mostly corkball on this lot, and that's where I really got a, a love for baseball. A friend of mine, Ricky Perry [ph.], who lives out in California right now, we'll see each other in a couple of, couple of weeks. Yeah, he was just such a great pitcher, and I was a catcher. And we had, you know, the guys, it would just be something we would be doing all the time. And we, you know, played basketball in, in backyards. I remember playing in the Spite family [ph.] backyard football all the time against other streets. You know, our street had to play other streets. You know, you think about all these gangs that we have today in our society. Well, we, we were gangs. We were just gangs of good kids. You know, our gang from the Derbys [Derby Avenue] would go and play the gang, the guys from Chatham [Avenue], and then we would play the guys from Hobart [Avenue]. Then we would play the guys from, you know, whatever other street, and that's just the way it, it worked. And there was no real animosity; you know, it was our street against your street, and then when it was over, it was over. You know, you won--whoever won, whoever lost, you know, we figured we'd, we'd, we'd get it right the next time. And so it, it was just that kind of camaraderie and that kind of fun.
Speaker 1: Now did you--these, these were the days, if I'm right, in St. Louis [Missouri] when, when you were growing up, the St. Louis Cardinals were a mighty team--
Speaker 2: Oh, man, are you kidding?
Speaker 1: The, the baseball team, led by a, a black man who, from Omaha [Nebraska], Bob--
Speaker 2: Bob Gibson.
Speaker 1: --Bob Gibson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was one of my heroes. I remember Bob Gibson pitching against the Pittsburgh Pirates on the 4th of July one day. It was raining, and I was, I, I think I was--I can't remember who I was out with, but I remember listening to the game on the KMOX Radio [St. Louis, Missouri]. So we spent a lot of time at the radio, at the radio. And when I was old enough, when I finally got old enough to ride the bus myself, I would--we would spend a lot of time just hoping on the bus going down to spend time in the bleachers in, in Busch Stadium [St. Louis, Missouri]. And so me and Ricky and whoever else could at that time, we spent a lot of time in the bleachers in Busch Stadium. And I remember so well Bob Gibson pitching, Lou Brock stealing bases. I was actually there the night Lou Brock was about to get his 3,000th hit. And we were at the game, and he, he was on 2,999. And we were just waiting, waiting for the 3,000th hit, and he didn't get it that night. He got it in first at bat the next night. And so, but yeah, we were all Cardinal fans. We're still, we still are Cardinal fans. And, and, and I grew up not only watching the Cardinals at that time but watching the football Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals; Arizona Cardinals]; I grew up watching the football Cardinals. And, and now I do some, some side work in a law officer for a gentleman I used to watch play football for the Cardinals, Jim McFarland. He, he is a, a former Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] player who signed on as a tight end with the Cardinals. So, I remember watching him play as a kid, and now I work with him back in Nebraska, in Lincoln [Nebraska] rather--but yeah, football fans. We didn't have a basketball team back then. The, the old St. Louis Hawks [Atlanta Hawks], if you will, that went and moved to Atlanta [Georgia], so we didn't have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --basketball team.
Speaker 1: So they had moved by the time you came--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --along. Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: But, but the Cardinals, both football and baseball, both--all in--both in Busch Stadium and plus the St. Louis Blues. I blew- I grew up a hockey fan as well. Yeah, you know, the St. Louis Blues were there, and they were a competitive team. And I remember the bar- the, the Plager brothers [Bob Plager and Barclay Plager], Garry Unger. I used to be Garry Unger. I used to skate around in the house with a hockey stick and, and on roller skates as Garry Unger, number seven from the St. Louis Blues. And so I grew up watching a lot of hockey and learning a lot about sports at a very young age. And so, when I watch a lot of trivia contests, I'm very good at sports trivia because very, very early on I got a lot, a heavy dose of St. Louis sports. And not only St. Louis sports, I remember Roberto Clemente, the, the Pittsburgh Pirates and the Baltimore Orioles playing in the World Series [1971 World Series]; Brooks Robinson having the unbelievable series. I remember the Super Bowls all the way back to Minnesota [Minnesota Vikings] and Kansas City [Kansas City Chiefs] in the Super Bowl [Super Bowl IV], which is a long time ago, as a kid, you know, a lot of great basketball games. The Olympic, when the Olymp- when U.S.A. got the shaft against the Russians in the Olympics back in the '70s [1972 Summer Olympics, Munich, Berlin], I remember watching that game. I remember the, you know, ABC 'Wide World of Sports,' all the great fights Muhammad Ali had in the--so I remember the night I was in my, my bedroom listening to Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier fight their very first fight after Ali comes out of retirement. I was a big Ali fan, got to meet him in St. Louis. And I remember crying when, when I heard Joe Frazier caught him with that left hook, and Ali was down. And I just, the tears just started to stream down my face as I listened to that on the radio. So yes, sports was just always a very important part of my life as a kid.
Story_ID: 564361
Speaker 1: Was television as, as such and radio a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was, I was a TV junkie, you know, particularly--mostly sports though, mostly sports. And so, I'm trying to remember the TV shows I watched as a kid. I mean I watched a lot of those, those little funny sitcoms that they have on old TV now like 'The Beverly Hillbillies,' the 'Green Acres,' 'Petticoat Junction.' I remember watching--I'm a, I'm a, a superhero fan. I used to watch the green--'The Green Hornet.' I'm a Batman fan. I used to watch the old, the old 'Batman' show and 'Superman' ['Adventures of Superman'] of course. And I remember one time my--and they'll tell--my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] and my siblings will, if they were sitting in this seat, will tell you the time I ate some Superman popcorn, put a towel around my neck and jumped off the front porch, to the chagrin of my forehead, and (laughter), and met, met, met the pavement. And so, you know, the whole issue of, of reality had not yet hit me. You know, there was, that was fantasy. Superman could not really fly, and just eating Superman popcorn won't allow you to be able to fly. I had not yet bought that and took off, off the porch, and the, the rest, as they say, is history (laughter).
Speaker 1: I could refer to quite a few stories about people that put that towel around their neck and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: --they--
Speaker 2: --yeah, I took off. But, but, again, TV--I, I remember, you know, because early, we had to go to school early morning, very up, up early in the morning, Lone Ranger and Tonto, first thing, couldn't, couldn't leave the house without watching 'The Lone Ranger.' And so I remember countless days getting up early, early to get to school, make sure we get that 'Lone Ranger' in at 7:00, 7:30-ish, off to school by 8:00. And then we, we walked. I mean it was, it was maybe a ten minute walk to school. And, but yeah, I was a TV junky; I still am. You know, I don't get to watch as much as I, I used to, but you know, those shows I, I do watch now, I really invest myself in.
Story_ID: 564362
Speaker 1: What about music? Was music a bigger part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, Motown [Motown Records]. You know we're Motown people. You know, as a, as a, as a religious family, sometimes, you know, you call that music devil music. And so it was one of those under the, under the sheets kind of things you were doing. You built yourself a little tent.
Speaker 1: So was not--was there a--now I, I know some people that are Pentecostals, and though I didn't know the origin of the religion, I do know some of the behavior. So--
Speaker 2: Very strict.
Speaker 1: Some members of Bethesda Temple in Dayton [Ohio], for instance, could not go to the movies.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They could not listen to secular music.
Speaker 2: That, you, you, you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They--
Speaker 2: --right on top of it.
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of things they couldn't do--
Speaker 2: The women didn't wear, didn't wear pants where, in that church I went to, no pants, no makeup, no jewelry, on and on and on and on. And so, the, to listen to Motown music was, was totally contrary, and so it was something that, that you had to sneak and do. And so, you know, we would find our self, you know, in the, upstairs with the, the, the record player with the sound, you know, all the way down. And then somehow my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] would still hear it. I don't know how she could hear if it's on one or two, but somehow under this, under this blanket, under this little tent we had, somehow she, "Turn that music off," she would be telling. And we wondered, how could she hear this? But yeah, we listened to--I mean The Temptations, the whole Motown thing, yeah, it's, it's, it's all, it was all of what, what I grew up with.
Speaker 1: When you reflect back on it, do you think that, that that kind of music was destructive to your per--
Speaker 2: Oh no. It's some of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) personalities?
Speaker 2: --it's some of the best music you listen to. I mean, I think about Earth, Wind and Fire. I think about Stevie Wonder. I remember his, his great anthology that came out ['Looking Back'; 'Anthology'], I mean music that stands the test of time. No, it, it, it didn't scar my psyche in any way, shape, or form. But you know, it, it, it's just like I have kids of my own now, and you know, you think about what they listen to and what you would want them to listen to, parents thinking they're doing the best for your--for their children. And I imagine my mom was thinking the same thing, not, not--she--it wasn't music she was listening to, though she had listened to some, what you would call jive and, and, and whatever music was hip when she was a kid, you know, in the, in the, in the little juke joints. So she knew that, that, that music maybe spawned a different kind of behavior and lifestyle. But you know, the music of Motown, the music of those groups, you know, the Four Tops and the, The Spinners I remember, The Whispers. I remember being at social functions and listening to 'Always and Forever,' 'Heatwave,' and The Moments [Ray, Goodman and Brown], The Chi-Lites, The Stylistics, The Main Ingredient, 'Everybody Plays The Fool,' I mean on and on and on and on; we could go on. We can take up the whole tape on, on this whole area right here by itself. But it's the songs we're still listening to. My kids were listening to Luther Vandross, 'A House Is Not a Home' and, and, and, and Jackson 5. I remember wat- watching The Jackson 5 on the Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'], I mean that very night when, when America was captured by these five guys, I mean, and unbelievable. And so, yeah, you know, it's, it's the music that, that we grew up loving.
Story_ID: 564363
Speaker 1: Now, now what, what elementary school did you start at?
Speaker 2: I started in Spensmar Elementary [Spensmar Elementary School]. It was this, the school we were bused to.
Speaker 1: How do you spell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) S-P--
Speaker 1: S-P--
Speaker 2: --E-N-S-M-A-R, Spensmar Elementary. It was in Wellston [Missouri] on the northern most part of the community. And then when we moved to Derby [Avenue], I went to Central [Central Elementary School, Wellston, Missouri]. I move, moved to Central Elementary, which was right up the street from my home.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Derby. That's a, another one of those, those suburbs.
Speaker 2: Oh no. That's the street we moved to.
Speaker 1: Oh, on Der- on Derby.
Speaker 2: After Etzel [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, we moved from Etzel to Derby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: D-E--D-E-R-B-Y.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's where I spent most of my elementary years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you do in school?
Speaker 2: I was always a good student. My family was, was considered the smart family. My sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Harris Hall], was the valedictorian in Wellston School District, ended up going to Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri] as a theater major. My brother, Chris [Chris Harris], was a, a very smart guy. He was a scholar athlete. He ended up leaving Wellston and going into one of the city public schools called Beaumont High School down in the City of St. Louis [Missouri], was a scholar-athlete for Beaumont. My sister, Regina [Regina Harris Trotter], very smart student as well. So, so we had, we had a reputation in the community as people who--and again, my, my mother [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] worked in the schools, but she, she knew enough, having gone through high school, and I think she had done some community college, to know that education was always a priority for us. It was a hallmark of our family. And you know, we wanted--you know, the next person in line had to represent, so we had to be accountable educationally, and we, we, we all did well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, and I was fortunate to, to be the valedictorian of my eighth grade class before transitioning to a private school at that point. So, we went from--I went from, from Spensmar to, to Central Elementary, and then the middle school was called Spector. We had a nurse--Mrs. Spector was a nurse. She had died, and so they named our middle school after her, Spector middle school [Spector Junior High School, Wellston, Missouri].
Speaker 1: S-P-E-C-T--?
Speaker 2: O-R.
Speaker 1: O-R, okay.
Speaker 2: O-R.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school or a subject that you excelled in?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of that was mostly general, general subjects. I do remember in, in seventh grade parti- well, spelling was, was my thing. I remember in, in fifth grade, Mrs. Martin's [ph.] class--I don't know why I should remember this so well, at, and, and this was at, at Spector--having spelling contests. And my mom worked in the cafeteria. And, and, and I would often be the only male left standing after the, the spelling contest had gotten into the heat. You know, you see maybe five young girls still up, and I'm still the, the only male. And oftentimes, Mrs. Martin would have to call a draw because I would not lose. You know, so then I remember last--the last contest I remember she had me spell denominator. She said, "If, if John [HistoryMaker John Harris] can spell denominator, then it's a draw, because this will go on forever." All the girls were still standing there and, and me. And so I spelled denominator, and that was it. And so, and that's the way it always went. So spelling was always something; I'm pretty much a stickler for spelling. Now, as an instructor, my kids will tell you that spelling is all--and language has always been something that have been of great interest to me. I think later that, that, that love went to a higher level. In seventh grade I had a teacher named Mr. Riley [ph.], was an older gentleman. He was the assistant principal, African American gentleman. And Mr. Riley made us every day do the eight parts of speech on the board, every day. And so it was our responsibility at a certain time in the day to go up and write the eight parts of speech and the definitions, some part every day. And so, I don't know why he did this, but at some point in time I really fell in love with that, that whole idea, language, eight parts of speech and, and being a stickler for language in that regard. And so, English became something of, of a great love to me, writing; not necessarily reading. I have never considered myself an avid reader, though, though now I read a lot more than I used to when I was younger. Unlike today, with my children, we were never challenged to read novels, mostly, you know, as a sports fan, mostly magazines, excuse me, newspaper and so forth. But languages has always been something that as of great interest, 'cause I wasn't really adept at math. I could never find myself being very good at math, other than the basic stuff--language, spelling, English, reading, writing, those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 564364
Speaker 1: --Now did you have any other mentors in the neighborhood? Were you part of a boys club or Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or any, anything like that?
Speaker 2: We had a number of sports teams. When we moved from Derby [Avenue] to Irving [Avenue], that's another street in, in Wellston [Missouri], more toward the city [St. Louis, Missouri]. There was a Salvation Army community center located in that area, matter of fact, in the middle of the block. And the Salvation Army allowed us the opportunity to play ba- organized sports. We had a softball team there; we had a basketball team there. And I never played, I had never played organized sports, not like youth football or youth basketball, other than in the, in the school, and so, unlike my kids, who play in Lincoln [Nebraska]. They play, you know, midget football. They play organized basketball in recs. We never had a YMC [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] rec team, but we did have a same--Salvation Army rec team. And then there were some community teams, strictly softball teams that you could get on. I didn't do Boy Scouts, though, though there was, I think those kinds of things were available. For, for whatever reason--I can't remember why. You know, either my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] was at work in the, in the evenings, and so we had to be at home. When she left and went to work, our job was to stay home and wait 'til she got home. And so those afternoon activities or evening activities were things we couldn't be a part of. But we did--I did find myself involved in Salvation Army activities through the community center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and it helped, and that's what helped keep me out of trouble, keep--kept all of us out of trouble. We didn't necessarily have--and again, you talk, talk about mentors; the community was our mentor. Again, we're, we're, we moved from one neighborhood on Derby to another community neighborhood on, on, on Irving. And so, what you have, you have the Sloanes [ph.]; you have the Crenshaws [ph.]; you have the Fords [ph.]; you have the Claires [ph.], and so you have, again, another block of people that is a, is a neighborhood. And so there are men, strong men. Mr. Claire was--we, we lived in a duplex, and so Mr. Claire was my neighbor. My dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.] wasn't present every day, but Mr. Claire was. And so I found some solace and some leadership from his fatherhood. He was a, a solid, solid citizen, beautiful Christian man, right there for his wife, right there for his kids. And this was, this was his, his, his--I think his first wife died, so he married again. And so his, his older kids, who were all grown, would come by and be a part of the, this, this new family, and so, again, a big family. And he was always, kind of was a mentor by default, because I, I, I grabbed onto him. Now we did have a, a gentleman who was a part of our school, Mr. Hopkins [ph.]. He was my sister, Regina's [Regina Harris Trotter] teacher when she was in school. And he gravitated kind of to our family, first with her, and then he was available in the community to offer jobs to us as young men, and opportunities for us to put a little money in our pocket, and provided some role modeling for us.
Story_ID: 564365
Speaker 1: Now, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think sociological history tends to show that around the time that you were growing up we started losing male figures in the household, because that, there, there was a time when most black households even had, had the father, a mother, and everybody was in the household together.
Speaker 2: Oh, indeed.
Speaker 1: But, but that started to kind of, started to disappear in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Well, on, on Derby [Avenue], all the fathers were there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --as far as I can remember. Mr. Ramey [ph.] was there; my dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.] was there before the divorce; Mr. Perry [ph.] was there; Mr. Denman [ph.] was there; Mr. Carol [ph.] was there before he died; Mr. Wafford [ph.] was there, so, so that, that's right. On Derby, every father was there. And then on Irving [Avenue], my father wasn't there; Mr. Sloane [ph.] wasn't there; Mr. Cren- Ms. Crenshaw [ph.] had a live-in boyfriend, Isaac [ph.] I believe his name was; Mr. Ford [ph.] wasn't there. So, so it was just the opposite on the street that I moved to. And it was interesting, that's an interesting dynamic, how, in, in that short a span of time--I graduated from, from, from high school [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri] in, in 19--well, it would have been 1979. But when I went to a private school I have to go back a grade. So, so in '74 [1974], '75 [1975]-ish era, it moved quickly from--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --just what you're talking about to no fathers around really at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Mr. Claire [ph.] became the, the father basically of the block, of the block, as a, as a man who was, again, there every day, a solid citizen. He, he took his son hunting. I didn't know a--do a lot of hunting. I didn't necessarily--I wasn't necessarily an outdoorsy kind of kid. My dad tried to take me fishing one time over in Alton, Illinois. It was a bad, bad experience, and so I never wanted to go back. He took us under some--I don't know. The area he took us was just was not favorable, and so, but I did end up going--doing some outdoorsy things, camping with the Salvation Army. They took us to these different Christian camps, got us out in the open spaces and so forth but not a whole lot of that, in terms of the love of nature, the love of the outdoors and so forth. But Mr. Claire, as he would go--take his son hunting, they'd come back with these squirrels, you know. They'd throw them on the grill, and they're eating, we're eating wild squirrel, you know, and so forth. And so that was some of the kind of things he did. He was a, he, you know, he was a, a guy from the rural community and a good old, old, you know, black man who liked a lot of different things, horseshoe pitching and so forth. So we got a love for all those kinds of things, and I got my love for grilling from him.
Story_ID: 564366
Speaker 1: Now where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I left--again, I'm living in Wellston [Missouri], and I graduated from eighth grade at Spector middle school [Spector Junior High School, Wellston, Missouri]. And Mr. Hopkins [ph.], again, the gentleman I mentioned earlier, had, had come to my, my mother [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] with a proposition. His daughter had been working I think as a teacher in the St. Louis Public Schools and was working with a private school in west St. Louis County [Missouri] called Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri]. It was a, a school run by Benedictine monks. And she had been working to move young men from the St. Louis city schools into this private school arena. And initially, and wasn't having a whole lot of success with it. And so, when I got to the eighth grade and graduated and I was on my way to high school, she approached Mr. Hopkins about the possibility of some guys from Wellston taking advantage of the opportunity that she was trying to afford these guys from the city. And so he, he thought of me and maybe some others, but particularly me. And he talked my mom into the possibility of me going to a private school way out from my, my home. And so we talked about it, and this was in an era of course where, you know, kids didn't have opinions. My mom, if my mom thought this was what was right, best for me, this is what I was going to do. And so we ended up taking the test at two specific private schools to see if I was academically up to speed. And, and that was a tough, tough thing because we hadn't had a, a very strong, hard curriculum back in Wellston. It was good enough to get us by. And I took the test at Country Day School [St. Louis Country Day School; Mary Institute and St. Louis Country Day School, St. Louis, Missouri] and at Priory, and I was accepted at Priory for entry into their, their eighth grade. Actually, I was in the eighth grade, going to the ninth, and, and because of my academic background, or the lack of, thereof, I was accepted into the eighth grade again, so I went back to the eighth grade again on my--before I started high school at the Priory. So, I went from eighth grade to eighth grade in the fall of '75 [1975]--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And then I left eighth grade and then went into the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --high school there the following year.
Speaker 1: Great. So how, how far was it away from home?
Speaker 2: About, it was about a twenty minute drive, twenty-five minute drive from home every day. I initially started--when I started in the, in the eighth grade, this, this was a change for my whole family. My dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.] did not want me to go to this school. You know, it was the whole white people thing. It was--and he wasn't a, a staunch education proponent. And so, though, you know he need--he knew we needed high school, he knew we needed a certain level of education, he didn't think that this was a, a great idea for me. And so I think--
Speaker 1: So, so did he, he mistrust people that were educated on some level or, or, or--
Speaker 2: You know, I, I can't speak really now as to why he, he opposed this. He, he just didn't think--you know, he wasn't really involved in the decision. And so when, when it came down--the fact that this was something that was going to happen for me, he was just opposed to it. And, but it was going to happen. My mom wanted it to happen. They accepted me, and they were trying to work out the funds. Again, this was not a free school. Back in '76 [1976], there was a, a, a tuition of about fifteen hundred dollars or so. It was not the money we had. My mom was a cook. And I, if I'm correct, I don't think she, she made more than fifteen thousand dollars a year at any given time. And so, out of--you know, you, you got six kids--five kids--yeah, six kids at home. You're making fifteen thousand dollars. You're working two jobs. And I think at this point my, my broth- my oldest brother [Chris Harris] and my second oldest sister [Regina Harris Trotter] are now in college or on their way to college. So, so and, and, so these things are going on. But I ended up but going to this school, this private school, and they worked out the details, at least initially, to keep me there through my eighth grade and then into the first two years of high school, until the money became an issue, because you had to buy everything. You had to buy your books; you had to buy your athletic equipment; you had to buy incidentals and so forth. And so we found a way--my mom found a way to, to make it work somehow. And then my junior year I had to leave.
Story_ID: 564367
Speaker 1: Now, let me just talk about the school [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri] a little bit. Now who was--what was the--was it a--
Speaker 2: It was a Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Was it mainly a white school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pre- predominantly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --white Catholic school--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --run by monks who had come to the United States from, from England. They started back in the '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s]--and, and a college prep level school that would send guys to col- all the best colleges across the United States, guys of, of, of every race, actually.
Speaker 1: Now was this like a--I imagine it was some level of culture shock, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --attending this, this school.
Speaker 2: Well, in the, in the worst way. Here I am coming from the hood, if you will, going out to this private school. Again, religious differences; I'm raised in the Pentecostal denomination. Now I'm going into Catholic and so forth, not really understanding the, the, the doctrinal issues associated with that. It was an all-male school, which was something I was not in favor of, but again, I didn't have much of a choice. Athletically, they were substandard. They had, the--in football, they had, they had actually won the state championship I think in '71 [1971] or '72 [1972]. Basketball, which was my best sport, they hadn't won a game in two years, so they were 0 and 51 at the high school level. And, and here I am thinking, you know, this is gonna be the high school basketball team that I play for for four years or whatever years I would play. And in Wellston [Missouri], where all my friends were, you know, we were gonna have a, you know, really good team. I mean we had some great players, the guys I played with every day. I mean these guys could flat out play, and, and I'm not gonna be able to play with them 'cause I'm going to this private school. And so, yeah, that was, all of that was, was depressing (laughter), at best. It was not the, the way you would want to go into an educational opportunity. But the, the flip side of that is it was, it was outstanding school academically, and if I could find a way to, to, to get there and survive, the course of my life would be drastically changed.
Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you do there? I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, initially--well, first, the first challenge was mental, was psychological, because I was a smart kid. I, I mean it was, it was obviously--obvious from my, my work in Wellston that I could grasp information. I was obviously one of the top students in my school district [Wellston School District], which, which didn't mean much to them--it--to some degree. You know, this was a school where now I'd be taking French; I'd be taking Latin; I'd be taking algebra; I'd be taking all of the course that I probably should have been taking in Wellston. But with, but in this smaller district, school district, with a different academic mindset, it just wasn't happening. And so, but these kids were getting a high level of education. You know, you've got doctors and lawyers' sons and sons here. You got people, you know, in business. So all the, all the St. Louis [Missouri] upper crust folks are going to these kinds of schools, and here I am with them. And so the question is, you know, why am I here? Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies], the, the heiress to the Busch beer thrown empire, they're going there. The, the, the owner of--the sons of the owner of the football Cardinals [St. Louis Cardinals; Arizona Cardinals], their sons are going there. So, again, I'm thinking, why am I here? And so the first challenge was really mental. Did I really deserve to be here? What were the expectations for me here? Can I, can I achieve at the level of, of the rest of these privileged white boys and privileged black boys too? You know, so, so, so I had one of my classmates was a doctor's son. One of the young men, on the underclassmen was a doctor's son. Again, some upper crust black folks had kids there too. And so, again, the question was, you know, why was I here? And I often thought maybe it was because I could play basketball. Maybe they saw something in me academically, not only academically but athletically that might help change the course of, of what they were doing athletically as well. So, I kind of invested my initial mindset into, okay, do well enough to, to make it, but when you get your chance to play, that's where you're gonna shine, and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's exactly what happened.
Story_ID: 564368
Speaker 1: So I survived the eighth grade (laughter) with, you know, French, Latin, you know, algebra, you know, made it; had to go to summer school freshman year. Ah, I had, I had an experience--yeah, freshman year at Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri] it was tough; it was tough; it was tough, again, the whole mental thing, knowing I got homework, you know, going from a place where I didn't have homework every night to having three, four, five classes with homework every night, just time management issues, taking the responsibility to, to take advantage of this opportunity. Obviously, you're a young kid. You're not, not as mature. My mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] wasn't home, and so I didn't have academic accountability. And so if I wanted to do what I did, I did it. And then I was--you know, it was a struggle, you know, stuff I had not learned before. So I'm trying to grasp all of this, and plus, I had to go to school at 4:30 every morning 'cause it was the only way I could get there.
Speaker 2: How did you, how did you manage? Did you have any--were there, were there any, any people at, at, at Priory that stepped up to try to help you--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --you know, in that--
Speaker 1: No. It was, it was, it was, you know, survival of the fittest, you know. It, it was, it was an opportunity. You know, this was a big sacrifice for my family, for my mother, for my siblings, 'cause we weren't--if to pay tuition at this school, meant that we would be minus some things. Now we, we didn't have a whole lot, but that, it would mean maybe not, no new clothes for Easter. It would mean less Christmas presents. And so to take money away from my family to send me to this school, was a significant a thing I think as my mom had done at all. My dad [Eugene Harris, Jr.] I don't think was helping out a whole lot with his child support. And so the, the people at Priory made a decision that they were gonna support me to the degree that they could with scholarship information. My mom had to come up with the rest. And so, so the challenge of letting her down here was, was huge, because, you know, it wasn't necessarily about me. At that point it was about, you know, my mama. Mom has done a lot to get me here in this position, so you know, you, you gotta make it happen. And so it, it was tough; it was tough; it was tough, and nobody really stepped up. There was an expectation that I, you know, if I, if I'm there obviously I should be there; I should get it. And it was a struggle.
Story_ID: 564369
Speaker 1: Now were there other black students--well, I, I suppose there were since they were trying to make an effort to recruit--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --black students from St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: I had--
Speaker 1: Did, did, did you all bond together some kind of way, or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I had, I had one young man who was from a community close to where I was from. Carl Smith [ph.] was his name, short African American kid. He was with me in the eighth grade. And I had a, another kid from the more upper crust community, William Adams [Bill Adams]. William was a good, good young man, but his family was more well off than, than Carl's and mine was. And Carl had a brother at a, another grade up higher. They did not survive the school for some, whatever reason--I--maybe financially or whatever, or just they decided that that wasn't the place for them. William and I did become friends, maybe not close, close friends, because Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri], we had levels of, of--kind of a caste system. All the top students were in A-set. The, the little bit lev- lower students were in B-set, and then the, the, the, the students at the lowest level were at C, and I was in the C-set. William was in B-set. And then, but there were some overlap. Like, for instance, in French, which was my best subject, I would be in B, but all the others, I would be C. And so, so, and William pretty much was in B-set. And so, there was this kind of caste system academically in the school among, in our, in our own grades. And so the, the, the smart, smart top of the line guys were in the A-set. They didn't, they didn't kind of frolic with B and C very much. B and C kind of frolicked with each other, and then C-set was kind of the, the, the underlings, you know (laughter). We, we were the castaways. But, but in, but, but in a school like this, that's okay, because at the highest level, you're doing, you're doing work at a higher level than schools anywhere else. And so to be in--to graduate thirty-five out of thirty-six, which is what happened for me, I could go to any school in the country. But again, it was a struggle.
Story_ID: 564370
Speaker 1: I found racism there [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri]. I found--I remember one situation, a young man, who was a white guy, kid who was from the other side of the tracks, if you will, he and I kind of bonded together, and his name was Bob [ph.]. And I remember one day during a lunchtime I was coming down from lunch, and Bob and another kid were kind of roughhousing. And I come down the steps, and they push up in to me. And so my immediate reaction was just to kind of push them off. And then Bob turned to me, looked at me with all venom he could, say, called me, he said, "You effing nigger." And, and the only person at that point I thought I had made a connection with, then I was all alone. I thought, you know, Bob was from the other side of the tracks. He and I culturally had had some connection. And at this point he distanced himself from me. And at that point I knew I was alone. I knew it wasn't nobody else. It was just me. It was me and everybody else. And so, I kind of treated it that way, tried to, tried to, to, make some connections with some kids but never really too close to anybody. It was an interesting place because there, there were, there were kids there with such diversity of experiences. I mean their families, most of their families were pretty well to do. And this one young man I found an allegiance with because he loved music. His name was Tom, Tom Overhill [ph.]. And Tom obviously had parents who listened to these old crooning records. And Tom used to come by--come down the hall singing this one song that used to grate on me every single day. It's called 'I'll Get By' ['I'll Get By (As Long As I Have You)']. I don't know if you've ever heard it.
Speaker 2: How does it go?
Speaker 1: Tom used to sing it. He, he'll, he, he'd walked down the hall and he'd say (singing), "I'll get by as long as I have you. There may be rain and darkness too. I won't complain. I'll see it through. Poverty may come to me it's true, but what can I say? I'll get by as long as I have you." And he used to sing it every single day. It's a song, I found out, by a gentleman named Ed Ames. Ed Ames used to sing this song back in the crooning era. And Tom's parents obviously had this song and many others.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed, Ed Ames, he played the Indian [Native American], Mingo, in 'Daniel Boone'--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--
Speaker 2: --on TV. He was, he was, he was an Indian, American Indian.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so Ed Ames used to sing this song, I found out now, and Tom used to sing. And he, and he would do it on purpose. He would, and he would, and he would walk down the hall. And I call him a real good friend of mine now. But when I was in school, Tom used to come by and go (singing), "Spear chucker," and call me these, you know (singing), "Black Sambo, spear chucker, wannabe," and he would, he would do this all the time. I wanted kill him. I just wanted to flat out just kill him, but he was a smallish guy, and I knew I--if anything happened to him I'd be in big trouble. And so, you know, he would do this all the time. And I'd call him (singing), "White honky sucker, sucker, white honky." You know, he'd give it to me, and I'd give it right back to him. And, and, and, it would, it, and it was a kind of a, after a while it kind of became just a jest because, you know, I didn't think he was trying to really hurt my feelings. But he would do it to me; I'll do it to him. And I'm thinking, that's stupid.
Speaker 2: It was so stupid it just--
Speaker 1: It was so stupid. It was really stupid. (Singing) "Spear chucker wannabe, sucker, suck," you know he'd be going--where'd you get this from? But, but, but, but this, this 'I'll Get By' became a, a connection for us. And so one day at assembly, we'd, we'd have these chapels. And one of the great joys for me at that school was that since I wasn't Catholic, I didn't have to go to Mass. And so while the rest of the school was at Mass, I'd be just roaming around the, the grounds (laughter), you know, doing whatever I whatever I wanted to be--do. But, but one day they asked us to sing this song at, at, at chapel. And so, Tom and I got up there, and sure enough, it--so we start doing it after a while. Through our high school life we did it together. And, and so, so, so there were some moments of, of, of great satisfaction for me. That, that song is something actually I ended up singing at a piano bar. When I was, had graduated from college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], I used to frequent this piano bar in Central West End [St. Louis, Missouri] and asked the piano guy if he knew the song. I just felt like I wanted to hear it.
Story_ID: 564371
Speaker 1: Now, you have a decent voice. Did, did you sing much, or did you reali- did, did, did you take advantage of that talent--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in high school.
Speaker 2: --more so now than, than then. But let me, let me do something. Let me rehash something real quick from, from, from Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri]. One of the things that I, that I do remember about this school was that we, you know, with, with it being a Catholic school, there was, there was a lot of greats there in some respects for me, because, and, and, and some, some, sometimes I felt they were really trying to get me because I was the kid from the hood. I remember one time at lunch--no, in eighth grade--we had a bunch of kids suspended from the school. And I thought all these kids were so much better than me. Again, the mental aspect of it was, was great, the psychological place that I had put myself in, in, in terms of inferiority. There was no way I could match up with these guys. But I was no criminal, you know. I didn't had, I, I didn't have any record. I had never been incar- I had never been locked up. I never had those kinds of things as a part of my background. And so, in eighth grade, we're out on a campout. We had these, we had acres on this, on this--this school had a lot of acres, so we actually camped out on the school grounds, in the, in the woods. And so, Tom [Tom Overhill (ph.)] and I again, even from eighth grade, we're, we're, we're in the campout, and these guys are out there before the fire. And one of the, the classmates, Richard Pfeifer--his father [Carl Pfeifer, Sr.] owned a bakery, Pfeiffer's bakery in Clayton, Missouri, one of the great bakeries in St. Louis [Missouri]. He brought six boxes full of donuts. These--and I think there were seventy-two donuts or two dozen donuts or whatever in each box. So he stacked them up. And the next thing you know, Tom and I grabbed a box and went into a tent and just started eating until we fell asleep. We just, we ate donuts until we just fell out, fell out. The next day--no, the next Monday--this was on a Saturday--the next Monday we all get called into the office, yours truly first. It, it appears that, that some of the kids on the campout had been smoking marijuana, a lot of marijuana, a lot of marijuana. But the first person they pull in is me. I had never smoked marijuana in my life, even to this, to this point in my life, forty-six years old. And so, I'm thinking, why you guys think it was me? Come to find out, that there were four or five guys on the campout, eighth grade students, eighth grade, who had been smoking marijuana and ended up getting expelled from school. But it was that kind of thing, oftentimes, whenever something happened of a, a negative social nature, I had to be the one involved. We had a young man at, at one, one lunchtime we had when I was in high school. Somebody had thrown--we had these tables. There's a headmaster table. Somebody threw a hot dog into the, onto the headmaster's table. Well, that's really not a problem. The problem was that it, it was in a condom. And so you're flinging hot dogs across the cafeteria. It lands right in the bowl of hot dogs that's on the headmaster's table. So lunch is over. They call people into the office. Guess who they called first, you know? You know, it had, I had to be--somehow, I had to be the one with the condoms.
Story_ID: 564372
Speaker 1: You were saying during the break that you were not perfect at school [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri]. You did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know--
Speaker 1: --some things.
Speaker 2: --I did some things, you know.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: The, the hot dog in the condom was not mine, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Smoking marijuana on the campout was not mine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the hot dog in a condom, now that, you know, being in an integrated setting in high school myself, I know that doesn't sound like a black prank. That sounds like a white prank--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --more. I mean you can almost typify it. Black people wouldn't do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I and I definitely didn't it though we were always--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --but the, the selection of, of people was pick was, was narrow, you know. And so, you know, who, why would these boys have condoms? You know, you're from the city [St. Louis, Missouri]; you gotta have them. No, I didn't have any. But, but, but you know, again, I was not without some, some pranks. You know, I was, I was on the football team; I was on the basketball team, and I was pretty, pretty fast back then, and I would, I would go by and knock guys' books out of their hands and keep running. They could never catch me. And so, I remember one time Tom Overhill [ph.], the guy, again, Tom was, he and I had this ongoing thing where he would try to get me. I would always knock his book out, and he was, he was just bent on getting me back. And so, everywhere I'd--you know, we'd be looking around the corner. I'd be looking for him; he'd be looking for me. And most often I would get him all the time. And so this one particular time in French class, Tom was, was bent on getting me. So he walked out of class first, and I knew what he was doing. He was trying to set me up. And so what I did was, I allowed the French teacher, Father Benedict [ph.], to go first. And so, we walked, we're, we're walking out of the door, and I got my arm around Father Benedict, and I'm talking to him in French. And, and I knew, as soon as we stepped out of the door Tom was gonna come running by. And sure enough, Father Benedict walked his arms right out of--hold his, his stuff right out the door, and Tom thinks it's me. And he comes by, (makes noise) and knocks all of his papers, books, all of his stuff all over the place, stuff flying in the air. And here I come walking out after Father Benedict. And Tom comes running by, "Gotcha." And Father Benedict calls him back. He call--and we all go back. He and, he and I and Tom go back into the room, and he, he take--chalks up an eraser. He takes an eraser and just keeps chalking it up, chalking it up. And he just gets Tom by the head and just plasters his face with this eraser full of chalk, just (makes noise), just, just, just pounds him with this eraser full of chalk. And it makes him even more white than he already was. And so I, you know, I was, I was not without some mischief. On, on occasion I would open up a student's book during a test and then point to the book to show this student who was cheating. And so (laughter), so, it was those kind of things, but, but you know, marijuana and, and condoms, was not my thing (laughter). But you know, so it was not a place without, without some joy for me. I just wish those, those, those stories were, were greater than the others.
Story_ID: 564373
Speaker 1: Now what happened though when you were a junior that, that you left the school?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I think that was a financial issue primarily. The tuition continued to rise. My mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] was just not in a position to be able to pay, and so I transferred to Cleveland High School [Cleveland Junior Naval Academy] in south St. Louis [Missouri]. My sister and I were gonna be going to--all my other siblings were going to public high schools in St. Louis. My two older siblings, Chris [Chris Harris] and Regina [Regina Harris Trotter], were going to Beaumont [Beaumont High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. My sister under me, Chrystal [Chrystal Harris Greer], she was going to go with, to Cleveland with me. And then, but, and then her, her and my other sister [Lisa Harris Hampton] ultimately ended up going to Soldan [Soldan High School; Soldan International Studies High School, St. Louis, Missouri], because they were using my dad's [Eugene Harris, Jr.] address to go to a different school. My mom didn't want them to stay in Wellston [Missouri]. They--she wanted them to get a better education I believe, and so she sent them to the city schools, using my dad's address. And so, and then they ended up doing well. They ended up doing well. And so, so--
Speaker 1: So Cleveland has to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) financial issues--Cle- Cleveland was--and now Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri] had already been in a week. It was a private school, so it started earlier than all the other schools. So Priory had been in for a week already, and the second week of school was the first week I was gonna start at Cleveland. So we ride the bus to south St. Louis, and here I am in this big mass of humanity. Now you got to understand that a private school like Priory, you're really pampered. And so, something as simple as getting your lunch, we didn't get our lunch. The lunch was already there. So we walk in, stand at the table, the lunch would be on the table. Our simple job would be, if we wanted more lunch, to take our bowl back up to the, the place where the food was being distributed for seconds, pizza, chili mac, whatever it was. So we never went through a lunch line. So, so for three years I had never been to a lunch line. So my first day at Cleveland, you know, I go to a couple of classes, and then it's time for lunch, and I don't know how to go to the lunch line. You I get this, get the tray. I'm standing there. I'm just totally confused. I don't even know how to get my own lunch, and so I decided not to eat. So I didn't even eat lunch, I was so confused about what to do. And then, then I had a couple more classes. It was, it was a very frustrating day. I mean, 'cause culturally I had been use to Priory for these three years, eighth, ninth, and tenth. And now I'm headed--I'm in eleventh grade, and I don't know how you even get my own lunch, 'cause I never had to do it for three years. And so, so I get home, and my mom says that there's a call from Priory. And I said, "Well what's it about?" They, they told her not to send me back to Cleveland. Now interesting, remember, I talked to you, I told you that Priory had not won any basketball games for two years. My freshman year we won our first game in two years, my very first game we won. We were three and eighteen. My second year, my sophomore year, and I, I started on varsity these two years. My second year we were a tournament team. We were a district team. We won fourteen games, and we won two tournament trophies. So we had a really great team my sophomore year. I mean we were on the way up. You know, we had won more games in two years, you know, three the first year, seventeen games. They hadn't seen that many--those kind of wins. So we were definitely a team on the rise. And, and so, I, I think they saw some of that, and plus, I think they cared about me at some level. And so they told me not to go back to Cleveland. And so the next day, Tuesday, I didn't go back. I went back to Priory the following day, Wednesday. And I was already a week and a half behind (laughter). And so, what I think happened is that someone made a decision to pay for my education, to invest in me, and I think it was one of my coaches. Nobody has, has told me who it was. I'm, I've got a sense I think of who it is. But, but I'm just thankful that somebody did it. And you know, I wouldn't be here right now if somebody had not thought enough of me and what I could be to invest in me at that time.
Story_ID: 564374
Speaker 1: So you, you did your, your, the rest of your junior year and your senior year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The junior year--
Speaker 1: --at, at, at Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had some difficulty, I mean academically. I had--I was--I had to sit out of a couple of games for academic ineligibility. I was just dogging it. I was getting close to, to graduating I thought, and I, I just started--I got on cruise control. I was just so happy that I was gonna be leaving there, you know. The time there was, was going to be coming to an end, and, and I didn't, I didn't rev it up like I should have. Again, it, it's, it's, it's about that academic accountability. It's about that push, you know. Yeah, my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] cared about me, yeah, but, but it was only so much she could do. She had other kids, and there was no, nobody there telling me: okay, listen, you need to get this figured out; you need to get this done; you need to get these papers done; you need to get that, to a degree, but not at the level that, that spurred me to really get it done the way it should have been done. And so, so, you know, I got it done to the, to the degree that I could.
Speaker 1: Now, now, now you were like a point guard on the basketball team?
Speaker 2: I was--I started--my first year I was the off guard; I was the shooting guard. And then the last three years I was the point guard.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did you do the last two years? I mean how, how did they do?
Speaker 2: Junior year, again, yeah, the so--there were some struggles. I mean I had had a--my junior year I think I was having some, you know, personal crisis of leadership. You know, I was, I was the veteran member of the team, and I, and I was still, you know, one of the youngest players. Most of the guys who were on the team with me were seniors. I was a junior, and they were seniors, but they had played at a level down from me years before. So I was a veteran. I was a three year starter and, but I was still pra- one of the younger guys on the team. In class wise I was the youngest. I was a, I was a junior; everybody else was a senior. And so, so, you know, I, I didn't, I didn't ascend to leadership. I remember one game I actually ended up not going to the game because I think it was travel issues. You know, I lived far away from the school, and something happened where I, I missed the game. And I remember one of the, the black players from East St. Louis [Illinois], Jimmy Williams [ph.], he pulled me off to the side and just chewed me out the next day at school. I just figured they didn't--if wasn't no big deal, you know. So what I missed a game. So what, who, who cares? And Jimmy pulled me off to the side, because it was a reflection on the, on the black players too, you know, not just on, on being at Priory.
Speaker 1: On the black students--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, with, with thinking like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where is the guy that represents us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, you're the lead-- he, and he pulled me off. He said, "You're leader of this team." He says, "You were the leader. You've been here." He said, "You, you cannot not show up. You have to be here." And oh, I mean I'll never forget him, him, him, his willingness to do that. And Jimmy wasn't a regular player. He didn't start. He was a talented kid. You know, he was kind of the guy who, who had all the moves, but you know, in the, in the, in the team game he wouldn't flourish. But he, but he had all the, the individual tools you can imagine. And so, you know, playing a one on one game with him, you know, he was a great player, but in the team concept, I was a, I was, you know, a better player. And, but he pulled me off to the side and chewed my butt out that day, and I never forgot that. And if I ever--you know, I haven't seen him since high school. And if I did, I, I definitely will remind him and thank him for that little chewing out he gave me, because, because you know, you ascend to leadership in many different ways. And I remember back when I was in elementary school. I think about it now because as a speaker and a person who does, does a lot of motivational speaking and presentations about leadership and what it means now to reflect on the different times I got leadership. You know, I led, I led the band in first grade. You know, they chose me. In seventh grade Mr. Riley [ph.] gave me the keys to the gym [at Spector Junior High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. He was the assistant principal. He gave his keys to the gym to a student to open the gym and so forth. And I said man, that's leadership. And then, and then, you know, being a leader on the, on this team, as a, a person, I just had not accepted it as my team. I hadn't ex- I hadn't accepted the position of leadership, though I was in that position. And Jimmy reminded me that, you know, you're the leader, so be the leader, and stop looking for somebody else to be the leader. You know, you're the one with the experience. You're the one with, with the position and so forth. So, I remember that quite vividly. But senior year, yeah, it was, it was, those last two years were a struggle. They were really a, a struggle personally; they were, they were a struggle academically. And my, my only hope was to get out, and thank god I did (laughter); I got out.
Story_ID: 564375
Speaker 1: Okay, so, when, when you were on the verge of graduating from Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri], what were your college prospects? What, what did you--
Speaker 2: Well, thank god there were many. Again, my, my favorite subject was French, and my, my goal was to be a French interpreter. I thought, I thought, you know, I loved French. I mean I hadn't had any of it before, of course, I got there. But as I, as I got there and, and began to enjoy the language, the French language, I really fell in love with it. And I thought, you know, this would be a great career path for me. French is obviously my best subject. If I can go to college, major in French, then I can possibly--I had always wanted to maybe go to Africa. I thought Africa, as a great French speaking population, maybe I can find my way into the government as an ambassador or, or a representative of the U.S. to Africa as an interpreter or something like that. And, and so that was, that was my very weak career ambition. The prospects that I had, I had an opportunity to go to the University of Missouri, Columbia [Missouri]. Saint Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], of course, I applied there. University in Arkan- of Arkansas [University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Arkansas], I loved their basketball team and the Razorbacks, I fell in love with them watching them on television, Ron Bewer- Brewer [Ron Brewer], Sidney Moncrief, Marvin Delph. I mean I just loved those guys. And I thought, man, I need to be a Razorback. I need to go to Arkansas. Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, Sound Bend, Indiana] was an option for me, any number of other schools. And so, so I had a, I had nice list, I mean thirty-five out of thirty-six, and this at Priory, is a, is a top student anywhere else. I mean I had, I had algebra, statistics, geometry, trigonometry, language, French, Latin, the whole deal. So, so my resume, my academic transcript was rich, you know, whether I got a C, or a B, or an A, or whatever, and so I could go anywhere I really wanted. Money was an issue, and so I had to go somewhere that was financially feasible. And so that, that began to narrow itself down to three specific schools: Saint Louis University, University of Missouri in Columbia, and Arkansas. And then those too were narrowed down as the weeks drew near to the University of Missouri and then to Arkansas. And so as I was bandying about the possibilities, even up until the last few weeks, the University of Missouri ended up winning because just on pure financial, the financial reality--
Speaker 1: Did, did, did they offer you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) being close enough to home.
Speaker 1: --a, a basketball scholarship or--
Speaker 2: Well, there was--well, actually, well, let's--as, as you rewind there, I had actually been physically, physically--by the time my senior year came, physically I was, I was in bad shape. My knees were in bad shape. The beating that I had taken early on at football had hurt my knees, and physically I just wasn't there. And then I was having the onset of that exercise induced asthma. And so, I was having problems, pra- some problems I didn't know about. And then, from the neighborhood I had started to smoke, something I, I, I, I didn't like very much when I saw it initially. And I don't know why I even started to smoke, but I actually had, had started to smoke. And I think that took a toll on me as well. You know, here I am, a guy who had no sign- no smoking in my body, and then about my sophomore, maybe my junior year, I just kind of gravitated to it because of what was in my neighborhood. You know, some of these folks in the neighborhood smoked, and I would--I was just a casual, you know, puffer. And somehow, it became something that I, I--a habit I gravitated to. And I think that also hurt me as well, in terms of my respiratory situation. But the guys who were looking at me as a, as a junior--senior year was just not a good year. I didn't play football, kind of focused in on basketball, just health wise, and just got hurt, and it just was not--it was down the tubes athletic year for me.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1980? Is that--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980] instead of '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, because you spent that extra year, yeah.
Speaker 2: Had to go that extra year. That, and that was a psychological problem for me as well, because, you know, I was, I was gonna be a member of the class of '79 [1979]. You know, I was excited about that early on. And now, a lot of the people who were behind me were clo- had caught up with me. And my sister [Chrystal Harris Greer], who was two grades behind me, was on, now only one grade behind me. And so, yeah, that was a problem; that was a problem. You know, I was supposed to have been a '79 [1979] graduate; end up being an '80 [1980] graduate. But you know, that's just the way it went.
Story_ID: 564376
Speaker 1: So University of Missouri at Columbia, Missouri. So, is, is there another campus for the University of Missouri?
Speaker 2: There're actually, three, three campuses.
Speaker 1: When people think about the University of Missouri (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, four campuses.
Speaker 1: What's, what's the main campus that people think about?
Speaker 2: They're thinking about University of Missouri in Columbia.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I thought, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a Missouri- University of Missouri campus in St. Louis [University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]; there's a university campus in Kansas City [University of Missouri - Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri]; there's a university campus in Rolla, Missouri [Missouri University of Science and Technology]. That's more of the engineering school, but there are four of them.
Speaker 1: Those are the other University--
Speaker 2: Yeah, those are the four campuses.
Speaker 1: --of Missouri campuses (laughter).
Speaker 2: When you're talking about Mizzou--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --University of Missouri--
Speaker 1: All right
Speaker 2: --you're talking about the University of Missouri--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Columbia, and to the chagrin of all the rest (laughter). But, that's same, same thing as in Nebraska. You think about the University of Nebraska-Lincoln [Lincoln, Nebraska]. There's, there's the medical center [University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska], there's Kearney [University of Nebraska - Kearney, Kearney, Nebraska], and there's uni- and Omaha [University of Nebraska - Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], so there's four campuses as well. But when you're talking about University of Nebraska, you're talking about Lincoln, and so the same thing was true. But my brother [Chris Harris] had attended the University of Missouri before me, my older brother, my second oldest sister [Regina Harris Trotter]. They had both gone to Beaumont High School [St. Louis, Missouri]. Both of them went to the University of Missouri before me, and so, I just--it, it just became something of a legacy issue, really, at that point, as well as the best financial decision for me. There were no sports offers. Again, my coach told me junior year there were some people asking. And then if I was going to play I would have to walk on somewhere. And I just, I didn't have the motivation. I didn't have that. I thought about it. I wanted to walk on and play football for Missouri. I investigated the prospect of it. I found out that the, the walk on program was not a very friendly program. You know, if you weren't recruited, you were the scum of the earth. And, and, and I wasn't ready to go through the hazing that, that, that they told me I was gonna have to go through if I wanted to walk on and play football. I think my, my brother had actually done it. He had actually walked on and, and suited up for the Tigers a couple of times. And he was a good athlete, you know, great baseball player. He played football for Beaumont. So, he was, he was, he was a really good player. I kind of watched him a lot. You know, you talk about mentors, and I'm sorry I didn't mention him earlier. I watched my brother a lot. I followed him around. I followed his baseball team. He, he was--I don't know if you remember the old Pittsburgh Pirates teams, excuse me, with second baseman, David Cash, when they had Manny Sanguillen and Dave Cash and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --all those, all the guys in their heyday. My brother was a, a Dave Cash clone. I mean he, he played, he really played well in baseball. He was a catcher. And I followed him around and, and mar- marveled at, at, at the things he did in baseball. And I would--you know, he really could have been a, I think a really great baseball player had he pursued that. But you know, that just wasn't my lot. And I didn't pursue sports in, in college. I wanted to, but it just didn't happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 564377
Speaker 1: So you were you gonna focus on French and--
Speaker 2: Initially, yeah. I went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --I went to school to be a French interpreter and got talked out of it immediately by my first advisor. Yeah, I mean, you say well, how could that be? Well, it, it, it obviously wasn't--it was something that I had in my mind, but it wasn't something I had in my heart. It was--and so when, when I went to talk to my advisor, this was happening in the first week of my freshman year.
Speaker 1: What was the rationale of the advisor? If you, if you have good grades--
Speaker 2: He had no rationale.
Speaker 1: --in French--
Speaker 2: He said to me--I told him. He said, "Well, what do you want to major?" I said, "French. I want to be a French interpreter." I told him my whole plan, just like I just articulated here. And he said, "You know, I don't know many black French interpreters." He said, "Why don't you try journalism?" Just like that. And so, without any, any real commitment to it, without any real research about what it would take to be a French interpreter, his plan became my plan.
Speaker 1: Now at that time you didn't--did you know anything about the Negritude movement or the black writers of French expression like the Damas [Leon Damas], Cesaire [Aime Cesaire]--
Speaker 2: None of it.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: None of--
Speaker 1: Camara Laye.
Speaker 2: Nothing. I, I had no idea. I, I was, I was going into it blind. It just sounded like something that was a good idea and didn't have any, any model for it, didn't have any precedent for it. It just, you know, I, I put the connection with French and Africa and African American and the whole deal. I thought, you know, thought it--and the travel. You know, being a young man traveling the world, I thought it just sound so, so beautiful.
Speaker 1: Well, he ac- your advisor was actually wrong, but, but as it was, you changed your major to journalism (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I, I--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --went, I went right into journalism--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and immediately began and, and the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] was the top journalism school in the country. And so, as many people they could get into journalism, I guess that was the, the way to go. And so I immediately got into news writing, into all the things that would, that would make you a good journalist at the University of Missouri. And so I started those courses. Of course, now I'm in a, a different, anoth- another cultural transition. I moved from this all-male school [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri], high academic place to the freedom of a college, college life. And so my first major was girls. You know, I figure it's time to make up for lost time. And so, here I am on campus, University of Missouri, it's all about fun and frolicking and having a good time. And so I just started majoring in having a good time. And, and for my first semester, with all these great academic credentials, I, I finally--I mustered a 2.1 grade point average, which they tell me now is good (laughter) for your first year. And, but, but I didn't get them in journalism. And I'm not enjoying it. It was not my plan. It was not the thing that, that I had come to the University of Missouri for--but again, the social life, the, the freedom of being in college. I loved being in college, and then I just happened to have to go to class. So, it was one of those things of, of trying to grow up. I found out how immature I was. I look back now, and I, I realize most of the decisions that I was making in college I probably shouldn't have been making. But, and, and I didn't have any real advice. I probably should have talked to my brother [Chris Harris] and sister [Regina Harris Trotter] about my goal and my plan, but we--but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Now did you see yourself as a print journalist or, or a--
Speaker 2: I didn't see myself as a journalist at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one thing I did know was that I liked sports. And if there was any place for me in journalism or in broadcasting or any of the other mediums, it would be in sports. And so I knew that much, and so I figured that that's the track I have to follow. But again, I remember the day that I decided, you know, this isn't, this isn't gonna work out. Because it all, all became about--in every class it seemed I was in, it was always about getting the, being the, the top spor- story, getting the exclusive, you know, beating out the other guy for the story that, that makes the front page. And so it was a real competitive thing, and, and I just didn't enjoy it. And I remember the day I was watching the news, and there was a court case about a journalist who had dug into Richard Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] trash he had--they had thrown away on the sidewalk. And it was, the, the ruling was that it was okay. Once you throw your trash away, it's public information. And so, you can--a person can come by and dig in your trash and take out whatever they want and do a news story on it. And I thought, that's terrible; that's terrible. And then that--I went in that day and I said you know what? I'm not gonna major in this anymore. And I went and changed, stayed in the same vein so my classes would transfer. And I went into the, the speech communication major, radio/TV/film production. And I thought, this is a place where I can learn the kinds of skills to, to do ultimately what I'd like to do, and that would be sports broadcasting. And so, that's where I spent the rest of my academic life.
Story_ID: 564378
Speaker 1: Now, now, what was the percentage of black students on campus? This is a big campus, big, big school (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we, we had about 3 percent. So we had about twenty, twenty-four thousand students at that time, about eight hundred African American students, so we had about 3 percent. And we had an active student body. We had an active black student body. We had our fraternities and sororities are very--were very active organizations. We had an organization called LBC, the Legion of Black Collegians, very active organization on campus. Yours truly was fortunate to join a fraternity, Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] at that time, and with, with nine other young men, with the idea that for what we saw on campus in terms of the fraternity and sorority life, we, we didn't like it at all. We didn't like their, their combativeness toward one another. You know, we're eight hundred students, and African American students particularly, and we don't need division; we need unity. And, and that's not something we were seeing, and so me and nine other guys joined the fraternity system. We actually rebelled against it, and, and, and that, that wasn't taking very well. We started an in it--an organization called N Phi N, Nu Phi Nu, as a, as a rebellion against the Greek system, the black Greek system at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri]. And we created more problems.
Speaker 1: Nu Phi Nu?
Speaker 2: Nu Phi Nu, we started because it was new. And we were coed. You know, it was, it was, it was a--
Speaker 1: Now was there, there, was there a black student organization on campus at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, several. Yeah, there, there was the Legion of Black Collegians and, and, and every main fraternity and sorority at that time, black fraternity and sorority.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so the Legion of Black Collegians was the, the black student organization (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black student government organization, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and so--
Speaker 1: And what about a black studies department? Did you know any of the people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew--my, my first class was with Dr. Walter Daniel [Walter C. Daniel], who was a part of--who taught African American lit. Then we had another gentleman, Dr. Arvarh Strickland, who's just been memorialized in, in, in a--I think there's a building named after him. I think our arts and science building now is named as Strickland arts and science building [Strickland Hall] at Mizzou.
Speaker 1: Did you know a Dr. Dorsey [Carolyn Dorsey] there? I think she was head of the African American studies department.
Speaker 2: I can't remember her first name, but I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Dr. Dorsey.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's from Dayton [Ohio]. She's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know Dr. Dorsey. I remember Dr. Dorsey very well. And so, yeah, and those individuals were, were people we really were very fond of. She had an af- nice little Afro.
Speaker 1: Tall.
Speaker 2: Yeah, tall woman. Yeah, we enjoyed her. And she hung out with Dr. Strickland all the time. And so these, these individuals were, were, were people who we, we--I know I just really enjoyed being around, gleaning knowledge from them. Dr. Daniel made us learn Claude McKay's poem, 'If We Must Die.' And, and, and my students now at the, at the drop of, of my word to them have to recite that poem in my African American studies class. And I remember the very first day he said to me--because my brother [Chris Harris] and sister [Regina Harris Trotter] had come before me, "Harris [HistoryMaker John Harris], next class I want you to have this poem memorized." And that was in, in 1980, the fall of 1980, and twenty-seven years later I still know it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is the significance of that poem as far as you're concerned? Now this a poem that's written in the 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenties [1920s].
Speaker 1: --twenties [1920s] by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: --Claude McKay--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --during a time when there was a lot of lynching going on in the United States.
Speaker 2: That's right, during the, the red rage, during the summer of, of riots and so forth. And what it means to me, first of all, is that Dr. Daniel was, was mindful, first of all, of, of, of those things that really impacted him. And, and he wanted to pass along that to, to the, the, you know, his predominantly freshman class. And he wanted to give us something that we could carry with us for many, many years to come. And not only the poem, but, but, you know, I went on to research and found out that, that Winston Churchill used this poem to rally the British troops against the Germans. You know, and, and to find out the, the depth of, of the, the contribution this poem has made not just, you know, to African American life, not just to the Harlem Renaissance I mean, but, but on a national, international scale is just compelling. It is unbelievable, and now it's something I challenge my students with. I love, I love this poem; I love it.
Story_ID: 564379
Speaker 1: Okay, we're talking about a poem by the Jamaican, Claude McKay, 'If We Must Die'--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that was used by Churchill [Winston Churchill] during the blitzkrieg, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --when the British thought they were gonna, you know, go, go under. But it wasn't written for the British. It was written for us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and, and Claude McKay, I mean, to, to know about him and to know that he had made a decision to, to write something that was, that was gonna be--that would stand the test of time. Again, like we talk about the music, you know: how do you know what good music is? It's music that, that you could sing when, when it, when it, when it was made and something you can sing long after, you know, it was made, and, and the same is true with 'If We Must Die.' You know, it was, it was the early 1900s when it was written, but it's, it's, it's as relevant and as applicable to the struggle today as at any time. And, and it's something my students have to know.
Speaker 1: You, you gotta give us the poem, then, then tell us like what context does this poem fit into though--the life and the--of, of your students today.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, the poem, for those who, who be watching says, "If we must die -  let it not be like hogs / Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot / While round us bark the mad and hungry dogs / Making their mock at our accursed lot. / If we must die - oh let us nobly die / So that our precious blood may not be shed / In vain; then even the monsters we defy / Shall be constrained to honor us though dead! / Oh Kinsmen! We must meet the common foe; / And though far outnumbered, let us show us brave / And for their thousand blows deal one deathblow! / What though before us lies the open grave? / Like men we'll face the murderous, cowardly pack / Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back!" And yeah, those words, I mean, they send, send a little chill (laughter) down my spine. But what it means to, to share that with my students--and matter of fact, one of my students [at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] in one of her oral presentations did a, an expose on Claude McKay, someone she had never heard about, someone she had not been privy to until such time. Now she's a junior in, in college and had never heard the name Claude McKay, never--and, and, and, and what that does is it, it not only just opens up information about Claude McKay but about the whole Harlem Renaissance, about the whole, the movement of the time, Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes and many, many, many others during that time. It, it opens up an understanding of the, the race riots of the early 1900s. Of course, Omaha [Nebraska] was one of those cities, Tulsa [Oklahoma], East St. Louis [Illinois], I believe Chicago [Illinois]. So, so, so we're talking about a series of connections beyond just the words of the poem itself. And so it just opens up a, a new breadth and a depth of knowledge about various aspects of the African American experience that, that all connected, not only to Claude McKay, but to, to those time periods and events of that time, and things they have to know, things that they must know.
Speaker 1: Okay. And how do students respond to it now, and how do they relate? I, I know at the time it was written, the pictures of lynchings in all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the major black papers, the Courier [Pittsburgh Courier; New Pittsburgh Courier], the Defender [Chicago Defender] and people in the urban cities see these pictures, you know, and a lot, lot, lot of them saw that when they were in the South.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And the poem had a personal, really had a--they knew somebody, or somebody in their family was lynched or maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you--
Speaker 1: --they just escaped it. But what do the kids now think when they, when they read this? What do they--
Speaker 2: Well, we, we--
Speaker 1: --what are they reflecting?
Speaker 2: --we're thinking about this in the context of, of current events. You think about--you know, we're talking about injustice, racial injustice particularly. And right on the heels of, of our--the time we were talking about this in, in our class was the time when they were talking about the boys in Louisiana--
Speaker 1: Jena.
Speaker 2: --the Jena Six, young men and ra- and the, and the rallies and the cries for justice that are yet applicable in 2007. And so, both of those things were going on and as we're talking about the injustice from the nine--early 1900s, 1919, 1920. Here we are in 2007 talking about racial justice, talking about the law, talking about politics, talking about, you know, a false accusation, talking about a, a prosecutor who's accusing these young men of attempted murder in the midst of, of, of the altercation. And so they begin to, to pour out the various--pull out, rather--
Speaker 1: We're still talking about nooses hanging from trees (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --a threat.
Speaker 2: Exactly, or, or the, the noose hanging from a tree and then the two nooses that the gentleman had on the back of his pickup as he drove past, past the streets. And so, what, that they understand at this point is that we have yet not overcome, and there, there is still the need for these conversations. And, and not only that; what we, what we're teaching, what I'm teaching particularly, is that, again, as we talked about earlier, that the challenge is not just knowledge for knowledge sake but the acquisition of the knowledge in order that it might compel you to be an agent of change. And so, this poem, that information, those situations, the experiences of, of 2007 in connection with this poem and the words and the struggle continue. And so these young people understand now, yeah, you didn't get it in high school, but you're getting it now. And the question then is: now that you have the information, now you understand the crisis; you understand the condition; what do we do about it? And so your generation is, is, has to be just as involved. It's not something that, that can just fly over your head. Your part of it. So what do you do? So that's where we are.
Story_ID: 564380
Speaker 1: So you say you, you became a Sigma at the--
Speaker 2: University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) University of Missouri. Now a Sigma, I remember like--I'm, I'm older than you are, but I, I know I didn't remember Sigma as being one of the fraternities when I was in, in college. But I know it's--has, has a presence now.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But did, was it a new one that--I mean what, what, what--
Speaker 2: Well, Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] is, is, is, is from that, that 1900 early time period, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when you think--
Speaker 1: Just--
Speaker 2: --about the, you know, the, the Pan-Hellenic eight at that time, you're talking about Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and Phi Beta Sigma. Those were the four fraternities. Then you're talking about Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], Zeta Phi Beta [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority], Sigma Gamma Rho [Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority] were the four sororities. Now, the organization founded in the '60s [1960s], Iota Phi Theta [Iota Phi Theta Fraternity], has now joined those eight. And now there are nine organizations that are quote, unquote those known across the country and across campuses as the organizations most people will find and will join.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I joined, again, I, I joined out of, out of a certain rebellion. I didn't like what I was seeing from them on the University of Missouri campus. I didn't like, and many others, did not like the, the, the rhetoric of unity, the, the com- now it's nothing wrong with, with friendly competition, you know. But we didn't--we saw, you know, fisticuffs. We saw just antagonism. And we thought, to ourselves, with 3 percent of, of the population on this campus, we can't afford to be against one another. And so we started Nu Phi Nu, you know. We wanted something new. We wanted something that included--that was inclusive. And that, that started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now do you spell Nu Phi Nu? Is that with Greek letters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Was it--
Speaker 2: Nu Phi Nu, yeah, N-U--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, N-U--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Phi Nu. Now we, we initially called it something else, but we--it was N Phi N. But we figured we need, we needed to change the N. You know, as we become enlightened, you know, N didn't take on the same--the N word didn't take on the certain connotation. Okay, we're enlightened, okay. Somebody said, one of our, one of our friends from Kansas City [Missouri] said, "Why don't we call it Nigger Phi Nigger?" We said, "No. We can't do that. We're on a college campus. We can't do that. We can't call it that." He goes, "Well--you know," he was, he was from a different place than we were from. You know, he was from Kansas City (laughter). And I had another friend from Jefferson City, Missouri. I said, "No. We gotta call it Nu Phi Nu." He said, "Why we wanna call it that?" I said, "Because it's new, because we're bringing a new attitude. We're bringing a new paradigm, a new unity, a new camaraderie that the fraternities and sororities are not showing. That's why we're calling it Nu Phi Nu. And we're gonna involve ourselves in ways that, that show them something different than, than what they're presently doing." That was the challenge. And, but in that was a certain antagonism. The, the fraternity members, as we began to, to, to endear ourselves to the sorority members, had a problem with us, had a problem with our newness, had a problem with the fact that we hadn't paid our, our proverbial dues, if you will, to become Greek members. And so we were, we were kind of, we were included with the sororities but outcasts with the fraternities, so this was actually working counter to our plan. And so, we, we made a decision. We said the only way we're gonna change this system is to become a part of it. And so we looked around and tried to find a place where we could get into the system without the least--with, with the least amount of pain, because, you know, back then fraternities were hazing. They still are in some respects. But they were--you know, to get into one of these organizations, you know, you really had to go through a pledge process, and oftentimes that meant being paddled; that might have meant physical challenges and so forth. And we wanted--and I know personally, I wanted the least amount of that as possible.
Story_ID: 564381
Speaker 1: And so, we gravitated to the one place we thought we might be able to get in without a whole lot of struggle, and that was Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity]. They had one member--three members on campus [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] and one really active member, and we figured he can't place ten people, you know. You know, he can't place all ten of us. You know, we're gonna find out way. If, if we join that organization, you know, in four weeks we'll be in; then we can get our plan going. And so we figured, hey, Phi Beta Sigma is the place, you know. We didn't look at the ideals. We didn't look at the purpose. We didn't look at a lot, but we did see him. And the gentleman, young man is the late Tony Hudson [ph.]. Tony was a, a young man of slight build who--and, and this whole Greek thing, this whole black Greek fraternity/sorority thing is, is an interesting, just psychological, psychosocial dynamic in and of itself because of, of, of what it, what happens, and how people get in, and, and what happens when you get in. But on a college campus back then, on many college campuses, when someone joins one of these organizations, there is a, a gift giving process for those who join. It's called a neophyte, you know, beginner. And Tony was the only member of Phi Beta Sigma, active member on campus at that time. And so at these neophyte celebrations of new membership, each fraternity and sorority brings gift to the new members of this other organization. And I don't know of what, you know, what, what origin it, it has it, that has itself in. But Tony was the only member of Phi Beta Sigma. And so if the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] had nine people in their, at their neophyte celebration, Tony was, was responsible for providing each one with a gift, and he had no chapter. He had no, no support, but he was still responsible. And so, if, if five lines of, of sorority members went over, or fraternity members, he was responsible for making sure because it would be an, an embarrassment to be there and not provide them with a gift. It could be something small, a trinket, but it was your responsibility to do it, such was the case for us. And so, and so we would go to these parties. Again, they would have the, the members come up forward, six members, five members, four members. And they would me- out--they would say, "And Phi Beta Sigma, Tony Hudson, the only member on--active member." There were two other guys. They were not active. He would walk up. He'd have gifts for everybody. He would hand them--go down the line hand them out. And then the next weekend there might be another line that went over--Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], five members. He'd be there with five gifts. And we just thought that was so impressive. I know I did personally. I'm thinking this gentleman understands what it's all about. It wasn't all about the, the flash and dash of the organization, looking good, acting, acting like you're doing something you're not. When it was time to, for the rubber really to hit the road and, and for him to, to, to actualize the reason he was involved, he was there. I was so impressed by that. But I said you know what? This is the organization we should join, and so we did. Now the one mistake, we didn't--we underestimated the impact of pledging. Because what we didn't realize was that, though we only had one member involved in our process, there were multiple chapters within a two hour radius that realized we were on what we call on line.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you had like Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh my goodness--
Speaker 2: --different, other--
Speaker 1: --they swarmed on us like we were--my--Lincoln University. Then they had a, a campus at nor--at Kirksville [Missouri], Northeast Missouri State [Northeast Missouri State College; Truman State University]; of course, there was university--there was St. Louis [University of Missouri - St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]; there was Kansas City [University of Missouri - Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri]. And so all of a sudden we were, our campus was inundated with Phi- Phi Beta Sigma members from, from the far reaches to make sure that we went through our process, with some experiences. I'll put it to you that way (laughter). We, we didn't, we were not to be able to go through without experiences (laughter). So, so that's the way it went down. But, but after we, you know, we went through the process, we were then members. And we have the great fortune of saying we, we initiated some things that we, we can be really proud of.
Story_ID: 564382
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause it sounds, it sounds to me what, what you're describing is, is really seems to a strate- strategically thought out kind of thing. I mean you, you take the lead on a lot of these. And the, the way you describe why you became a Sigma, it really sounds like a general plotting, a strategy-- well, I can get in this one because this is how--you know--
Speaker 2: Well, well, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean--
Speaker 2: --you know, again, you know, my brother [Chris Harris] had, had tried to join Omega Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] when, when he was in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], and, and then they wanted to--I think the physical aspects of what they wanted to do to him, he wasn't gonna go for it, you know. It was, it was just unreasonable--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to think.
Speaker 1: They've been banned from campuses for doing some--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, as, as--
Speaker 1: --for the--
Speaker 2: --as Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] and--
Speaker 1: --Omegas and the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and even on some campuses--
Speaker 2: Some of the sororities.
Speaker 1: --the Alphas [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] are even like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --do things--
Speaker 2: So, so, it just seems unreasonable, you know, though you know on some places it's what you have to do to join. Some folks are not willing to take the physical hurt to join an organization you gotta pay money for to be a part of a community service organization. It just, just doesn't make sense, but people have done it for years. People continue to do it. And it, it just seemed to me that if I--for the reasons I wanted to get in, if, if I--if, if anybody had, had tried to hit me, I wouldn't be a Sigma. If anybody had tried in any way to try to do physical harm to me, I wouldn't be in, because I wasn't gonna go for it. And so, and I--and many of the other guys in my organ- who pledged with me wouldn't have gone for it either. But that didn't happen to us, and we were able to--you know, we're just as much member as anybody who did go through that. And, and more than that, we, we're, we were not just members in, in name only. I mean the, the three, three letters and two colors, it meant more to us. We wanted to, again, change, change the face of Greek life on the campus, particularly for African American students. We wanted to be not only a social outlet, which is the case on many cases, but we started academic study groups during finals week. So we would get the culture center [Black Culture Center; Gaines/Oldham Black Culture Center, Columbia, Missouri]; we would, we would use the funds from one of our parties to bring refreshments, and we would, we would set up a place where students could study in a quiet place during finals week, and so we could get the best possible grades for our organization. We stud- we started what the white fraternities and sororities had. They had a test in the Greek Life office [Office of Greek Life]. They had test files or so. Somebody took a course before you or something similar to you, you could actually go to the test file and find out--you know, get yourself some help, and so, so you didn't have to struggle. And so the, the white Greek system had a system. They had a, a network. And I said you know, for us to be effective, maybe we should have that kind of network as well. There are some things we can learn from them. We don't have to be them, but we can learn from them. And so, those are some of the things we, we decided. And then I became the, the president of the chapter and then president of the whole Greek chapter, old--whole Greek council, the Pan-Hellenic Council, and we did some significant things, I thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We integrated homecoming for the first time in a long time. We got our members involved in the campus wide--excuse me, campus wide homecoming. Many of the Af- African American students had not been involved in homecoming campus wide, particularly the, the homecoming court system or what they call the, the theatrical performances, spring fling. I, I forget what they, exactly what they call it. But they did a series of theatrical performances during hom- homecoming as well or in what they call spring fling, and, but none of our African American organizations were a part of it. They did food exchanges, house exchanges. Well, we didn't have houses. But, but in, in terms of wanting to be social, in terms of wanting to share life, if you will, we wanted to do that. We had, we initiated a process where the, the, the president of the, the white sorority council and the white fraternity council came to our meetings or sent representative to our meetings, and we sent representatives to their meetings. So, so it wasn't a black and white Greek system; it was just a Greek system; it was a fraternity/sorority system. So we, we wanted to be--we wanted to know what they knew, and we wanted to, to, and we wanted to know it from them. And so we shared life with each other in a way that had not happened previously, and I think we were the better for it.
Story_ID: 564383
Speaker 1: Now, when you were at University of N- of Missouri [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], I'm trying to think of what happened at--oh, I, I was thinking about University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]. I got (laughter) confused, thinking about--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Johnny Rodgers and some of those guys. But--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that--but you were at Missouri, huh? So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were there--well, who were the big stars on campus when you were--
Speaker 2: Well, we, we actually had, you know, we actually had--I live in Nebraska now, but we actually had Nebraska, a former coach who was our coach at that time, Warren Powers. And we actually had some really good teams back then. We had some guys from St. Louis [Missouri]. This was right after Kellen Winslow and those guys had left, when my brother [Chris Harris] and sister [Regina Harris Trotter] were there. But, if you're--if you think about some--James Wilder I think had left as well. And then when you get into the era of Phil Bradley, who was a star at the University of Missouri, and not only a football star but a baseball star as well, went on to play with the Seattle Mariners. We had the, the, the guys on defense, Kevin Potter and Demetrious Johnson. We had I mean some, some great guys on our football team. Then, back then we had Ricky Frazier, Steve Stipanovich, Jon Sundvold, Curtis Berry. We had some really--and we were actually the number one team in the country during my time at University of Missouri. Our t- our basketball team ascended. Matter of fact, we played Georgetown--no, no, University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] with [HistoryMaker] Ralph Sampson, when we were number one. And we were number one actually for about six hours or eight hours, because the, the, the poll came out I think on Friday. And then the next day the u- University of Missouri went to Nebraska to play University of Nebraska-Lincoln and got beat. So we were only number one for about eight, ten hours, and then we were back to ourselves again. But you know, there were, there were some glory days back then. It was just such a fun time to be a Missouri Tiger. And again, I really enjoyed college life. I mean it was, it was such a fun thing. I stayed in, in the dorms all four years--again, but, but again, the rollercoaster ride of emotions, relationships, girlfriend things, again, psychological toll.
Story_ID: 564384
Speaker 1: Now how did you do in your major? Did you, did you really learn what you thought you were gonna learn and, and, and, and get close to becoming like a, a sportscaster?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I wish I could say yes (laughter). I wish I could say I, I was smart enough to maximize my time. But there, there were some good things happening. In my major, I did join, I did become a part of a show called the 'Columbia Rock Report.' They had an audition for three people who would be what they call video jocks and provide local concert information and other music news as a part of MTV's [Music Television; MTV] local broadcast. And so they had these multiple auditions, and I was fortunate to be able to be one of the individuals selected. So I was a, a part of the MTV show every, every day there that--called the 'Columbia Rock Report.' And so we would tape a, a, a vignette of what would happen, what happens in concert, the concert life of Columbia [Missouri], St. Louis [Missouri], Kansas City [Missouri], and surrounding areas. And so I was one of the individuals who actually got the opportunity to be what would you call a, a video jock during the MTV breaks. And so MTV would be showing their music videos, and then at the local breaks they would show our spots in the, the 'Columbia Rock Report,' our thirty minute spots. And these spots would play regularly. And so after a while, we became kind of local Columbia celebrities. But I still have my MTV jacket to this day. Of course, I could nowhere near wear it. But it's something that I was really proud of, being selected of this. And the one thing, you know, you talk about being able to acquire the skills, I think my, my fault in, in my major was that, as a person who wanted to do broadcasting, I spent more time doing the talent portion of the major and not enough time doing the technical. And, and many of the jobs early on were in the technical arena. They weren't in the talent arena. And so I had not invested myself into the place where--and again, I hadn't, I hadn't got that advising [at the University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri]. I mean, if someone had told me that you need to spend more time behind the camera than in front of the camera, I probably would have taken more time to do that. But you know, all, all the time I had spent in front of the camera learning the trade, learning the craft, learning how to speak well, learning how to, to, to, to pace myself, learning how to write scripts, learning all of those things to prepare myself for the on camera eventuality did not pan itself out into a job. But there were plenty of jobs for production assistants, editors, on and on and on. And when I graduated, I had not invested in, in that, in those skills as much as the talent skills.
Story_ID: 564385
Speaker 1: You graduated in what year? What--
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay. And so what, what, what did you do? You--I guess you looked for some of these jobs and could--
Speaker 2: Well, well, if, if you, if you had looked at my resume when you--when I graduated you would have thought, man, this guy can do anything. And matter of fact, I got, I got offered a production job in Allentown, Pennsylvania. I was off, offered a, a production assistant job in Pueblo, Colorado, for a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] station. And so, I had a--you know, as any senior college senior would do, you send out hundred- tons of resumes, and I did. But I knew that I couldn't take a job in a production company. I just knew it. I got job--offered a job in Allentown, Pennsylvania. I got offered a job in Pueblo, Colorado, as a production assistant, the production manager. And you know, you look at my resume, you look at all the things I've done, you say, "Boy, this guy, you know, we need this guy," and that's what they said. But I, there's no way I could take the jobs, so I didn't. And so I went back to St. Louis [Missouri]. And I had been working with a organization, Group W cable [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company], was the organization I worked with when I was doing the MTV [Music Television; MTV] thing, so I just transferred. I had them basically transfer me to the Group W cable in St. Louis. So I became a salesman for Group W cable in the fall of 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, so how, how long did, did you do that?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, I wish--too long is, is the first response. I started that in about, let's see, August of, of '84 [1984]. And I did that until February of '85 [1985]. I got a new job. Actually, I was moonlighting while I was doing that job. I was moonlighting as a speech lab instructor. I found a job at a community college [St. Louis Community College - Florissant Valley, St. Louis, Missouri] teaching speech as a lab instructor. They had a, they had an office for a person who would provide tutoring, basic tutoring help with acting, public speaking, oral com [oral communications] and those particular areas. And so I would videotape the individuals and then play the tape back. And then we would analyze their, their public speech, their acting and so forth, and I would give them some advice because I had done some of that in college. And so that was a prime, perfect job for me, didn't pay a whole lot, but, boy, I loved it; I loved it. It was perfect. And then I had to let the commission sales job go with the cable company. So I was finally at a place where I was using, I felt I was using, what I had gained in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri]. It was awesome.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was in February of '85 [1985] until I got married [to Charlene Maxey Harris] in July of '86 [1986]. So I did that for little over a year.
Story_ID: 564386
Speaker 1: Now tell us how you met your wife [Charlene Maxey Harris].
Speaker 2: I met her in '84 [1984]. Matter of fact, I met her on October 19th--18th? It was 19th, 19th, 1984. I was doing--in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] I used to do some standup comedy at talent shows. And so, I, I, I don't know if I fancied myself as, of a, as a comedian, but you know, I, I could tell funny stories and make people laugh. And so periodically at talent shows I thought, you know, given the opportunity to stand in front of people and tell funny stories, I could do that, and so I did, and found myself, you know, with some success there. And I had just graduated. And Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] invited me come back to campus to, to do some, some comedy in between some of their talent, their tal- in their talent, talent show. So I, I accepted the invitation. I was busy hard selling cable TV, so you know I--it was tough to break away from that. But, but I did, went up to Columbia [Missouri], and actually it was, it was, it was a, it was my ex-girlfriend's birthday. (Laughter) So that's a broad--that's a bad way to remember it, but it was her birthday. And yeah, that's why, yeah, it was the 18th of, of October, and I went to Columbia. Actually, I had tried to see her before I went to Columbia. She wouldn't see me, and so I went to Columbia kind of broken hearted but knowing that I had a, a, a routine to do. And I, I thought maybe I should talk about, you know, relationships, but I didn't do that--and got up there talking about cable TV, having a job out of college, having a business card. I just kind of wung- I just, I just winged it. You know, I was, I was not a, a script comedian. I just got up and start talking about things that were, I thought were funny, and, and they thought they were funny. And the young lady who would become my wife was in the audience that day, didn't know her. She had just gotten to campus that fall, and she didn't know me. And if she had known me when I was an undergraduate, she probably wouldn't have approached me. But she did approach me after I finished and told me that I had said some funny things. And we ended up talking for the rest of that night, exchanging personal information. It was, it was the day that changed my life forever. It was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was a great day. It was a great day (laughter).
Story_ID: 564387
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long was it after you met your, your future wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] tha- you know, that you actually got married?
Speaker 2: Well, we, yeah, we dated, let's see, from--we met in October of '84 [1984]. And in a couple of months I was actually in Nebraska. In December of, of '84 [1984] I was at her home for Christmas. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now she's from Lincoln [Nebraska], right?
Speaker 2: She's from Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father came to the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] from Indianapolis [Indiana]. He played with the Big O, [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson, on the Crispus Attucks [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] 1956, '57 [1957]--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --Indianapolis championship teams and out of high school, got an opportunity to play basketball.
Speaker 1: What was his fa- what was his name?
Speaker 2: Al Maxey [Albert Maxey].
Speaker 1: Al Maxey, okay.
Speaker 2: Al Maxey. And so he's one of the Crispus Attucks players. And they have a, a video--they have a, a movie, a documentary out called 'Something to Cheer About,' which chronicles the Crispus Attucks success over those championship years. But, yeah, he came to Nebraska and became a police officer for about thirty-one years there, police lieutenant. And fortunately, he and his wife [JoAnn Maxey] had, had my wife (laughter). And, and so meeting her, we dated for about a year and a half or so. And in December of '85 [1985]--we met in, in October of '84 [1984]. In December of '85 [1985] I proposed, and then in July of '86 [1986] we were wed. So that's, that's pretty quick.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did all of this from afar. We actually probably hadn't seen each other more than four times. She was in New Hampshire. She--out of, out of grad school. She graduated from--in May of, of, of '85 [1985] from grad school with a degree in library science. And we, we, we talked about what she would do, and she made a decision to move to New Hampshire to work at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire]. And so I helped her move there. And we talked from afar this whole, that whole time, until we decided to, to get married. So we had a long, long, long distance relationship--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time, but it worked out.
Speaker 1: So when you got married, did you move immediately to New Hampshire?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, originally had thought about some, getting somewhere close to our families. Being from St. Louis [Missouri], her from Lincoln, Kansas City [Missouri] was an idea place, four hours, three, four hours from each place. I tried to, to get a job with Hallmark [Hallmark Cards, Inc.] at that time. I fancied myself as a, a writer of, of poetry and of humor, thought that maybe I could get a job at Hallmark. And so I applied, sent in a very nice portfolio I thought. And they liked it, but they didn't hire me. And with that, I was out of a--I, I didn't have any employment. I thought, you know, maybe I should--I hadn't been to any place significantly other than St. Louis. Maybe this was time for me to grow up, and so I decided to move to New Hampshire where she was. And it was a very frustrating initial period 'cause I didn't have a job, had a new wife, and a new life. And for three months, it was a very, very, very tough time of transition, and it almost didn't work; it almost didn't work. We, we actually had a, a falling out, if you will. Three months in, our marriage was, was almost over, primarily because of my selfish, selfishness and immaturity, and that's just the simple truth. But thank god we got it--worked it and got a, I got a job in the me- media services as a media specialist. And we were responsible for providing the media equipment and services to the broader Dartmouth campus at that time. And it was just a great place to be, at Dartmouth, great place of learning, great place of education. I had never been on the East Coast at all before. And to be in this bastion of, of education and of history was, was just an unbelievable thing for me. And she had been there a year prior. And to be in this environment was a highly charged, this was during the time of divestment from South Africa. The Dartmouth College shanties were up. There were things going on there that, that were in--unlike any other place I had ever been. It was electric. And there was always something on the academic, political, and social radar screen that they were dealing with in that environment. And so it was just a, a great place for me to be (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell--
Story_ID: 564388
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about the shanties. I'd never heard that story. What, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a, a move in the student body to get Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] to divest itself from those places that were supporting apartheid. And so they had shanties put up on the, on the quad, if you will, right in the center of campus in, in, in protest. And so, this was, this was a hotbed of protest, and ultimately, Dartmouth did divest. But you know, again, the, there was a politically charged environment. There were always students from New York [New York] or Boston [Massachusetts] area or somewhere on the East Coast who were, who was leading, and some international students as well. Dartmouth's a, a college of about four thousand students, and interestingly enough, you know, about 10 percent of those students, you know, were, were African American. So they had, you know, they had 10 percent of four thousand on that campus. You know, I, I was a University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], thr- 3 percent. So they had a 10 percent African American student body, so there was quite a community there of individuals but, but a highly charge--lot of, a lot of political awareness goin- there, some, some hotbed issues. I know there was a music professor there who was taking it really in the shorts there tough. The white students didn't think that he should be talking about the black experience in a, in a jazz class, and so they sent him emails and harassed him publicly in the newspaper, trying to get him to, to resign. William Cole is his name. And we were all a part of, of that whole experience up there with Dr. Cole. It was, it was just un- unbelievable. The Dartmouth Review was the conservative newspaper during that time--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and they--
Speaker 1: --got a lot of press for--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --racist remarks and their attitudes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, they basically--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --had some, some people call Dr. Cole and of course harass him. And, and when he responded, they had, they were recording him. And so they put his transcript of, of a taped conversation of him in the newspaper. And it was, it was just a, a tough time of, for him. But you know, that was one of the times it was challenged--it was a challenge for the African American community there to be a support to him. He had done nothing wrong, and these people should not have been able to just harass him the way they were doing. And then finally, at, at a certain point, Dartmouth got a new president, Dr. James Freedman [James O. Freedman]. And at some point in time, you know, the line of free speech, they crossed the line many times. But when it finally came to a head, Dr. Freedman, the, the, the, the president, was Jewish. And Dartmouth Review put a story in The Dartmouth Review about Dr. Freedman, the president, and they had him wearing a Nazi uniform with swastikas on the, on the sleeve. And at that point, they had just had enough. That was it. That was the straw that broke the camel's back. And they had to be censored; they had to be shut down, and Dr. Freedman took moves at that point.
Speaker 1: The Dartmouth Review.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, boy.
Speaker 2: --we were there during a, a pretty tumultuous time. And some, some of the, the more challenging experience I think I've, I, I grew up during that time, and I got married. And I sensed when I was, you know, a bachelor living a kind of carefree life, I was living a life that wasn't--really wasn't as carefree as I thought it was. It was pretty, pretty mundane actually, pretty frivolous because I didn't, I didn't ha- I wasn't really going any specific direction, which is why I was so surprised that my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] would accept my proposal (laughter). You know, I, I was working at, at the cable company [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company]--I mean, yeah, the cable company first and then Florissant Valley community college [St. Louis Community College - Florissant Valley, St. Louis, Missouri], not really going anywhere. And, and obviously thank god she saw something in me that, that wasn't actualized yet. And when I got to Dartmouth, it's like my eyes opened, not only personally but spiritually as well. I, you know, I, I just found the, found faith again. And, and that's why I needed her, because she was a, a person of great faith, and she, she, she spurred that in me. And life was, was new and alive, and we, we, we, we began to have a life together. I began to grow up.
Story_ID: 564389
Speaker 1: So, did you get involved with the Pentecostal church again or?
Speaker 2: No. There were a number of community churches, a lot of small churches there. You know, they had--we went to a church called Valley Bible [Valley Bible Church]. You know, there were some really nice rustic communities in that area, because we were right on the border of, of Vermont and New Hampshire. So we actually went to a church called Valley Bible, which was in White River Junction, Vermont, just pretty solid congregation of people. There were a number of more charismatic congregations in, on, near the campus that we were involved in part. There was a local campus church as well that I'm not sure the actual denomination of it, Presbyterian or Episcopal denomination. But I actually got to speak while the pastor was gone periodically at that congregation, lead the service. And so, so it kind of, again, spurred in me some, some leadership. They saw me as a leader in that community, though I wasn't working in any of the academic departments. I was working in more service oriented department, in media services. As, as faith grew, responsibility also grew. And I became involved in not only the sharing of the messages at the, the church, but also Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] had a, a gospel choir, and the gospel choir was really, really good; also had a black theater workshop that I was a part of. You know, that was a part of my background in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] as well, was theater, and so, involved in all the things that I was, I was interested in, gospel music; you asked about singing earlier, got involved with that; got involved with the black theater workshop, did 'Wine in the Wilderness' by Alice Childress, did 'The Wiz' there, did a 'Day of Absence.'
Speaker 1: Doug, [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, day, the 'Day of Absence' and something I'm forgetting. But we did--I did four productions with the black--they called it BUTA, Black Underground Theater Association, BUTA, and really enjoyed, as a staff person at Dartmouth, being involved in this particular underground theater--and then got the chance to advise some organizations. They had some fraternity and sororities on campus needed some black leadership, who understood that dynamic. And so my college experience in fraternities and sororities helped me to, to be an advisor for these organizations, though I was not a member of these organizations. As a matter of fact, I advised the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] at Dartmouth, advised a couple of the sororities as well. My, my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] was a member of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. And so we were, we were able to use our previous involvement, particularly in leadership, in black Greek organizations to help the college with the student population, the students who were involved in these organizations. So it was, it was really a great time. Though I, I was only there two and a half years, I can say as, as significant a time in my life as any place I've ever been.
Story_ID: 564390
Speaker 1: So, so you left there about 1987, '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: Left there in '88 [1988]. We had, had, just had our first son [Preston Harris]. I, I was looking--we were looking to, to go. I think at a certain point in time it was, it was, though it was a highly charged academic environment, it was I--an isolation for us from our family since we were so far away. It was good because we were a young married couple initially to, to have to be able to work things out on our own, not be--having anywhere to run, anywhere to hide. And so it was good early on, being so far away from family. Again, there was nowhere to go when, when you had problems. You had to figure it out; you had to work it out. And we were fortunate to be able to do that. But it was time to, to, I thought, to, to leave. Let me, let me retract for a second. One of, one of the more exciting times about being at Dartmouth was we, we produced the 1988 Republican debate at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire], at the Hopkins Center [Hopkins Center for the Arts], and a great place of, of, of culture, of entertainment. All the top acts came too. And that the only great thing about being at Dartmouth. Since it was such a close, close place, you got to hobnob with all of the, the, the big shots who came. I remember we, we got to spend a, a whole afternoon with Cab Calloway. He came in to do an evening program. They were, they were actually showing on the big screen 'The Blues Brothers' show, 'Blues Brothers' movie with him. And he was going to do, you know, his thing afterwards, or he would come out at, at different spurts, doing his hi de hi de ho thing. And, and we got to spend about three, four hours with Cab Calloway. And I took about three rolls of film of him and me. And I had people take shots, and I took shots, and found out that the film was under de- was not developed right. And so I now, I don't have one picture of my time with Cab Calloway. But also Wynton Marsalis when he was first starting out, he would come there. The, the black theatre ensemble out of New York [New York] did, did some awesome presentations. They came to Dartmouth, did the, one of the presentations on a, on the main stage. And oh, man, to hang out with those guys afterwards, it was just--I mean all of these acts, all of the great black performers that would come--
Speaker 1: Were you, you referring to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. You said the black theatre ensemble--
Speaker 2: No, the Negro Ensemble Company.
Speaker 1: Okay, Negro Ensemble Company.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Negro Ensemble Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I remember they, they had just finished a presentation. They were gonna have to go somewhere to eat afterwards at a restaurant. We just got to sit with them and talk about their travels and the, and the great time they have doing what, you know, what they do. It was just awesome, and then the opportunities just to hang out with the, the individuals. We knew the director of the, the, the Hopkins Center there, Colleen Jennings, Roggensack at that time [Colleen Jennings-Roggensack]. And she was just somebody who, who wanted us--who allowed us, rather--I don't know if she wanted us, but she allowed us to be close to what was going on when the performers came. And it was just such a sweet time of, of, of learning culture. I mean, being in St. Louis [Missouri], again, being a young man who hadn't left St. Louis very much, and now to be on the East Coast, to be close to New York, to be close to Boston [Massachusetts], to be close to Montreal, and having gone to Montreal, Canada, early on in my marriage [to Charlene Maxey Harris], it was just so awesome. I mean I, I--it just, it just blew me away that all of this was available. You know, and I think a lot of, lot of young people don't realize what's, what's available, and I didn't at all. You know, Wellston [Missouri] was my, my, my purview, was my paradigm, was how I saw things. You know, we moved from Etzel [Avenue] to Derby [Avenue] to Irving [Avenue], all in Wellston.
Speaker 1: Your world was pretty, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you knew it, but it was a narrow--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and--
Speaker 1: --world.
Speaker 2: --the only trips that we had taken outside of St. Louis was to Chicago [Illinois] to see our relatives. I think I did go, go across from, from Illinois to Michigan to see a cousin one time. That was the extent of all the travel I had ever done. I had done--I had gone to Hannibal, Missouri. My brother [Chris Harris], he was on a baseball legion team. They won some tournaments, had to go to Hannibal, Missouri. That was it; that was it.
Story_ID: 564391
Speaker 1: So you knew you wanted to come back though to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, back to the Midwest.
Speaker 1: --to be close to your people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so forth. So, so where did you--I mean what, what did--what was arranged for you to, to come back?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I was at a point where I'm thinking okay. I told my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris], said, "Yeah, honey, we need to, we need to maybe think about going somewhere else." She said, "Well, I got us here. If we're gonna leave here, you're gonna, you're gonna have to get a job that moves us where we go next." So I said okay. So I, you know, I had a background. I had a resume. I had, you know, an academic life at the, at Florissant Valley community college [St. Louis Community College - Florissant Valley, St. Louis, Missouri], so I did have some skills. I had media skills I had now acquired. And, and unlike my time in, in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], it was not--I was, I was now a technician, because my responsibility as media specialist was to learn the equipment, learn the cameras, learn how to set up audio setups. I remember when they--we did the debate [1988 Republican debate] we had a major video production. And I was responsible that day for Jack Kemp, advising Jack Kemp, was micing him up and getting ready like it was done for me here today. And while we were getting ready for his individual presentation before the evening of the debate, I said, "Mr. Kemp, I, I got a couple of things I think would be good for your platform." And so, I mean here I am, a guy who potentially could be president, and I'm, I'm talking to him about items for his platform. I mean that, that was just unheard of. I mean I'm thinking there's no way I can do that. I think not long after, I think Dukakis [Michael Dukakis] was running that year as well. One of the good and bad things about being involved with him was that I got to videotape him, you know, from a very close range, got to meet him. Well, didn't get to meet him personally, but he was on stage saying all the things that sounded right, you know, for, for the lo- for the, the, the average man, every man, "I'm the candidate for every man." And so, he finishes his presentation, and he's walking off the, the stage, and I'm the first person he sees. And I, you know, I, I had agreed with just about everything he had said. And I extend my hand to shake his hand. He walks right past me. And he, and he became public enemy number one at that point. Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was running during that time. We had to have very intimate time with Jesse Jackson as he came to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and, and, and, and spent time with us, you know, in a room just like this. And so, and while everybody else is seeing him from afar, I'm, I'm talking to him just like I'm talking to you, about his candidacy, about what it means to be, you know, a presidential candidate. I mean it was just, it was electric, the most unbelievable time, being there. But before I, I, I move on, leave New Hampshire, one of the greatest things I've ever gotten in my life, I got from being there. Working in the media center one day in '87 [1987], a gentleman came into the, the, the office with a, a cassette, a reel to reel tape of a, a speech [Towards Freedom] by Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that he had given at Dartmouth in, in May 23rd, 1962. The gentleman had recorded the speech, and took the tape home and put it in a box, and didn't have--hadn't done anything with it for twenty-five years. So he recorded in '62 [1962], and in twenty-five years nobody had heard it. It had not been transcribed. It had not been recorded. It was sat on this reel to reel tape in a dusty box for twenty-five years. And so, he brought it into our media center. I don't know when he found it. He said, "I need to--I want to save this." Well, I imagine so. This is Martin Luther King talking about the future of race relations, the, a year before, the March on Washington. This, so this speech was the precursor and all--and if you hear it, it's all the information that--much of the information he prides--provides for the March on Washington is in this speech, May 23rd, 1962. So he brings it into our media center, and he wants--and we had just gotten the machine. He had heard about the machine that reconditions tapes, and now you can record it onto a cassette, and save these--save your reel to reel recorded stuff. And so, I'm thinking, we got, we had a big about this about this in the paper. He heard about it. He went in that box, got the tape, brought it to our media center. And now we're ready to record. We're ready to recondition, clean, and duplicate this speech that had never been recorded, never been duplicated for twenty-five years. I get the responsibility to do it. And so, here I am, taking every inch of this tape, cleaning, cleaning through the, through the rollers, trying to loop it, making sure I don't break it. It's very brittle, very, very fragile. And I'm thinking, man, if I break this tape, I'm gonna be in bad shape. And so I don't--I care for this tape as, as fine as I care for anything. And I mean this is--there's no copies of this. This is the only copy of this that exists. And so now we finally get it all cleaned, finally spool it around, record it. This is the only tape of this speech. And so, what I ask him when he comes in, I said, "Sir, we have a fast dub machine. Can I make a second copy of this tape?" And he agrees. Now there are two, his and mine. We're the only two people alive who have this, this Dr. King speech. And so, I thought I was the most special person in the world. I'm thinking, my goodness. I take it home, and I listened to it. I play it. I play it. I wore it out playing it. I mean hear, to hear his voice, to hear, you know, Dr. King articulate the, the very essence of the Civil Rights Movement in 1962, it just, it was just unbelievable. And so, over the years, I've now recorded this--I had this tape, this particular piece, dubbed onto a CD. I've had the noise taken out, and I've been passing it around to my friends, but, but only because I was at Dartmouth, only because I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a college presents opportunities that people don't foresee (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Story_ID: 564392
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got an education because as a media tech, a media specialist, I was actually in the classrooms setting up video equipment, setting up computer equipment. And I was--listen, I'm the least tech- I can say this on tape: I am the least technical person, at least I was, the least most--the most least technical person you could ever find in your life, me. I couldn't, I couldn't thread a, a ne- thread through a needle. I mean I couldn't, I mean I couldn't do anything.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we often suspect that people that run the tech (laughter) off--
Speaker 1: I couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) offices on college campuses are like you. But--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but we--(unclear) know it, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I couldn't do anything.
Speaker 2: --now we know.
Speaker 1: And then, you know, the time I spent there, you know, I could set up big media setups. And oftentimes, we had to do it alone, and so, so I became a very technical minded person. But then to have this speech, and to have the opportunity now to have a, a, a, a slice of history, and now to do a presentation called If Dr. King Were Alive Today based on this particular speech [Towards Freedom], this particular piece of, of information, is, is one of the hallmarks of my life, to be able to do this.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you do actual, an oral presentation--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --based on the--
Speaker 1: Based on that--
Speaker 2: --on the tape.
Speaker 1: --particular tape.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: We talk about Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] perspective on the positions one should have on the, the civil rights, the future of race relations, on race relations where he talks about the extreme pessimist view, the extreme optimist view, and the realist view. He talk--he, he actually systematically goes through his five points that, that he--that they were fighting for in the Civil Rights Movement. And he talks about the myth of time and the myth of education as remedies for getting us closer to solving the problems of race relations. I mean he just lays it out. And, and, and I'm able--I'm, I was just blessed to be in a position to be able to have this speech and use it as a basis for--
Speaker 2: Now do you, do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) my conversation.
Speaker 2: --do you present this as Dr. King when you do it, or--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay. But you just--
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: --you--
Speaker 1: I, I talk about the, the story as I've shared it with you, of acquiring this tape and then the, the, the reality of hearing him say it to, say it to me personally. So I really personalize it, not overdramatize it, but personalize it in a way that bring people right to May 23rd, nineteen six- like they're actually sitting there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and he's articulating these things to them. And then we, we, we look at its present day application. Are, are these still the same things, you know, voting rights, un- injustice? Economic justice is something that he was fighting for, of course the, the, the hypocrisy of America in terms of what it was promoting in its principles and then what it was actually doing and so forth, his, his whole desire to expose segregation publicly, you know, as, as just pure hypocrisy as it relates to American ideals and principles and so forth. So all the things that he articulates in this speech is something we try to apply to present day race relations as best I, as I can do it.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, and only being at, being at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]--
Speaker 2: That's, that, that is interesting item you brought up there. That's--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's something.
Speaker 1: I'll, I'll send you a copy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the CD.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah, yeah, okay. Yeah, The HistoryMakers--
Speaker 1: I'll make sure you can have that in the archive.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, right, that's a good, good thing.
Story_ID: 564393
Speaker 1: So what did you set up in--to go to, to come back to the center of the country--
Speaker 2: Well, we--
Speaker 1: --to do?
Speaker 2: You know, I had made a decision--we had made a decision together we were gonna try to move, and so it was my job to try to find us a place to be. And so I began to send resumes out in a number of different areas all across the country. And actually, what happened was I, I actually ended up getting a number of interviews, and I became actually kind of a professional interviewer for a while there. I was traveling really all over the country interviewing for certain jobs. I remember going to tenne- University of Tennessee, Knoxville [Tennessee] and interviewed for a job as their head of Greek affairs, fraternities and sororities relations. And of course that was the experience that I had. It was something I was doing at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], something I, I had been involved in in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri]. And so I was using my student services background as part of the basis. Now I, now I had the media experience that I had not had before when I left college. I had the, and now I had the technical experience to do what I couldn't do in college. So I, I had a number of different directions I could go. And so I applied at St. Lawrence University [Canton, New York] for a job in their media center. And though I liked what they were offering, that was just a part of the, the country that my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] didn't want to live, in, at St., St. Lawrence University. It was up, up, Upstate New York. She just didn't wanna, didn't wanna move there. They actually offered me the job when I left. I was a runner up for the University of Tennessee job. I had, I applied for a job in student services at, at Naugatuck Community College in, in Connecticut [Naugatuck Valley Community College, Waterbury, Connecticut], had an opportunity to go to the basketball hall of fame [Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, Springfield, Massachusetts] as I was on my way to the interview. So I left early, went to the basketball hall of fame. My fa- matter of fact, found a book with my father-in-law [Albert Maxey] in the book while I was in the basketball hall of fame bookstore on the basketball in Indiana, found him in a book. I couldn't believe it. I thought it was unbelievable. And, and so, so I had been applying, and then finally I'd sent a, a, a resume to University of Nebraska-Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] for a student activities position, which is what I ended up getting at the end of 1988.
Story_ID: 564394
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're in 1988 at the University of Missouri [sic.], right?
Speaker 2: No. We're at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] now.
Speaker 1: Are we getting ready--we were just, we had just had you moving to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --we, we moved, we moved from '88 [1988]; we moved to Omaha [Nebraska]. We just left, left Dartmouth. We had just had a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, right, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: We had my youngest son--my oldest son, Preston [Preston Harris]. We had just had him. Matter of fact, we were waiting. I, I, I got the job in November or, or earlier in '88 [1988], end of '88 [1988], but I couldn't move because my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] was pregnant. And so we had Preston the day after Christmas 1988. And then at a week old, we moved to Omaha--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I would take the job in student activities at the University of Nebraska at Omaha.
Speaker 1: This is '89 [1989] now, right--
Speaker 2: This (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When it starts, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so in '89 [1989], January of '89 [1989] we actually moved to Lincoln [Nebraska] because my in-laws [JoAnn Maxey and Albert Maxey] are there. We spend a couple of months living with them. And then in February of '89 [1989] we get a home in Omaha to rent, and then we stay there for the time I'm at UNO, that's what we call University of Nebraska-Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], working at student activities--
Speaker 1: University of Nebra- okay.
Speaker 2: --and doing some good things, working with students. And, and I had another transition. You know, there's a lot of moments, as I look through my life, where I can see important transitions or events that happened like the, the, the King tape [Towards Freedom]. But you know, as a, as a person who does a lot of speaking now, we had a speaker come in. Tony Brown I think came in either '90 [1990] or '91 [1991]. I think it was 1990 we had Tony Brown come in for a Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] program. And he, he was a bit feisty. I mean he was, he was, he was a bit demanding in terms of some of the things that he wanted that we weren't able to provide. Did a great job as a speaker, but his attitude was such that we didn't--I thought that if I ever became a speaker, I was gonna make sure that I was a personable person, a person was not a--'cause it's such a privilege to be able to be a person that people want to hear from. It's a privilege to be a person who, who gets the, the opportunity to impart historical information, cultural information, really any information at all, particularly for a fee. And so, so, so as I listened to him, and as I remember that time with him and (laughter) you know--and that doesn't mean you don't treat a person right and, and, and well that you bring to campus and so forth. I mean my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] told me as, as the host, you know, you want to treat the guest as well--very well. And so, and then we try to do that to the greatest degree. But some reason he just wouldn't be satisfied. So I said if I ever got to be a speaker, I'm gonna make sure that I, I'm a person with a lot of grace for the sponsor, person who brings me in. But, but it, you know, that landmark moment, helped me understand that, that, that what he was sharing was something that I should share. And then he talked a lot about African American culture, about the statistics about African American consumerism, and a lot of things that were becoming--that, that African Americans were doing to themselves to keep them in a certain condition. And so that really spurred me to want to, to dig deeper into that and be able to impart that information, not just for information's sake again, but that we might be able to found solutions to the problems that still befall us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, so, a lot of work in student activities at that time. And that's where I started speaking about--I left there in '91 [1991]. So, in about 1990, late '90 [1990], '91 [1991] is when I started getting opportunities to, to speak and to be a speaker on college campuses on various subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And it started off with diversity, quote, unquote. Nebraska is a very vanilla, if you will, state. That's the only phrase I can use right now. And, and, and they've realized, particularly in student arena, that with all the African American and Hispanic and Asian and other kinds of students, international students, on our college campuses, it was important to have a sense of how to work with students from various backgrounds. And, and, and, and the idea that you just treat people as people is okay. But there is special cultural specific needs in the international community, so on and so forth. And I found a niche with providing that information and--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) found some success there.
Speaker 1: Now would you say Nebraska is--is it, I mean in terms of even the European American population, is it very diverse? I, I just wonder, you know, if there, there are many--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nebraska is famous for its ethnic festivals and celebrations, Oktoberfest, the Czech fest [Czech Days] down in Wilber, Nebraska, Swedish fest [Swedish Midsommar Festival] out in Gothenburg, Nebraska [sic. Stromsburg, Nebraska]. Right down Highway 2 [Nebraska Highway 2] is Syracuse, Nebraska, on and on and on, Palmyra [Nebraska]. There's great ethnic diversity in Nebraska all across Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But of the 1.5, 6, 7 million people, the racial diversity is, is a minimal--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --predominantly in Omaha, particularly for African Americans, minimal in Lincoln and, and particularly for African Americans. The Hispanic population continues to boom in Nebraska as well as the Asian population across the state. That's where the, the bulk of, of diversity, racial diversity, quote, unquote is, is burgeoning in Nebraska.
Story_ID: 564395
Speaker 1: So well, just continue. Like what were some of the highlights of--now you were, you were direct--
Speaker 2: I was a, a student activities advisor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the University of Nebraska-Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Student activity advisor.
Speaker 2: And, and, and the idea there is that, from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]--from, from Florissant Valley community college [St. Louis Community College - Florissant Valley, St. Louis, Missouri] to Dartmouth, the whole idea there is, is student involvement. That was, that was one of the keys to my, my life on a college campus, was the opportunity to impact students. And I, and I, and I often remember what kind of student I was, and how much help I didn't have, and, and a lot of the decisions that I made that I probably should not have made. And so one of my challenges is to try to help students. I created a program called The Real Reason for College. And in that program, what I'm trying to do is help, help students understand there are some things you have to learn about college to be able to be successful. And one of them is to how to navigate the college campus. Every college campus is not user friendly. And so you have to know people; you have to be able to get some of the things you need when you need them. And, and that's now with, with manipulation but with relationships. And so, what I challenge students to do is take college very seriously and to, to understand the investment the student has to make in his or her success in college. And so I did that at the University of Nebraska-Omaha for two and a half years, having some real good success, doing some things that are work, again, working with Greek organizations there, chartering chapters, working with the, the Greek council called the Pan-Hellenic Council, chartering there as well, became the president of the graduate chapter Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, Inc.] and then the president, like I was in, in college, of the overall Pan-Hellenic Council, which was in Omaha [Nebraska]. And we did a number of different projects. One that I'm really proud of was we started a, a recognition program in Omaha for businesses and for education and so forth, simply to say we're watching you, and we want to support you. And then we gave out awards to those businesses that supported--not only supported our organizations but reinvested in the community, and so we would award them. We supported--we actually gave elementary, high school--middle school and high school education awards to people who were nominated who had done things. And so, we, we, we aligned our self, and we did a number of what we called career days in schools. We wanted the, the, the kids to know that there are various and sundry opportunities available for you. And unlike me, when I got to college and did--wasn't really clear about the French interpreter thing and was easily talked out of it, we're asking students to--you don't have to have it all figured out. But, but if you have a vision, a sense of what you'd like to do, let's begin to, to dig deeper into that to see if it can come to a rally and it--a reality--and see how we can bring it to fruition. So, that's a lot of our community, we got a lot of--involved in the community life of Omaha, didn't see it at first, thought it was a pretty boring place, but, but in Dartmouth, you know, coming from Dartmouth, I came here with some electricity. I thought, man, you know, politically charged, socially charged; you know, that's the kind of life you gotta live coming out of that environment. Came here, everything was just kind of flat. I said man, we gotta, we gotta kick this thing up a notch. But the only key was not to complain about it but to get myself involved in it and getting--and, and the avenue for me was, first of all, working at the university, being involved in the community, and then finding that niche, which was something I was used to in Greek organizations, the Greek life organizations, at the graduate, you know, gave me that opportunity to be involved, and not only in, at the university but in the community. We did a thing called the, the black Greek picnic. And we, we, we would bring in the community all the black Greek members. We would meet at Benson Park here in, in Omaha. And, and out of that--matter of fact, I remember in 1990, there was a civil rights act that was still, that was on the docket in the, in the, the government, passage of a civil rights act. And so we used that as an opportunity to get our members involved in the political system. And so we provided cards for every person who wanted to, to send to our u- our representative, Nebraska representatives, to, to be in support of the civil rights act. And interesting enough, we shipped all of these cards off, and they sent each, each one of us a letter from the senator it went to. And so, so we, we, we tried to find opportunities, not just to be involved in the local political scene but to be mindful of what's happening at a higher level and to keep our, ourselves involved as a community. And you know, I'm proud to say that we were able to do some things like that before I left Omaha in '91 [1991] and went to Lincoln [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska].
Story_ID: 564396
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about? Did, did you apply for a job there or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother-in-law [JoAnn Maxey] was diagnosed with cancer. And actually it happened--I was praying. I was--you know, my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] I thought--you know, I didn't know--we didn't know how long she had to live. And I thought, you know, wouldn't it be nice if my wife could spend, you know, certain, certain amount of time, whatever was left with her mother. And I--it wasn't--actually the simple truth is I, I just prayed one day: you know, God, give me a, you know, give me an opportunity to get my wife to Lincoln [Nebraska], and, and I kind of just left it at that. And two, about two weeks later I get a call from a gentleman who was a friend of mine at, at the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] who was then the director of multicultural affairs. Jimmy Smith [ph.] is his name. And Jimmy, and Jimmy said, "John [HistoryMaker John Harris], there's an opening down here in, in student affairs." I knew the guy who had actually been in the job. "It's in the vice chancellor's office for student affairs." And, and I said to him, "Well, Jimmy, I'm not really looking for another job." (Laughter) What are you talking about? You know, I had just, I just been at--seeking an opportunity to get my wife to Lincoln, and here it was two weeks later the opportunity--the guy calls me. He calls me out of the clear blue sky. And I was like, man, are you--what's wrong with you? This is exactly what you had been praying for. And sure enough, I go down and interview on a Thursday. They offered me the job on Tuesday, and in a, and in a week I'm in Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your job in Lincoln?
Speaker 2: I was the special assistant to the vice chancellor for student affairs. I was actually now in an upper level administration job. I actually started on a temporary basis, a six month basis before they could open up a search and hire permanently. But it--I figured that if I got in there and did the kind of job that I knew I could do, they would hire me permanently, and sure enough, that's exactly what happened. And so we moved, we moved. We actually--I drove to Lincoln, from Omaha [Nebraska] to Lincoln initially. We started in August, and then in December of '91 [1991] we actually moved to Lincoln. And my wife then drove back to Omaha. She was working at that time at the University of Nebraska Medical Center [Omaha, Nebraska] in the library there. And so, we're, we're transitioning back and forth, Lincoln to Omaha, and, and I'm starting my administrative life with the University of Nebraska working with student organizations, being a resource for students, advising. It, it was a--there were so many things that I had the responsibility for there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a great opportunity, an opportunity I had not sought out personally but an opportunity I welcomed, because it was, it was a great place for me to be and quite a blessing for me, particularly since I had not actually sought it out personally.
Story_ID: 564397
Speaker 1: So did you have a chance to do some of the same--the community things that you were doing in Omaha [Nebraska] on the same--
Speaker 2: Well, this was a, this was a, you know, a different, a different position because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, again, I'd come out of Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] with activism in mind, get to Omaha, move into activism again. I actually ended up having a TV show in Nebraska, in Omaha, actually called 'Issues of Our Time' [ph.]. And it was a program that was on Thursday nights. And I would interview individuals within--back in the media game again--interview individuals of various, from various communities about the issues affecting not just African Americans but just about anybody on the Omaha scene. And so 'Issues of Our Time' became a really kind of popular thing. We, again, we were doing these career days in high school. I became a, a part of the speaker, speak, speaker's bureau for the university [University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska] and was involved with these career days. And we were doing these in, in concert with Metropolitan Community College. And, and so it was just a great time to be involved with the young men, particularly young men who were coming to these, these man--we had manhood summits involving young African American men, and then career days sponsored with the Pan-Hellenic [Pan-Hellenic Council]. And so there was a lot going on. And so I moved to Lincoln [Nebraska], and again, we're in transition. And now it's time to, to, to try to find out, okay, what, what are the issues here? What are the things going on? And immediately there was resistance. Here I am, you know, a new guy on the block. I'm, I'm wanting--I'm, I'm sensing some things going on, and I'm sensing a need to try to change some things immediately. And, and as I approach other African Americans about it, there's a, there's a barrier, a wall. I didn't, I, I--it became a, a point of frustration for me and over time, more frustration because I just didn't see the movement. I just didn't see people wanting to address the issues that were kind of like an elephant right in the middle of the room; they were right in front of us. And one day it all came, it kind of came to a head. There was a, a situation on campus [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]. Our police chief was let go. And there was--oh, actually there was a need for an assistant police chief. And I think there was an issue involving a young African American man that could have been dealt with a different, different way. And we wanted someone with greater sensitivity on the police force. The opportunity was there to hire a gentleman who would do that. The, the, the university decided not to hire anybody. The gentleman was right there. He was a prime candidate. He had all the experience. They decided to hire nobody, and so I had a big problem with that. So I pulled all my African American colleagues together. We had a meeting and so forth. And I said to them, "Listen, this was wrong, and we need to do something about it." And they looked at me like I--like what are you talking about? We don't want to do anything. I mean what are you talking about? We got to do something. And to make a long story short, what happened was it--out of that was a great deal of frustration. I'm thinking, here is a situation that's right in front of you. Why don't you want to do something about it? And it caused me a great deal of frustration that day. They were asking me, okay, why is there no food here? Why is there no, you know, what, why you not providing something for us to be here? And I thought, there's something wrong here. And so one of, one of the guys who was at the meeting pulled me to, to the side, and he, he shared with me something in friendship that, that made a big difference for me. He said, "John [HistoryMaker John Harris], you need to understand something. You don't know these people, and they don't know you. And so, you're asking, asking them to put their--themselves on the line, put their livelihood on the line for something that's righteous. There's no doubt about that. It's righteous. But you have no relationship. So you have to build a foundation and relationship, and then, then people will go to war with you." But--
Speaker 1: Now, now this is basic organizing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, basic organizing, yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's, it's something that you hadn't been exposed to I guess up--
Speaker 2: Well, not formally.
Speaker 1: --to that point, yeah.
Speaker 2: Not formally--
Speaker 1: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know. And, and I may have--
Speaker 1: Very few people have--
Speaker 2: --been doing it.
Speaker 1: --actually.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And I may have been doing it just kind of my own way, because in Omaha that's exactly what we did. You know, we established relationships with people, got to know people, and then we moved in concert and, and, and so forth.
Story_ID: 564398
Speaker 1: But there are always these, like in Omaha [Nebraska], there were these barriers, particularly when you work with students. You know, you, you're a staff person, they're students. The issues are affecting them, and you're trying to mobilize them. And, and they're all--and there was one particular administrator who always found a way to diffuse them. And I would tell him, I said, "Listen, there's an act- if you want action, you want something to happen, don't go to dinner with the guy; don't go to dinner." I said, "The first thing he's gonna do, invite you for a meal." And sure enough, every time they--you're students. And so, the, the, the administrator says, "Hey, let, let me invite you all to dinner, and let's talk about this." As soon as they get there, I said this is what's gonna happen. And every time it--by the time the meeting was over, the issue wasn't as important; the thing had subsided. And you know what? I had put my neck out on the line. And so, I said you know what? I'm not doing that anymore. But, but I, I'd figured that sometime, at some point, there were issues so important to, particularly to black folks, that, that you move. You just gotta move. You gotta, you gotta address it, and they obviously didn't feel the same way. And, and, and I've realize that day, skin color does not an allegiance make, okay. You're not automatically allied with somebody just because you think they look like you, okay. You have to have some common ground other than the color of your skin. And--
Speaker 2: Well, in, in this country, most people who are black do have similar, very similar experience, but--
Speaker 1: You would think so.
Speaker 2: --but they don't--but you're right. It doesn't guarantee that they're gonna--
Speaker 1: No, they're not gonna be on your side.
Speaker 2: --have the same analysis of it.
Speaker 1: What, and it also means that, that we're not a monolithic entity. You know, we are a diverse people. You know, we, we, we come--and, and if you looked at the--if I looked at--if I took a list of all of the people in that room and, and, and did a chronology or a bib- a biography of each of those, we would have all been very different people, you know, very different backgrounds, very different value systems, and some similarities of course across the board I think. But we were all very different people, and so I didn't necessarily take that into account at that point in time. I just figured we needed to do something about the issue at hand. And he said, "Listen, you've got to have relationships, and you got to begin to set some foundation for activism."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So what happened? How did you--
Speaker 1: Well, I, I appro- I approached all those folks again, said, "Let's get together. We'll provide the meal, and let's get together and talk about this situation." Now, again, the person didn't get hired, but it began to set in motion the kind of relationships that, that would pay dividends at a later time. And so, it was a learning experience for me, one, one of many that I had at the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] over that time.
Story_ID: 564399
Speaker 1: I actually had another interesting experience where the students, we had a retreat. The vice chancellor did a regular retreat where he took the students off campus to address university issues. And I went to the retreat in my first month of activity there, thought it was a really good thing, thought some--I heard some really good things. But what I didn't realize is that the vice chancellor, there had been some issues before the retreat that had--yet been unaddressed. And the students knew that, but I did not. And so I'm coming in with the rallying cry, coming in with a positive outlook, and the students are like, you're working for a shyster. You're working for a guy who's, who, who's not righteous. And here you are--you know, they thought I was, you know, the stereotypic, you know, Uncle Tom, spook by the door, whatever you want to call it. And, and sure enough, I was just a person trying--I thought I was on their side, you know, trying to work with them to help, help them succeed. So they came in the next week and asked that I be fired. They look--they came into the vice chancellor's office and said you need to fire this person. And I couldn't understand how--I hadn't even been there long enough to have done anything wrong, and here they're asking for me to be fired. And they asked the vice chancellor if they could meet with him personally, and he said, "No. If you, if you got a problem with John [HistoryMaker John Harris], he needs to be there." So he allowed me to sit in the meeting to hear what they had to say. And, and, and, and at first I thought, you know, this was going to be hard to hear, but it actually wasn't because I realized they didn't know me. Yeah, they didn't know, they didn't know any of, of my background. They didn't know any of my activism. They didn't know any of the, the things that we had done at UNO [University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska]. And though they said they had, they did, they actually did not. And so, so, though I remember it with not a lot of fondness, I do remember it was, it was something that, that didn't scar me, because I realize that once they, once they realize--once they knew who I was and once they knew what I was about, then they would figure it out. And interesting enough, before I left the university in '99 [1999], a gentleman, a young man who was in that meeting that day, he needed my help. He was here in Omaha [Nebraska], and he needed my help to, to address some issues with an organization. And I talked to him, and I helped him. And he, he called me back. He says, "You know, I need to apologize to you. You know, I remember that meeting." I said, "What meeting?" (Laughter) I remember. I knew what meeting he was talking about. So he said, "You know, we were wrong. We were very wrong." And, and you know, I said, "Well, I appreciate that."  Because he, he knew that over time he had heard from other students the impact that, of what we were doing to help move things forward and so forth, and he, he apologized for being in that meeting. So that was, that was some vindication that I had done some things right. So, but we did a lot of good things at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln [Lincoln, Nebraska]. I was involved in the, the coordinating of diversity retreats. But my job primarily was as a student advocate, of breaking down the barriers that help move students forward. And so I challenged the people at the university to do their jobs, to, to do whatever it took to, to move somebody forward, to try to push back the impediments, try to make students more responsible for their own university life, to use college as an opportunity for life learning experiences so, so they would not jeopardize a young person's credit when they got out of college. The students actually got the service at the highest level that they deserved because they were paying for, for, to be there and so forth.
Story_ID: 564400
Speaker 1: I did run into some, some conflict periodically because I was, I was true to my, true to what I believe. In 1997, some students burned a cross as a fraternity ritual in a field not--outside of Nebraska. And I--my sense was that they should understand the significance of that symbolism. The vice chancellor disagreed, saying that they meant no harm. And I said, "Well, the parents who were calling me to take their students out this school believe they meant harm." And so, so that, that was a personal crisis moment for me, 'cause I felt that at that time the university was on the side of the cross burners and not on the side of, of those who felt most affected by it. So that was, that was a time of challenge for me, because I wa- I was, I was seen as not a team player, not somebody who's gonna hold the party line, on and on and on. And so, at that point people started treating me a little different. And--
Speaker 2: So did it remain like that, remain strained, the relationship or--
Speaker 1: Yeah, toward--at the end. I mean at the beginning and in the middle things, things went okay. I kind of did my own thing. I was kind of a free spirit. That would just had to be my style because I had to be where the students who were, I had to be, you know, and, and I can't say that I was a person who, who, who stopped the students from, you know, getting--the, the, the gatekeeper for the vice chancellor, but I was able to, to hold off--give you a case in point: early on when I, when I was at the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] we had a, a, a football player. Scott Baldwin is his name, young African American man, who, who, who lost his spot on the team due to injury. We found out later that Scott had some psychological issues that needed to be addressed. And, and while he was recuperating from his injury at the football--on the football team, he had a psych, psychotic episode and almost killed a woman. And there were many people, they said the university--the women on, on the university felt that certain people were to blame. And so there were a lot of, there was a lot of blame going around. And, and, and, but Scott really needed some help. And so there was going to be a rally on campus, one against him and one for him. The African American students were gonna do the rally for him right before the rally against him on the same, in the same space, five minutes apart. And I, and I got wind of this. I'm thinking and this is gonna be a problem; this is gonna be a problem. And, and, and so I found a way to get to both camps that day, talked to them both, and, and did--and said listen, do the rally you want to do, but let's do these rallies together. Let's find a way to do these rallies together. I said what is the common ground? What is it that we're really wanting here? Okay, yeah, the young, the young lady was hurt. She's in the hospital. She will never be the same. And that needs to be addressed. But by the same token, Scott Baldwin has, has some victimization issues as well. I mean he didn't get the, the, the, the medication he needed. He didn't get the help he needed. The university--the football team psychologist left him hanging. And so let's go after the real culprit here. And sure enough, they did the rallies together. They said--and, and matter of fact, both, both of them made the same condition. They said we'll do them together but only if you speak. You have to get up on the fountain in front of everybody, and you gotta talk. So I did, and it, it diffused a pretty volatile situation. And within the--you know, again, I had only been at university a couple of months. But this was, this was major, and this was gonna be a major problem on the campus, and we were able to not necessarily diffuse it but, but give them an opportunity to, to have their say and, and address the real culprits in this situation. And so, so I, I think early on I was at least able to make some contribution, and, and I didn't have the, the confliction--conflicting problems that I had as I became more of a, my own person, again, growing up a little bit more, maturing, and really seeing what was, you know, what's really going on on campus, and, and having to take certain stands that were not popular.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, it's a tough job, political--I mean campuses are highly political and--
Speaker 1: Well, I wrote a lot in the daily--
Speaker 2: --charged.
Speaker 1: I wrote, I wrote a lot in the newspaper. See, I always--I have a document that I want to show you about--on my departure, they wrote a document--an article about my leaving the university in '99 [1999]. And on the back of the document they wrote pieces of it, of many of the letters that I had written to the Daily Nebraskan newspaper about my time at the university, just snippets of, of things that I had to say. And I thought that was really interesting, the many times I had written the newspaper. And the vice chancellor, you know--I remember when I wanted to write my first letter to the Daily Nebraskan. They never wanted me to write letters that, that chided them for getting my words wrong. But when I had comments, you know, you know, I'm a citizen of the State of Nebraska. I have an opportunity to say whatever I wanna say, and so and I did. But I, I spoke my mind.
Story_ID: 564401
Speaker 1: Tell us about going to City Impact [Lincoln, Nebraska]. You left the University of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, about, 'bout--
Speaker 1: --Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska].
Speaker 2: --nineteen ninety-eight [1998] I, you know, I had another transition, personal trans- transformation issue, time when I was trying to figure out, okay, where was this point in my life taking me. I felt, felt a need in '96 [1996] to maybe go and do something different. And then as my position at the university and the attitude started, start to change, I felt that maybe this is the time to begin to look at something different. And so in August, or October of 1998, after three weeks off work to, to help heal a, a wounded knee, I slipped on an airplane in January of '98 [1998] on a, on the way to a speaking engagement and hurt my knee but never really spent any time off. And so, I got three weeks off in late, late in the year, and that time was a real soul searching time. And out of that time, I, I came to the conclusion that I needed to change the course of, of where I was going in my life. And I went in after my three weeks off, and I resigned. I resigned my job and made a decision to go a different direction and didn't, didn't have a job lined up, didn't necessarily have anything. I just knew it was time to go and to do something different, more in line with ministry, more in line with my own per- a mission, more in line to give back part of the blessing that I had received, you know, from, from my, my years. You know, I, I'd--just, just, just to go back a quick moment, you know, at a certain point in my life, particularly after my folks [Maeola Wilson Blanchard and Eugene Harris, Jr.] divorced, I started stealing; I became a shoplifter, started doing some things that, that weren't total righteous periodically. And, and, and those things, you know, could have landed me in, in some serious trouble, but fortunately it didn't. And, and as I started thinking about those as a, as an adult, I thought, man, you know, I could have been on a, on a totally different course in my life. But thank god, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm still here and, and with a story to tell. And so how can I use that, those experiences to help other people? And, and, and being involved in the Lincoln [Nebraska] community, I figured one of the best ways was try to infiltrate the youth culture, to be able to share my, my story with young people. I wasn't the best student, you know, when I got to Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri], but, but I made it. I wasn't the best student in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri], but I made it. You know, so I was--so, so I, I figured I had something to give, and so it was time to give it. And so I left the university in, actually in, in, in January of '99 [1999] and was out without a job for a number of months. I had a couple of speaking engagements to pay some bills. My wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] was a stay at home mom at this time. She had been home for seven years. She left her university medical center [University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska] position to stay at home to raise our kids, yeah, right after her mom [JoAnn Maxey] passed in '92 [1992]. So she had been home for seven years. And so, without any reasonable income, without anything in sight, here I, I just left my job. And now it's time to see if, if, you know, the, the guy that I believe in can, can do what I, I believe he can do. And so in February I get a call from City Impact, a local community organization. They need, they, you know, the director said they needed--he had been talking with my wife and obviously she said, "Why don't you call John [HistoryMaker John Harris] and see if, if this would be something he would be interested in doing." And it was act- exactly one of the things that I had, had a desire for and that was working with young people in the community. And City Impact gave me the opportunity to connect with some young men in the community. I became the, the men's youth ministry coordinator. And that was working specifically with young predominantly African American males in middle school and high school. And so, I was a part of this faith based community organization, and did that from Jan- July of '99 [1999] 'til about June of 2002, and did some really good things, involved in the community, met a lot of families, engaged these young men. Matter of fact, I just helped bury the five month old premature son of one of my club members just the other day. I officiated the service for one of the young men who was in my club at City Impact when I first started there, he's now twenty, twenty-one, twenty-two. His girlfriend had a, a premature death--baby die, and he called me. And so, those connections continue to stay with me even though I'm not officially with the organization. My sense in 2002, again, transitioned. My sense is nothing really ends. There's always that something that just begins. And so I began, began again, a new vision for impacting people with a different, a deeper level. We were doing some things that were good for people, helping people as an advocate, as a resource. I started the shadowing program in Lincoln Public Schools, started until met--until midnight basketball program in the community. We were doing a lot of good things for a lot of people. But my sense was it wasn't going deep enough. It wasn't--we weren't personalizing it. We were just doing it. And my sense of the gospel was, was a, a desire to really go deep because people needed more than, than just money. They needed more than just the kind of stuff we were doing; they needed, they needed real deep change; and they need a sense that, you know, the thing, that they had something to give. You know, there are a lot of programs that help people, but they don't ever tell the people that you have something you can give back. And so the people sit there and they wait for help, wait for help, wait for help and, and never really give anything back. And so, I decided to take a different approach and start my own organization called Encouragement Unlimited [Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska].
Story_ID: 564402
Speaker 1: And so the Encouragement Unlimited [Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska] has three primary pillars: one--you'll have, you have that in the, in the handout I gave you--is a program, is, is partnerships. Our job is figuring really not to create a whole lot of different stuff. There's a lot of stuff going on. There are a lot of people who need encouragement. And so what we look for are people we can, we can partner with, and so we partner with the school system [Lincoln Public Schools]; we partner with community organizations; we partner with Lincoln food bank [Food Bank of Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]; we partner with people who help other people. The second is programs. We do back to school supplies; we provide food assistance; we do the kinds of things that we think fill holes, fill a gap for people and families. And then lastly, we do what we call a postcard project. We have a postcard project, where we send people encouragement in the mail. We, we literally take postcards and we send them inspirational messages in, in the mail. And one particular mother of a young man I used to work with, with City Impact [Lincoln, Nebraska], she asked me after she got seven of my postcards, "How do you know what to write?" I said, "All I do is go down to the post office, take a stack of cards. I say a prayer. I say God, give me, give me a sense of what I need to put on this card. And I write it, and I stamp it, and I put it in the mail." I said, "That's as simple as it get." She goes--I said, "Why do you ask?" 'Cause we never follow up on these cards. She said--I said, "Why do you ask?" She said, "Because it seems that every time I get it, it's exactly what I need to hear." And sometimes I'll just put on the card, hang in there, you know, don't let go, you know, we're here for you, you know, as simple a message, you know, as you can provide for someone, and, and veritably we believe that it makes an impact. And so over five years of existence, you know, we've sent out about twelve to fifteen thousand of these postcards to people all across the United States who believe need encouragement. We send them to kids. I send them to my own kids. I send them to my family members. I send them to my nieces and nephews. I send them to people--somebody says hey, listen, I know this person So and So in Dayton, Ohio, and they need encouragement. And so I'll say okay, send them a postcard. And so our job is not to encourage everybody but to build an army of encouragers, an army of people who, who believe that every day they wake up they can in, they can inspire somebody to, to hang in there, to, to, to sustain life just one more day, no, more hour, one more minute. And so, our job is just to, is to promote hope, because our motto is if, you don't have anything if you don't have hope. You know, if you just can't--if you don't believe you can, then things just start to fall apart. And so, that's the one thing I found from the people in City Impact I was working with, is that, yeah, they, yeah, they would love to have more money, and, and they would love to have more, more stuff, you know, 'cause most of them were, you know, low income. But the one thing I found myself doing most often was, was trying to sustain hope for them, that things would get better, that the troubles you're having now you won't always have; the problems you're having now you won't always have. And now, we try to be a resource. You want to finish high school, and you don't know the mechanism. We can put together the pieces, but you've got to do it. We can't do it for you. So, we just try to be the resource and the, the conduit through which the hope and inspiration flows.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so when I left City Impact, that's the life now I live.
Story_ID: 564403
Speaker 1: So, so a typical week would be spent how? Would, would it be doing more personal appearances or, or, or would it be--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) doing more--
Speaker 2: Well, let, let, you know, let's just start with, with Monday, I mean, preparing to bury a five month old preemie child and encouraging the young man and the young woman who, and the family who's trying to bury this child. A couple of days later I get a young man who's on social security who's, who's working a job but not making enough money. After he pays his bills he doesn't have any food, so we gotta try to help him find some food. He also needs maybe a little change in his pocket to, to, to go get his hair cut. And I'll give him an opportunity to clean my office and to make buttons. We have a button project that also provides inspirational messages on them. Next day I get an older gentleman, fifty plus, who's, who, who doesn't want to go on disability because he believes he can still work. But he, but he's in, he's depressed, and he wants something to do. So I have a number of items in my office that need to go to the city mission [People's City Mission, Lincoln, Nebraska]. He has a truck, comes to the office. We load stuff in the truck. We take it to the city mission, gives him a day where he feels fulfilled for a day, and then we try it again the next day. Again, that, you can't--I can't forget my own family. I got a daughter--two daughters [Shannon Harris and JoAnna Harris] who were homecoming royalty, got to be there for them, got to encourage them, got to let them know that they're doing the right things; got a son [John Harris, Jr.] who's in a middle school, gotta make sure he understands that, you know, he can, he can be successful in social studies. You know, my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] is, you know, just had surgery two weeks ago, and so she needs to realize that she's okay. You know, she's, yeah, she's lost a part of herself, and so she, so the encouragement there. I got a son [Preston Harris] in college, got to let him know though they've lost three games in a row that, you know, it's gonna be okay; you know, my nieces and nephews, postcards; sister's getting married. So there's, there's--it's all around me every moment. Then there's opportunities that go into schools, alternative learning classes, talk to young people about what it takes. I have a program called Life 101: Making It Happen Against All Odds [ph.], one called Motivation in your Life, again, Leadership: It's Your Time. And, and so there's opportunities all over. And, and, and many of those opportunities are just to, to try to say to as many people as I can: listen, somebody's gotta come your way who, who may need something significant that you have to give them. And, and, and it, and it's not--may not be anything out of your pocket, but it may be the, the words that come out of your mouth that provide the inspiration to sustain them. Be ready and be willing to provide that information, and do it as often as you can until you die and see what happens. And so, that's the, the, the genesis and the, the functionality of Encouragement Unlimited. It's a fledgling nonprofit organization. But, but for, for what we do, nobody does it better than us. And we're not trying to do it all. What we're trying to do is not--we're not trying to be an organization. What we're trying to be is a vision. We're trying to give our vision away. And so our hope is that we don't, we don't exist always. Because when encouragement begins to, to, to have the domino effect, when we, when we give it, give it away to one person and they give it away to another person, you know, the whole pay it forward idea, then, you know, we got that army of encouragers for people who wake up every day saying: who can I touch? Who can I impact? What difference can I make today? And it's born out of my own Christian experience, of course, but you know, it's a, it's as simple an idea, and I'm a simple person (laughter). So, it's as simple an idea as anybody could come up with. I remember one day we're having a ministry fair, and a friend of mine, you know, had all these organizations around. And here we are, tucked right in the middle. And we had our big sign up there, Encouragement Unlimited, Incorporated [Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska], you know, incorporated, nonprofit, alive, existing. And a friend of mine just stood there and looked at the sign. She looked at me, and she looked at the sign, and she said, "I know you didn't come up with this; I know you didn't do it." And I said, "You know, you're right. The inspiration came from somewhere else, but my job was to, to actualize it." You know, it's, it's a, it's a, is a name that, that I sense came from, you know, divine inspiration. It wasn't me. I was just trying to figure out how to provide en- encouragement for people on a regular basis. And then the name Encouragement Unlimited came into my head. And so, that's who we are, and that's what we do.
Story_ID: 564404
Speaker 1: In terms of the different ways to deliver the message, you, you have training in television, and, and you're a, you're a good writer and--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) have written quite a, quite a few pieces.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Had you, you plan to write a book or to produce--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --DVDs or, or, or, or, or, or media?
Speaker 2: Right now we have a, a PSA [public service announcement] four, four spot PSA that we send to radio stations. And local radio stations in Lincoln [Nebraska] play it all the time, Christian radio stations play it and four good pieces of PSA. And my, my plan now is to, to send that--is professionally produced. We're gonna send those PSAs to radio stations all across the country, actually, and get them to play those pieces. A book is in, in, in, in line as well, and anoth- and, and also, we have the idea for now what we call encouragement products, bumper stickers, buttons, t-shirts, the whole deal. And so, you know, we want, again, give the vision away. We have one shirt that has a big smiley face on the front of it. It says, "Go Ahead, Smile," you know (laughter). It takes far more, far more work to frown than it does to smile. And so we just--that's, that's, that's our message, go ahead, I dare you, smile. And, and, and that's what all, that's all we're trying to promote. We're trying to promote an ability of people to, to see what impact they can make before their time, it's their time to be pushing up daisies. And I figured this was my lot; this was the thing that I've been given; this was the, the thing that I had to do. You know, I talked earlier about my father [Eugene Harris, Jr.] and the thing he, he, he felt he had to do with setting up those storefront churches. Well, I guess I may not be too far from him. When I was at the university [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] there was something I was compelled to do, something I had to do, and I had to leave the university to be able to do it. And I didn't, and I didn't have a job. I didn't have any money in the bank. All I had was a sense. And so, the one thing I did make a decision to do at a certain point when I, when I finally grew up, quote, unquote was to not leave this life with any regret, as much as I could. And, and when I sat in my office in '96 [1996] and didn't leave, and I sat there in '97 [1997] and I didn't leave, and then '98 [1998] came, and, and I got hurt. Then finally in Oct- October I said you know, it's time to go. it all, it all--it was like the monkey off my back, actually a gorilla, you know, that whole weight of, of the pressure of knowing, you know, what is your destiny, what is the legacy you're gonna leave on, on, on the time you have here. And, and I la- I just love the Ensure--you know, I, I remember watching this Ensure commercial. I don't know if you've seen this, where, where there're some--their slogan is really simple. You're talking about slogans. It's, it's not the years in your life; it's the life in your years. And so I thought, you know what? I can deal with that. So, Encouragement Unlimited [Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska], the opportunity to teach students in college, the sharing of information with college students or corporate executives across the country in order to inspire and motivate them, share my story, the good, the bad, the ugly, the ups and downs, is a blessing for me.
Story_ID: 564405
Speaker 1: What is your typical clientele [at Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska]? I mean what--I know it's a lot, lot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Colleges.
Speaker 1: --lot of diff- colleges, okay.
Speaker 2: Colleges and universities.
Speaker 1: So they invite you out to speak and to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they do, community groups, community organizations--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --across the country.
Speaker 1: And how, how religious specific is it? I mean is it, is it--
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not at all (laughter), you know. You know, you know, faith issues, Christian issues, it, it's just a part of what I am. It's a fabric of what I am. It's the, it transcends what I've, what I am. But most often, you know, am, am, am I using--giving a religious speech? No. I'm just talking about life. I'm talking about--and, and, and the simple truth is, is that it's just like it says in the scriptures. You know, it says that, that some, some people, you know, some people be ready for the message, and some people aren't. People--you know, Jesus said, "I came to seek and save those who are lost" [Luke 19:10]. Some people don't realize they're lost; they don't realize it. You know, they, they, they're out there quote, unquote lost, and they don't realize it, and so they're not looking to be saved. And so those are not the people I'm looking for. I'm looking for people who realize they're lost and want to be saved.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, you said that like a minister.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean, I, I asked you how religious specific it is, and you said it was really not. But then--
Speaker 2: What I'm, what I'm saying, I'm--
Speaker 1: --what you just said is like, you're looking for people to save them, so I don't know if--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm saying that there are people--
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: --various and sundry situ- situations, people who are, who are looking for a, a course in life, people who are, who are, who are trying to kind of quote, find themselves, quite like I was. And, and what I have is, is information. Now, that, that may mean a sense of, of, of coming to, to making a decision to faith in Christ. It might mean any number of things. It might just mean changing, changing everything from your diet to your perspective. And so, I, I have the fortunate--the, the fortune and opportunity to, to be able to provide any of those bits of information. And if, and if there are people in an, in an audience where I am who hear my faith message and, and gravitate to that, that's great. If there are people in the audience who, who, who hear something different and gravitate to that, that's cool, you know. So, so what I'm saying is that if, if I'm in a place and, and all--I get to talk in churches, you know, so that's a place where I can, where I can share that message. But there is, there's a story that my story transcends everything I talk about. And again, there's a faith, faith component to that. But again, that's, that's, that's for, that's for the people to decide.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: If that, if that's something they want to gravitate to, God bless them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But if there's another piece--see, and there's a thing. The one thing I, one thing I did learn in college (laughter) of the mid- of, of, of two (laughter) is a thing called selective perception. You know, you, you, you grab, you grab hold to that which you can ascribe to, that which it sustains you. And so everything I say somebody may not--they may pick out a small little portion, say you what? I can relate to that; I can grab on to that. Maybe it's his story about, you know, the transition of divorce; maybe it's his story about, you know, growing up when he got to the East Coast; maybe it's the whole issue of finding, you know, finding himself and faith again; maybe it's his, his, his relationship challenges; maybe it was the reality of his, you know, any number of things; maybe it was the, how, how he was freed from shoplifting, that whole, whole dynamic there. You know, so there, there, there's a, a great bit of information that I share, particularly in my own personal stories, and it's up to you what you gravitate to.
Story_ID: 564406
Speaker 1: Now, what are your, were your, your future plans? Do you have--would, would you ever consider entering politics say, or--
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting you mentioned that. I had actually--my mother-in-law, JoAnn Maxey, was a state senator here in Nebraska. And, and I thought, you know, long and hard about her contribution and the ability to, to sustain a legacy in our family along those realms. And so I actually had thought about running for city council in, in Lincoln [Nebraska] and possibly running for the state legislature in Nebraska. And so those are things that I have contemplated and have given some thought to. My wife [Charlene Maxey Harris], you know, of course, she, she, she understands what that means to run a campaign 'cause her mom had to do it. And so she wants me to, to, to think about it a little bit more, give it a little bit more thought, research it a lot more. So I've been talking to individuals about and that--you know, I at four- forty-six now. So I figure at some time as, as I'm maybe given more years to live, that might be a part of something I do. But my challenge is, is to realize--you know, I'm in a position of, of unique--that may be unique, and maybe it's just the way I look at it. I know every day that when I wake up somebody is expecting me to do something significant. It may not be me always expecting it, but I know when, when I'm in the atmosphere, wherever I am, some- somebody is expecting something significant, every day. And sometimes it's my kids; sometimes it's my wife; and, and sometimes I used to ask myself is this a blessing, or is this a curse? And the only answer I ever get is yes (laughter), okay. Oh, and, and so, the, the challenge then is, so what do you do? And so I just do what it is I do. And I understand there may be a young man who I come across; a young woman; a single mom; a, an older gentleman may have lost his job; or somebody--and it, and sometimes it's taxing because you gotta find a way to be encouraged yourself, you know. If you're out encouraging everybody else, who encourages the encourager? And so you have to find time to pull away, to be refreshed and so forth, to do the kinds of things that keep you, keep you going. And that's, again, that's where faith sustains me, I mean prayer, fellowship with other people, playing tennis, getting back on the fishing hole, getting out there throwing the line in and just relaxing and, and, and those kinds of things. But, but I know until I die, this is my lot; this is what I do; and, and this is what I have to do.
Story_ID: 564407
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and you've addressed some of it already, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: They're primarily steeped for me right now in the reality of the African American man and males specifically. That's where I spend a lot of my time, working with young African American males. That was my work with City Impact [Lincoln, Nebraska]. I'm, matter of fact, later this month I'll be going down to Kansas, University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], to be a part of the Am I My Brother's Keeper conference. And so I've been a part of that for the last number of years in October of every year, where we try to get together young men and try to work with them. I have a project right now I've started called Manhood 101: Training the Next Generation. I'm formalizing right now a, a series of, of meetings for a conference in a twelve year--twelve month mentoring project specifically geared toward young men and particularly in the African American community, because I think if, if we can figure out those issues in some, some, with some success, we can solve a lot of others. And so, that's where my energies--a, a lot of my energies are spent right now.
Story_ID: 564408
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: I was just talking with a friend of mine at home, one of my best buddies, the other day about that very question. And there's a lot I'd like to do differently. I mean, but, you know, one of my--you know, I make a lot of buttons, and, and one of my, my latest buttons that I've made is, "There's No Do Overs," you know, you only get one chance; this is it. And yeah, I mean, early on in my life I had, I had a lot of relationships. I wish I was more mature. I wish I, I had made better decisions early on. I wish I hadn't--I had, I wish had a higher level of respect for women, you know. I didn't in college [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri]. And I wish, I wish I could have gone back. You know, if I knew then what I know now, I would have treated people a whole lot differently. At a certain point in time, I felt I was a good, a nice guy, and I always got kind of treated badly by, by young, young women 'cause they want a, you know, a different kind of guy, not as, not as respectful, not as, as square, quote, unquote, as I was. And, and that, and that, that pained me early on, that, that why, why can't you just want a nice guy like me? And so, so that rejection turned, turned the tables on me. And then all of a sudden I became the guy they wanted and wasn't good. And so, so I wish I could take that back. And I've had the great blessing of being able to, to, to go back to some of those young ladies and apologize for my, my, my behavior and, and, and provide some closure. And I had--and, and one of those young ladies I'm fortunate to say I got to talk to before she died. She died two weeks later. And so there are a lot of things I wish I, I could do. I wish I had invested more of myself, I had a higher opinion of myself early on educationally, my academic pursuits. You know, as a, a graduate student, I had a 4.0 graduate GPA [grade point average]. I wish I had taken school, school a lot more seriously early on and achieved at a higher level early on, found success, the success that was in me the whole time, wish I had, had, had given that out. I have a, another one of my buttons says, "Excellence is the only option." I give that to my kids, excellence is the only option; mediocrity is unacceptable. And so, we hold, we hold a high standard, my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] and I, and so, and that keeps my kids accountable. I wish I, I had had that kind of accountability myself. And so, yeah, I look a back, and I have, I have a lot of things I wish I could change. But I, but just like I told my friend: the, the, the course of our lives, if they had been different, we wouldn't be where we are right now. And so those things had to happen that way for me to know what I know and to be able to do what I do. And so obviously it wasn't my plan. And my plan wasn't a good plan because my plan was leading to destruction. I'm following a different plan, and I'm finding more success now and, and happy about it.
Story_ID: 564409
Speaker 1: Let me just, just mention here your master's thesis. You've just handed it to, to me and it's (laughter). But you were just talking about the crisis of young black males as being one of the, your chief concerns in the black community. And your, the title of your--I just want to enter this into the record, is that the title of your thesis is 'Helping Educators Understand the Black Male Crisis and the Importance of Fostering Resilience in Public Schools' [ph.]. Right, so, let--this is a question we always ask too, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Wow (laughter). I didn't figure I was done yet (laughter), so I fig- that's a question I have not really thought about a lot. But, but, you know, one of the things that, as, as I was sharing with my friend the other day, we were thinking about this, and I was, I was sharing with, with somebody just two days ago, about legacy and the whole idea of impression. And, and one of the things that, that I, I think I'm fortunate enough to be able to say, in most regards, is that if, if, if, if I would die today, and the people who come in contact with me would be at the place where, where I would be and about to lay to rest, and they had an opportunity, each of them had an opportunity to say something, that the last impression of me would be a favorable one. And, and that's one of the great challenges I think I have, is, is that what kind of last impression do I leave with a person? And you know, early on, I could say probably those impressions for some would not have been so favorable. But I think at this point, I've made a conscious effort of making sure that mote- most, if not all, my interactions with people are, are such that if they had to say something about the time we spent together, the lasting impression would be a favorable one.
Story_ID: 564410
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about your family. Now you, you have children, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have four children.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: My oldest son is Preston [Preston Harris]. He's a college student at Concordia University [Concordia University, Nebraska] in Seward, Nebraska. It's about twenty-five miles from Lincoln [Nebraska]. He graduated from Lincoln High School [Lincoln, Nebraska]. He was the child we had when we were in New Hampshire. He was a week old when we brought him to Nebraska, to Omaha [Nebraska] actually. He was born a day after Christmas in 1988. We, we were expecting him to be born on Christmas, but Preston is a procrastinator. I'm glad to say that on tape. And he waited until the next day to be born. (Laughter) And so, so he's, he's a fine young man. He wants to be a high school principal. He, he's taking on, taking on a lot of responsibility in terms of a desire to help young people. He sees and has seen what has happened in schools where he's been. He understands the, the magnitude of, of having a, a mother and a father that he can go to on a regular basis and the, and the void that there is for many of his friends who do not have that. And so, he thinks that there's an impact that he can have, and being a high school principal is one way to do it. My sixteen year old is my first daughter, Shannon [Shannon Harris]. Shannon is a junior at Lincoln High School. She is I believe become the first African American drum major that Lincoln High School has ever had. And she takes music very seriously, is a talented musician, an ex- an excellent young lady in many, many regards. And faith is very important to her. She considers herself a, a missionary of, of sorts but, but a musician. She can touch any instrument and be playing it well very soon, loves jazz. And the opportunity to, to lead this high school orchestra, band rather, is something of much import to her, and so very sensitive young lady. And I, I can't say exactly what she wants to, to do with her life, but it will be significant, and it may involve music for the most part. My second daughter is JoAnna [JoAnna Harris]. She's fifteen--my third daughter rather, my third child, my second daughter, is JoAnna. She was born--Shannon was born May 24th, 1991. Several months later, JoAnna was born on August 9th, 1992, and so a, a small, small gap there. JoAnna is, is just feisty. She, she's our lawyer. She's, she's our argumentative person. She's a person prone to conflict. But, but, but that's because she has a heart that's bent on justice. She, she expects people to do things right and, and in terms of treating people fair is something she's really, really, that's really, really important to her. And a matter of fact, she, she was in my office, and I have a lot of quotes on my wall in my office. And she said, "Dad, I got a quote for your office." And I said, "Well, what is it?" Because I think oftentimes people take quotes from other people. I think there's, there's inspiration in every, in everybody. So, just as easy as I can grab a quote from some quote, unquote famous person, I can, I believe I can say something just as significant. And, and so JoAnna said, "Here's my quote for your wall." She says, "If you can be fair, why not be?" And so I thought, hm (laughter), so I put it up. I typed it up, printed it out, put it up on the wall. And I thought it was, I thought it was insightful. And so she's a person who's, who's always in it with somebody, but again, full of compassion, a person who, who has made a decision that if, if she's at, at, at odds with someone, that she's gonna try to be the bigger person and try to rectify the situation. So I'm very proud of her for that. My youngest son is John, Jr. [John Harris, Jr.]. We had not planned on naming any of our children juniors or whatever. But when we got to the point where we needed a name, my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] said John. And so my namesake is my thirteen year old middle schooler, who in the last several months has gone from a size eleven and a half shoe to a size fifteen, a growth spurt that has taken him from about 5'6" to about 5'9.5". My family--my, my wife's family is a basketball family. They're all about 6'2", 6'3"-ish, and my son is on a growth spurt quite like her side of the family--size fifteen, he's thirteen.
Speaker 1: A fifteen shoe at 5'9"?
Speaker 2: Five foot nine and a half.
Speaker 1: He must have hands like--
Speaker 2: Well, he's, he's that nice long wing span. He's on his way up. And he, he, you know, he wants to be--he's a good athlete. He, he, he's had a medical situation that will keep him from most physical--excuse me, most physical sports. He has--his kidneys are not actually where kidneys are normally. They're actually fused into his lower abdomen. And so an injury there would cause him great harm. He does--he has no secondary kidney, so football is out for him. Basketball is a, is a touchy proposition, if, if he would get an elbow or something there. So we're, we're still trying to figure out exactly how to proceed with him--fine young man, tumble, quite. We need to oftentimes have to get him to talk louder. But, just all my kids have just a sweet, sweet disposition in spite of me (laughter), who, who come on like Sergeant Carter. But, and think god for my wife. Her, her--she provides the balance fortunately for them, and, and you know, they're, they're great kids.
Story_ID: 564411
Speaker 1: Do you teach African American studies too right now, cur (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --cur- currently.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I have historically taught cultural education for about fifteen some years, corporations, colleges. I do a number of programs in the diversity arena [through Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska], one called Finding Common Ground, one called Toward a Better Understanding, and so forth, and so some--a lot of foundational things that deal--have dealt with raising culture in general senses. This, this is specifically about the African American experience in, in depth, at least in the beginning stages. So we've, we've gone from everything from the Middle Passage to back to Africa to, to ancient Egypt, on and on and on and on, so we go way back. We don't start on the shores of the United States. We go back, back, back into the, into origins of--into Africa, into the pyramids, into Imhotep, into, into much of, of what is not in the American textbooks and privy to most high school and college students. And so, so we start there. And, and in an introduction class, you know, you can't do everything. And so one of our challenges is trying to hone in on that knowledge which is gonna compel the students to see either the, the, the condition, the contribution, the culture, or the crisis. And it's their job to begin to dissect, analyze, examine what they see, what they hear in a way where they can begin to understand some aspect of the African American experience. And then, not only that, not only just understand it, but be compelled in some way to ask the kinds of questions for further investigation or, or that might provide a solution.
Story_ID: 564412
Speaker 1: Is there anything you think we need to, to mention before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I, I, I think one of the things that, that, that, that I may not have done a, a good enough job of, in terms of, you know, the things have impacted me to, to where I--who I am and what I am now, are, are my friends. I think the, the guys who are my friends, I mean my real friends back home, are, are, are as, as significant a part of, of what, what I do now, I am, and because I think about where we are as young men. I think about the fact we're all still alive, the fact that we have families. I think about the place where we came from and how, how we, we, we had just as much choice as anybody else of going a different way, going the wrong way. Drugs were, were a part of our world. The potential for doing things wrongly was a part of our world. And somehow, in that community of Wellston [Missouri], we were blessed not to find those things. And we're now able to, to, to speak to one another about, about that in ways that is really significant as we continue to share life with one another, as we're part of each other's weddings, as we see our kids grow up, as we do the kinds of things. And that's where I think--as, as we talk about our, our, our fathers or who were there and those who were not there and so forth. And so, I think for me friendship is, has been a, as much a part of, of this experience, because a couple of times I've had, I've had medical issues. Ninety-five [1995] I had, I had to have a surgery, and I was in college I had to have a surgery in my back. And so I've had another--number of medical situations where my friends have, have--I remember--give you just a case in point. When I had my first medical situation, I had the onset of a heart attack, back in '93 [1993]. And you know, I had, just had some chest pains and went in to the doctor, and they, they kept me. (Unclear). I drove myself to the hospital, and they kept me in there for four days. And on, almost on cue, since I was gonna be laid up for a while, my friends start sending me money in the mail, you know, for, for whatever bills or whatever, something I had not asked them to do, things that, that--they just felt, you know, John's [HistoryMaker John Harris] gonna need some help. And so on cue, almost the same amount, they all just--and I'll--and then when I asked them, I said, "Did you talk to So and So? Did you, Kent [ph.], did you talk to (Unclear)? Did you talk to Cedric [ph.]? Did you talk to, you know, Lester [ph.]? Did, did you all--?" No, they didn't talk. The just knew that, that this was something that, that was gonna be necessary. I had a friend, Kent, one of my best friends who graduated after many years of not graduating from, from college. You know, we had all graduated. He had, you know, had situations that didn't make it possible for him to graduate when we all did. And I found out he was graduating the day before he was graduating from Harris-Stowe teachers college [Harris-Stowe State College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri]. And so I told my wife [Charlene Maxey Harris] I need to go; I need to be there. And Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was speaking, and he tells me the day before, but I got to be there. So I hop in the car. I drive seven hours to St. Louis [Missouri]. I go to sleep. I turn around and come home, you know. That's a place I had to be. And so, it's that kind of thing that, that I think is, is something that's, it's so lost. And, and you know, I wa- this is--if I had any desire for my, my kids, it's, it's to have the kind of friends that I would have. You know, people--kid, my kids say I met a new friend. No, it's not a friend. That's an acquaintance. I'm gonna tell you who, who real friends are. And I think that's one of the, the, the things that I think most people who, who, who are, who's anybody can say, you know what? I really got some people who I can really say are close to me, who are truthful with me, who are accountable, that I'm accountable to, who I have to represent well. And, and, and whatever success I have that I send home, my newsletters, they're proud of me. And, and that makes it worth it.
Story_ID: 564413
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: You know, some--I, I, I actually wrote this down. I was in a, a group called Leadership Lincoln, and it's, it's a, a class of people from Lincoln [Nebraska] who, who go through this leadership program. And I think that's one of the questions. And, and I would probably say now that I'm--I, I would answer this differently now than I did when I went through the Leadership Lincoln class. I think--man, that's tough (laughter). That's a tough question. Because I think at this point, I want--I, I can say it clearly. You know, I, I, I was at a funeral a couple of days ago. And, and one of the things that I, that I referenced from the, the Bible I think that, that, that helps me figure out how I should end my life is that in, in, in John 17 Jesus says--it's, the caption says Jesus prays for himself. And what he prays is that, that God would, would begin to bring, to bring him home basically. He says, "I've done all that you've given me to do. Those who you gave to my care, I, I, I took care of, and I let none of them get away" [John 17:12]. And so, in essence, I thought to myself, as I read that prayer, wouldn't it be great at the end of my life if, if it was clear, not only to me, but to those who know me and those maybe who don't, after they hear, that I had done all that I was here to do. And if, and if in forty-six years--and that's part of my goal, is to, to try to accomplish everything I was born to accomplish. And, and, and, and not--you know, if I, if I pass today, nobody could really say he died early, or he died before his time. No, I died exactly when I was supposed to. And, and the thing that I was supposed to do while I was here, whether it be Encouragement Unlimited [Encouragement Unlimited, Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska], which I think it is, was exactly what I did. I gave, I ultimately gave more than I took, you know. I smiled more than I cried, and, and, and I, and I sought to affect more than to be affected by life. And so, my, my goal and my desire is, is for me to leave here and be confident that the, the, the, the gift that God gave me to, to talk--and be--I asked, and actually I asked one day. I said just show me what I do, and I'll do it. Show, just show it to me. And, and the sense I got was, you know, you talk. I said well, anybody talks. But not like you. And so, once I realized that that's what really what I do well, I said that's what I'm gonna do. And so my mom [Maeola Wilson Blanchard] told me a long time ago, she told me, "You talk too much. You should be paid for it." I remember her saying that, you know, kind in jest, "You talk too much. You should be paid for it." And when I remember, I remember I got my first check from, from speaking, and I sent her the stub (laughter). And so, that's all I really want. I want, I want to, to know, and I want those who, who know, know about me and know of me to know that, that he, he gave his gift to the--away. He didn't hold it on for himself. He didn't hold it for his own success and his own prosperity. He gave his gift away. And, and the people he came in contact with, if not the broader community, is better for it.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's all we can ask.
Speaker 2: Thank you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 564414
Speaker 1: This is a, a picture from my brother's wedding last October 19--oh, mean, not 19--2006. He just, he got married, and we were all in St. Louis [Missouri] for the wedding. And this is the picture actually without him. His name is Tim [Timothy Harris]. And from left to right you'll see my brother, my oldest brother, Chris [Chris Harris]. My--to his immediate right is my wife, Charlene [Charlene Maxey Harris]. Back in the background to her right is a friend, a family friend, we call him Buzzy [ph.]. Buzzy's been a part of our, our family. His name is Sam Word [ph.]. Sam, Sam has a hurt--an arm disabled, but he played basketball in high school and college and was quite good. My sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Harris Hall], is to his right in the white. My sister, Regina [Regina Harris Trotter], second oldest sister is to her right. And my youngest sister, Lisa [Lisa Harris Hampton], in the back row there, is, she's an actress. She won three times on the Apollo ['Showtime at the Apollo']. She tours with a number of different theatrical groups. If you come down on the, the bottom row from left to right is yours truly with my wife behind. In the middle is my mother, Maeola Blanchard [Maeola Wilson Blanchard]. She remarried a gentleman named Mr. Blanchard, and he passed about six years ago. To her immediate right is my sister-in-law, Julie [ph.]. And then the last person on the bottom right is my young--second sister right under me, Chrystal [Chrystal Harris Greer].
Speaker 2: Oh, we have again the same wedding, October of, of 2007--'6 [2006] rather. And these are the, the grandchildren of my mother, my children and my nieces and nephews. And if you go from left to right, my oldest niece, her name is Pam [ph.]. She's preg- with child, yeah, right here. Her father is in the back there, my brother. She's the oldest grandchild. To her immediate right is--
Speaker 1: Left right (laughter). It's her left.
Speaker 2: Her left and my right--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well--
Speaker 2: --as we--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA MALE VOICE): Where he's coming from left to right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I go across is, is the, the daughter of my sister, Chrystal. That's Jerica [ph.]. To her, her right is Adam [ph.]. He is the nephew--is the son of my sister, Regina, who's actually on the far, far right in the back. My brother's oldest son is, is Chris, Jr. [Chris Harris, Jr.]. He's back in the back, and his youngest brother is Stephen [ph.], right in the middle, the tall kid right in the middle. My second oldest niece is Angie [ph.], who's back in the back. And then my son, John [John Harris, Jr.], is there in the green shirt standing. If you go down to the bottom row, my sister Chrystal's two daughters. All of her daughters are right clustered right together next to grandma. That's J- Jan- Janae [ph.] and Jayla [ph.] to her right next to grandma, and then my mother right in the middle is Blanchard, and my daughter, JoAnna [JoAnna Harris] with the piercing eyes to her immediate right--actually left, my right, and then Angie's daughter, youngest daughter, Asia [ph.]. And we have a number of, of grandchildren missing. My oldest son [Preston Harris] is missing from this picture, my oldest daughter [Shannon Harris] is missing from this picture and a couple of others.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well, this is just yours truly, his gradu- my graduation picture from the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], rather stoic of course. But that's the picture that I was blessed to be able to take as I graduated from the University of Missouri in May of 1984.
Speaker 1: This is a, an anniversary picture, wedding anniversary. I've been married twenty-one years. This is actually probably I think my twentieth wedding anniversary picture, a year or so at 2006. And this is my wife, Charlene, love of my life. And my life changed when I met her, and I can't imagine (laughter) what would happen if I had not met her in ni--
Speaker 2: This is a picture I'm definitely proud of. This is the, the day I received my master's degree in education after twenty-one years of trying and (laughter), and starting and stopping actually. So this was 2005, August of 2005, at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln [Lincoln, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Is, is what I call the, the summit photo. These are my nieces and nephews, and actually my, my nieces children as well. From left to right there's Jayla. Back in the background is Stephen, Janae--I mean Jayla. Janae is down in the front--Jasmine [ph.], Adam, Mark [ph.] standing rather in the middle there stoic, Quinn [ph.] to, to his right in the yellow shirt--she's at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and Mike Jones [ph.], who is at Valdosta State [Valdosta State University, Valdosta, Georgia]. In the, in the very front is Janae. I decided to, to, to have a meeting with these young people to talk to them about our family legacy and the kind of young people I would hope they would be one day, and we're, we're still working at it.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my son's senior night, football, my wife and I. I was working for a local radio station. Actually I was broadcasting this game for ESPN 1480 [KLMS Radio, Lincoln, Nebraska]. And this is the parent recognition at my son's final football game in 2006--actually, I'm sorry, actually 2007. He graduated in 2007.
Speaker 1: That's just a picture (laughter) of me. I don't know what else to tell you. That was taken 2005 at, at the columns at the University of Nebraska.
Speaker 2: That, that's simply one of the, the happiest days of my life. I mean that's the day I married Charlene. That's July 26th, 1986, and that's where it all started. And that's Christ Temple Church [Lincoln, Nebraska]. The pastor of that church was Reverend Trago McWilliams [Trago O. McWilliams], so I believe he's in the Nebraska historical book. This is actually the last wedding he did. He died soon after this wedding.
Speaker 1: You, you would wonder, you know, on this day, this is May 18th, 1984. I'm graduating from college, and I don't know why I look so perplexed. Maybe 'cause it's time to pack up and go. I really enjoyed college, but this was also a very happy day.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me. That's--I can't remember exactly what grade I was in on this photo. This is from elementary school, and of course with the shirt and tie, quite, quite elegant (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's the lady who brought me into this world. That's Maeola Blanchard. Believe that photo is from about 2002 or '3 [2003]. And she's awesome. She's, she's taught me everything I, I know and, and more. I've actually listened to some of it.
Speaker 2: That's her, my mom, as she prepares for our wedding day. And she, you know, she knows how to dress, and she always gonna have her a nice hat on while she's in the, in the midst of it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Magic Johnson, isn't it? I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, that was my nickname in--
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: --Magic in high school. That's who I modeled myself after, Magic Johnson. He was my idol. And everything I wanted to do on the basketball floor I wanted to do like Magic Johnson, even the, the no look pass, as you can see here. This was I believe my sophomore year on varsity, which would have been '77 [1977] or '78 [1978]. And that's against Clayton [Clayton High School, Clayton, Missouri], one of our, our rivals. We beat them soundly (laughter) on this day.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: One of the interesting things about this picture, this picture, this is when I was a freshman on varsity. This is '76 [1976]. I actually--this is an interesting contrast photo and a very--and probably the photo I have to probably keep more than any other. What you see, this is a contrast of two lives. The people in the background are from Wellston [Missouri]. They're waiting for the next tournament game. And then there I am on the court playing for Priory [Saint Louis Priory School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Those are your neighborhood people.
Speaker 1: Those were all my people. Matter of fact, on the top row at about one o'clock is my sister and the young man talking to her in the very top. If you look at twelve o'clock and just look right across was a young man whispering in a young lady's ear. Well, that young lady is my sister, and all of the, all the, the people in the background are my neighbors. And here I am playing with another team.
