Story_ID: 8197
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. And I'm interviewing today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Isaac Lee Hayes, Junior, I-S-A-A-C, L-E-E, H-A-Y-E-S, Junior, J-R.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 20th, 1942 in Covington, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation, well (laughs), I'm an entertainer.  That's my basic occupation is entertainer.  I've done a lot of things. Entertainer, I'm still a DJ [disc jockey], I'm an actor, I'm a voice-over artist, I'm a restaurateur, I'm a king.  What else am I?
Speaker 1: An Oscar-winning songwriter--.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I'm an Oscar winner. I'm a Golden Globe [Hollywood Foreign Press Association film and television awards] winner. I'm a Grammy [Recording Academy award] winner.
Speaker 1: Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
Speaker 2: Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee, and, you know, all kind of accolades like honors, you know--.
Speaker 1: Philanthropist.
Speaker 2: --philanthropist, and, you know, I have a foundation, and I support, number one, literacy and music education for kids in school.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is--let's see, today's date is the 25th of June, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right. And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Memphis, Tennessee at the Hilton East Hotel.
Story_ID: 8198
Speaker 1: There are five kind of 'People' magazine-ish-type questions that I'm compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: First one--they just require a brief answer. The first question is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is southern cuisine--in lay terms, soul food.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, summertime.
Speaker 1: And, third (sic), do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination--well, it's Pacific Rim countries but because of the whole change of the world and terrorism, I prefer Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase, I can't think of it right now, but I'm sure it will come to me. I might say it within this whole interview session.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know you're always quoted as "Ya' damn right."  [quote from Hayes's song 'Theme from Shaft']
Speaker 2: (Laughs)  'Shaft.'  Yeah, that was a famous quote, but, you know, I was making a song, you know, and composing. But a lot of people quoted it.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And even they quote this tune ['Theme from Shaft'], "He's a bad mother--shut your mouth."
Speaker 1: "Shut your mouth", right.
Speaker 2: And I was just censoring myself when I said we had the girl say, "Shut your mouth."  But it became a phrase.
Speaker 1: Right, it's really--it's a game that people play in the car with their kids and stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, I've done it myself. We get a kick out of it, you know.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Get the timing just right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible) shut your mouth.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right.
Story_ID: 8199
Speaker 1: What do you know about your ancestors, and how far can you trace them back?
Speaker 2: Well, I can trace them--it's sketchy, but my niece told me this from my grandfather's side, my grandfather on my mother's [Eula Bee Wade] side, yeah. It goes back to a ship that came over to America, and there was a slave named Solomon.  He was from Africa.  He was like a prince, and he was very rebellious. He was that way for a long time.  He didn't want to succumb to captivity.  He changed his M. O. [modus operandi].  He started seeking education, learning to read and write.  I guess he figured he could better survive that way, and that was a weird time for us to learn to read and write because if they caught us learning to read and write, we were punished, brutally sometimes.  So he had to do that and still survive. And that's as far back as I can remember.
Speaker 1: About when did he live?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, it was--my niece didn't give me that. It was, I'm sure, back in the--probably 16 [1600]-something. This is a wild guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But before, I mean, during slavery?
Speaker 2: Yeah, during.
Speaker 1: When they're still transporting slaves?
Speaker 2: Exactly, when they're still transporting through the Middle Passage.
Speaker 1: Do you know, where he--(unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: What part of Africa--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what part of Africa he came from?
Speaker 2: Don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would venture to say West Africa because that's where most of us came from.  I remember every time you go to Africa, people can look at you and they can tell where you're from.  One time [1991], Barry White  [musician] and I was in Cote d'Ivoire, Ivory Coast and they looked at me and said, "You're a Douala man." Several of them said that. They pointed me out. "Who's Douala?"  Well, Douala is an area in the Cameroon because that's where I came from.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Could be. There's some Muslim area, and I think Solomon is probably a Muslim name--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for someone in that part of the world.  They would've had a biblical type name. It'd probably be a Muslim name, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because from my studies, I know Islam came to Western Africa because it was called the Western Sudan early on.  And they came to Africa--Islam came to Western Africa probably in around ten [1000]-something, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1067, (inaudible).
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, I was right then.
Speaker 1: Abu Bakr took over the Mali Empire--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What they call the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(Inaudible).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Mali and then it was the city of Timbuktu was real big back there. They had universities and stuff, and they studied, and scholars came from way afar. And I realized that the Islam--people of Islam, they did all the administrative things for the kings.
Story_ID: 8200
Speaker 1: What part of the country can you trace your people to?  Were they always in Tennessee as far as you know?  Or I mean have them been in Tennessee a long time?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, that's--yeah, I think Solomon came in somewhere in Virginia, but it was a big old skip and then I found, you know, my grandfather's people in Tennessee.  But my grandfather [Willie J. Wade], he was weird in his color.  He had a lighter complexion, and he had brown eyes, real brown eyes.
Speaker 1: Light brown?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, you know, they were kind of light brown.  And he had red hair. My grandmother  used to tease him because she knew him when he was a little boy.  And kids wore--boys wore like long--something like a long gown when they were before twelve years old.  Her sisters--he had a lot of brothers.  Her sister used to laugh at those guys because they were very poor, and see, he was a sandy-headed boy with brown eyes, but I only knew him when he had gone bald because I was born in '42 [1942].  So, he was born in 18--I think 18--.  Let's see, my grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] was born in 1892.  He was born in 1890.  So he was fifty, fifty-something, I think, probably fifty-two years old, something like that.  He was already going bald, so I don't remember.  He was already gray because I remember brushing his hair.  He used to sit in a rocking chair, and I'd brush his hair.  Me and my sisters fight over brushing his hair.  That little patches on the side that he had.  So it was already white, so I don't remember it being red, sandy.
Speaker 1: Okay. So Covington [Tennessee]--were your people around Covington or--?
Speaker 2: They moved to Covington because the root was they came out of Somerville [Tennessee], the best I remember.  My mother [Eula Bee Wade] was born in Somerville, my grandmother and my grandfather on her side.
Speaker 1: Now, what is Somerville near or--?
Speaker 2: Somerville is not far from Memphis [Tennessee].  And where they moved to Covington is not far.  This whole area, you've got Somerville, you've got Covington going more north, Jackson [Tennessee] is going northeast, and, you know, all these areas are--if you come down [interstate] I-40 coming into Memphis, you see those exits leading off, going in those directions, those areas. Some of it is right--I mean Covington is going up Highway 51 north, and it's right--right across the river is Henning, Tennessee. That was [writer] Alex Haley's home.  Every time I see Alex on the road and he's promoting his book, he say, "Hey, neighbor."  So we'd run into each other the darndest places, you know, but--because he know I was going in Covington right across the river.
Story_ID: 8201
Speaker 1: Did your family pass down any stories or songs or anything about coming out of the slave experience or out of reconstruction, any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] told me that her mother was a slave, and her mother told about when they were fighting the [U.S. Civil] War and when the Union soldiers started coming, you know, advancing, when the South started losing the war, said the slave owners were saying, "The Yankees are coming!  The Yankees coming!  Hide the silver!  Hide this!  Hide that!"  Her mother was a little girl, and they were hiding things. Her mother was afraid of the Yankees because she had to believe what the masters were telling, so she thought the Yankees were going to get them, too. But they were after--they were trying to win the war because the South had seceded from the Union. And one of the strategies was to weaken them by freeing the slaves because they were working the crops, and they were taking away the work. That was a stronghold. They could survive selling cotton and tobacco but to Europeans, like to England and places. So they knew--[United States President] Abraham Lincoln knew that if he freed the slaves, he would hit them in the pocket.  So that's why they were fleeing from the Union soldiers. "Hide the silver, hide all the valuables," and things like that. That's what she recalled her mother saying.
Story_ID: 8202
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother. Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Her name was Eula Bee Wade, and I'm saying Wade because that was her maiden name.  Wade--E-U-L-A, B-E-E, W-A-D-E. And she was born November the 10th. Wait a minute. Hold on.  Let me see. Yeah, November the 10th, 1918.
Speaker 1: Now, how did your mother grow up?  You know, what was she like, or what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, they were all sharecroppers. I never knew my mother because she passed when I was a year-and-a-half, so I just went on the stories that were told to me.  I only knew that she was a very talented woman, and she was a nice looking woman.  I remember she had beautiful eyebrows, nice arch.  Didn't have to put any blades on them to arch them.  It was natural.  And she was married, before I was born, to a guy named Brown Homer Young, B-R-O-W-N, H-O-M-E-R, Y-O-U-N-G, and he was--my sister, oldest sister, half sister, Willette, W-I-L-L-E-T-T-E, Willette Young, she was Young then. Now she's Willette Rankin, R-A-N-K-I-N. She was born of that marriage, and then he was killed in a car accident.  He was riding on a running board on the side of a truck, and the car sideswiped him, and he--they didn't know where he was, looking for him, and he was laying in the bed of the truck just dead.  And after that, my mother married my father, Isaac Hayes, Sr.  And then I came along.  And my sister, she has a better recollection of my mother than I do because she was a year-and-some older than I was.
Speaker 1: Did your mother have a chance to go to school and that sort of thing out there or--?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I think they did, but, you know, schooling was--in the South it was, kind of weird. I know my uncle did, my youngest uncle, the baby boy.  He went to school because I used to look at his books when I was little.  That's how I learned to read and write even before I went to school.  But I know she was very talented. She could sing very well. That's what my grandmother told me.
Speaker 1: Did she sing in church or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, in church. I never heard of her singing any secular songs, just maybe spiritual and gospel, as it were during those days, and she was a hard worker because she worked in the fields.
Story_ID: 8203
Speaker 1: My mother [Eula Bee Wade] died in a mental institution [Western Mental Health Institute], a place called Bolivar.  That's not far from Memphis, either.
Speaker 2: Over in Tennessee?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, you know, that there had to have been horrendous conditions because the mental institutions as they were, were archaic. They were--it was so down the scale of, of human conditions.  They gave them shock treatments, all  kinds of stuff. But being black in the South, you can imagine how it was.  So she died in a mental institution. There were told tales told to me by my aunt, her sister, who was called Aunt Janie May, and she said that--she said, "You mine because your mother gave you to me."  I said, "How'd that happen?"  Said, "Your mother--I caught your mother running to the well, about to drop you in. I stopped her." She said, "Here, take him, I don't want him."  You see, my mother was not in her right mind, so I'm sure she wouldn't have done it had she been, you know, sane.  And, also, something my mother used to feed me--I was a baby, and so she used to feed me out of the chicken trough, dip the thing in the water, and feed me from it.  But she thought she was taking care of me.  That's how off she was.
Speaker 2: Okay. I'm just surprised that they had any institutions at all--,
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --black people.
Speaker 1: Exactly. They had them, you know, but I'm sure it was horrible.
Speaker 2: Right. I mean the institutions for white people who had mental problems were horrible.
Speaker 1: That's right. So, you know, blacks--just like Corinne Brown, the [U.S.] congresswoman from the state of Florida said, "If white America sneeze, black America gets the cold."  You know, we get it worse, you know.  So I'm sure those conditions were worse for blacks in mental institutions during those days.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well, she died when you were--?
Speaker 1: A year-and-a-half.
Story_ID: 8204
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your father?  What is his full name, and can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name just like mine, Isaac Hayes, Senior, I-S-A-A-C, H-A-Y-E-S, Senior.  When my mother [Eula Bee Wade] passed, he left. All he left me--my grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] always--he left me was a blanket. That's all I had that he left me.  And I had to grow up with my grandparents.  My uncle told me that--Granddaddy [Willie J. Wade] said, "Well," told mother, "Old lady, look like we're only person these little fellows got," meaning my oldest sister and myself.  "So I guess we're gonna take care of them. Or one day they might have to take care of us."  And so they were the only parents that I knew.  My father--all I knew--my grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] told me that he was--he was a laborer, you know, probably a field hand of some sort, and said he could play a harmonica.  It was always emphasis on musical talent.  He could play a harmonica.  But, you know, her mother's a--my grandmother said, "He's good for nothing."  I don't know.  But he came from--he was--he came from around Grand Junction, Tennessee, in that area, maybe Bemis [Tennessee]. But, you know, I found him, believe it or not, and I think it was in '72 [1972].  I had a cousin, his cousin, which would be--essentially was my cousin.  She was older, but she came to my graduation. I graduated from Manassas High School here in Memphis [Tennessee], north Memphis, M-A-N-A-S-S-A-S.  It was one of the oldest black schools in this city.  I think the original building was built by slaves.  And she came to my graduation. She gave me a gift, and she said, "I'm your cousin Minnie Moore."  M-I-N-N-I-E, M-O-O-R-E. She said, "Yeah, you're Daddy's son. You look just like Isaac."  And I'm just--I didn't know how to react to that.  But I always wondered, where was my father and why did he leave?  And growing up poor, you know, you see other kids have parents picking up, especially on rainy days.  Their parents come pick them up in a car and stuff like that.  Me and my sister [Willette Young] had to walk home in the rain, in the cold.  Sometimes I was crying but nobody knew it because rain in your face, they don't know you're crying.  And I always wondered why did he leave me and why did my mother have to die.  But I found him, and cousin Minnie, she called me.  Said, "I think I found out where your father is."  So she told me he was in Jackson, Tennessee.  She said, "We're going to go up there Sunday."  So we drove there, and it was like a caravan of cars.  Some of my employees work for me, you know, and my grandmother and my sister and I think it was--at that time, I was between marriages, and I think my girlfriend--yeah, because she was my PR [public relations] person and some of my securities guys, we had about five cars driving up there.  We went to Jackson, went to his address, and the lady he was living with say, "He's not here. He's around the neighborhood somewhere," on a Sunday, you know.  So we hit the neighborhoods, start combing the neighborhood.  Everywhere we went, "He just left. He just left."  So we eventually said, "We're going back to the house.  You see him, tell him his son is here to see him."  So when I got back--we got back to the house, there about five minutes, he came in, "Where's him?"  And he saw me, he ran up to me, and started hugging me. Said, "Lord have mercy, Lord," just kept saying that.  "Lord have mercy. Lord have mercy," crying.  And he kept saying, "You just don't understand. You just don't understand. You just don't."  So, saying it apologetically, and I had people--everybody leave--said, "Everybody, will you all please leave the room?  Just leave me and my dad here?"  And they left the room.  Set him down.  We sat down. I said, "Look," I said, "all these years, I had a lot of questions."  I said, "But I missed you. But somehow through prayers of my grandmother and grandfather and the grace of God, I made it."  Now, I said, "I had a lot of questions. I'm not going to labor you or burden you with trying to answer questions to justify your absence from my life during my formative years."  I said, "I'm a man now. I made it, and I have become successful without your help."  I said, "Having been an adult for a few years, anything could've caused you to leave.  I'm not going to question or punish you for leaving."  I said, "Most important thing is that--that we found each other, so we should make the best of what's left."  And I let him off the hook. I said, "I always wanted to know--meet my father."  So he didn't try to explain, but he stopped crying, and he said that, "Well, you know, I've done all kind of things. I've--trying to survive and everything."  He said he used to be a bootlegger. He used to run whiskey in the side door of his car, put it--unscrewed the paneling off and put the whiskey bottles in there and stuff.  He did all kind of stuff. He did a lot of migrant work, like picking and chopping cotton, and he just said somehow he made it.  So when we further discussed things, I found out he was in bad health.  He was a diabetic. He had heart problems. I think high blood pressure. So I immediately said, "Look, man, we've gotta get you straight."  So I put him in the hospital, and they taught him how to inject himself with insulin, and I bought him a wardrobe of clothes.  I bought him a car.  And he became the town celebrity.  And he pulled out a piece of paper, Sunday magazine, you know, in color, 'The Commercial Appeal [Memphis daily newspaper].'  He unfolded it.  It was worn.  He carried it around in his pocket.  He said, "I tried to tell them I was your father.  One time, '[The] Commercial Appeal' did an article on me in the Sunday paper, magazine, and he said, "I tried to tell you he's my son."  But he was kind of like afraid to come forward.  But that was--it was kind of touching that he had that, you know, with him.  But we became friends. I took him on his first plane ride.  Me and my band played somewhere down in Alabama, and I took--he saw us rehearse, and the band immediately took to him.  They called him 'Pop.'  And I took him to [Lake] Tahoe on a plane, explained the place. "Man, look like we--," he saw the clouds outside. "Feel like we sittin' still. Look like we could walk out on that--."  "No, you can't walk out that, Pop."  (Laughs).
Story_ID: 8205
Speaker 1: Give me some sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Now, you grew up in Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I grew up--I lived in Covington [Tennessee] until the age of seven, and I--living on a farm.  My grandparents [Rushia A. and Willie J. Wade] were sharecroppers, and I remember picking cotton. My grandmother made me a little seven-foot cotton sack, and we grew all our own foods at that time. You know, corn and, you know, potatoes and all the stuff in the garden, and peanuts and all those things. She would can them during the summer months and put them up.  We'd live on them for the winter and we, you know, our meats, we killed hogs, you know.  Hog-killing time, like coldest day of the year when it would seem like it, you know. Neighbors came around.  It was a community project.  We killed--all the guys come, men from surrounding area, and they would help slaughter the hogs and stuff, and they would--it's a process to see it.  And then they'd cut the different parts of the hog up, and the women would cook the cracklin' bread and cracklin' pork rinds and stuff like that.  They would take the grease off of it and put it in a little lard can and save it for like cooking and stuff, shortening and things like that.  They would smoke the meat and put it in the--salt the meat down and put it in the smokehouse.  And then when we moved to the city, my uncle was saying, "Come to the city," you know, like, "living is better there."  So we migrated to the city.  We loaded everything on a truck, a truck with sideboards.  In fact, we looked like the [television program] 'Beverly Hillbillies,' rocking chairs and stuff on top (laughs) going to the city.  Culture shock, the move to Memphis.  I'd never seen a popsicle man, an ice cream man, never saw supermarkets.  I mean it was shock, man, wow.  Soda fountains, you know.  And the amazing thing about it is that in the black communities before integration, we had our own businesses.  I remember the gentlemen that owned the drugstore where the soda fountain was, a black guy, I remember he had a Lionel train [model trains] back behind the counter.  Kids were there, watched that Lionel train, you know, going around.  And the store, the grocery store, was owned by a Chinese guy, Paul Lee, and we sat up an account with Paul Lee at the grocery store.  And we had our own, you know, funeral homes and we had our own businesses, and those were corner mom and pop sundry stores, we used to call them.  They were on different corners and things like that.  It was all in our own neighborhood.  But life changed.  My grandfather was working at a tomato factory.  His health started failing, so he became disabled.  And we, meaning my grandmother, my sister and myself, we had to survive, so I became like the man of the family at an early age.
Speaker 1: About how old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh, when he took ill, I was like eight or nine.
Speaker 1: That is early for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we lived--the place we lived in, a neighborhood called New Chicago out in north Memphis, and the first house we lived in was on Weakley Circle, W-E-A-K-L-E-Y, 1244 Weakley Circle.  Never forget that address.  It was a duplex.  We lived on one side, and my uncle lived in the other side, Uncle Arthur.  And, you know, you knew everybody on the street.  It was that kind of thing, you know. It was a close-knit community, and, you know, that's when--like the saying goes, "It takes a village to raise a child."  We got in some mischief up the street, and the neighbor up there saw us--saw me cutting up and doing something wrong.  She whooped my butt and then marched me home. (Inaudible). "I'm going to get him.  Bring him on in here."  Everybody looked after the kids, and it was a different time.
Story_ID: 8206
Speaker 1: The music thing started back in Covington [Tennessee].  I remember sitting on the porch in the evening, after a hard day's work in the fields, and so we'd sing Negro spirituals. And church--church and the school was joining grounds across the road from my house.  I was born in a tin-top house delivered by a midwife.  And me and my sister sang in the Easter program. I was like three years old.  My grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] was playing piano, my sister [Willette Young] screwed up. I stopped in the middle for her. "No, you're wrong. We're singing harmony."  She got off, and I said, "No, it goes like this."  And I sang the part, "Now," and said,  "Let's go."  My grandmother looked at me like, "Are you crazy?"  (laughs)  I didn't know any better, you know.  But we finished it.
Speaker 2: So you were three?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I could hear things, you know.  So my grandfather [Wille J. Wade], you could hear him coming through the woods after he'd gone hunting with a lot--I don't know, maybe six, seven rabbits around his waist, shotgun across his shoulder, singing (makes a singing noise) kind of clearly out of the woods.  Could hear him singing (makes a singing noise).  We know we got some rabbit for dinner, you know, rabbit stew, fried rabbit and gravy or whatever.
Speaker 2: What song would he sing?
Speaker 1: Oh, his favorite song was, 'His Eye is on the Sparrow.'  That was his favorite song.  And we'd be in church and he was singing.  Look, he was that kind of guy to sing.  He was a deacon in the church. Singing loud and wrong.  My grandfather would (makes a singing noise).  My grandmother would hit him and say, "Shut up!"  (laughs)  But I was--I participated in a lot of community functions, like I was in a play in a school across the road from the house.  We had a little play like 'Three Little Bears'-- 'Goldilocks and [the] Three Bears'.  I was a little bear that, you know, he drunk all the--she ate all my porridge.  And "The Three Little Pigs," I was the pig that had the brick house.  And I was a groom at a Tom Thumb wedding.  You know, that was my first--I was used to performing.  When we moved to the city, I would sing at devotion in the morning before class started.  You know, they all (inaudible) you sing and stuff like that. Me and my sister would sing duets like on talent shows and things like that.  And I remember having--they used to call me the 'Swoon Crooner.'  That was back in the '50s [1950s] I was singing songs by Perry Como and Eddie Fisher and Tony Bennett [singers], things like that.  My voice was really high, so guys would call me a sissy because my voice was so high. That was before puberty.  Well, as far as gospel and R&B [rhythm and blues], I heard my first gospel--black R&B music--my first black DJ [disc jockey] was from radio station WDIA. I think that, I was still in the country.  That was in, I'm thinking, 1947 or '49 [1949]. The DJ was Nat D. Williams, historian. This man taught at Booker [T.] Washington [Senior High School, Memphis, Tennessee], which was our rival school in Memphis. He was historian on black, very good.  And he taught it, but he was on radio.  And he was on radio from four to six in the afternoon.  His show was called the 'Sepia Swing Club'. The only other radio that I heard was like 'Grand Ole Opry,' and a country team called Aunt Bunie (ph.) and Uncle Ned. I don't know how to spell it.  But it was called 'hillbilly music' at the time. Later on, it took the name of country music. But when I first heard 'DIA [WDIA radio station] and Nat D., that I was introduced to the black music, that's when I first heard Louis Jordan [and the] Tympani Five [jazz/swing group]. And then I heard B. B. King [blues musician].  I heard Sister Rosetta Tharpe singing gospel, the first time I heard a guitar--electric guitar.  And Wings Over Jordan Choir and [Arnold] Gatemouth Moore [blues preacher/singer].  All I heard on WDIA. And my singing--I just--I love music, so I kept doing it.
Story_ID: 8207
Speaker 1: My studies, I was almost like a straight 'A' student.  See, when I was in Covington [Tennessee] living across the road from the school and the church, I started going to school at the age of three because they had--in the classroom, they had grades one through three in one room and three through six in the other.  Went as high as the sixth grade.  And I had nothing to do, so I'd sit around the classroom listening to the kids, looking at them going through that exercise and stuff, and then I was--people needed my uncle's book, and my grandmother used to read to me a lot of stories.  She read the Bible to me, plus she read some literature.  I learned English lit--a portion of it, like, what is it, Roland, the Noble Knight and--
Speaker 2: 'The Song of Roland.'
Speaker 1: Yeah. I heard that, you know, and she read that to me. She also read a lot of 'Arabian Nights' to me.  She read 'Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves.' She read the 'Seven Voyages of Sinbad.'  What was another one?  But I used to love 'Arabian Knights.'  And I remember, "Forty Thieves,' she'd read, she said (laughs).  She would say like he opened the cave, open the hidden door, he would ride in and say, "Open sesame!"  Well, she said, "Open Se-same," (laughs) because she that what--she saw it, you know.  Later on, I learned, you know, grammar and all that stuff, so I wouldn't tell her she was wrong, but I just kept repeating it, and she kind of got it. But it was great growing up, and, you know, I had that kind of background and the rearing that it took. But we all, most of us, we all--I mean the kids in the neighborhood--when I moved to the city, kids in the neighborhood had their care, as I earlier stated.  But as I moved up into--I first went to a school called--oh, by the way, I had when I was like six years old, I had almost like a third grade education because I was going to that classroom every day learning along with the other kids. And I was so young, but I couldn't go to school until that proper age.  But I was going through the drills and everything, so I was getting educated.  So I passed to the second grade. I made the sixth grade and passed to the second.  But when we moved to the city, they told me--told us, my grandmother, that the teachings in the rural areas was inferior to that in the city, so they put me back a grade. Totally unfair.
Speaker 2: So they didn't give you a test or anything? They just--
Speaker 1: No, assumed.  And so I had to repeat the first grade. I was supposed to be in second grade, repeat the first grade.  But, you know, I started at Klondike Elementary School [Memphis, Tennessee]. This neighborhood in North Memphis called Klondike. And I went from the first through the third grade there because Klondike was like adjacent to New Chicago, the first neighborhood I lived in.  And we used to walk to school every day and made a lot of friends. And then I was passed to the fourth.  We moved to a neighborhood called Hollywood.  Hollywood and Hyde Park was adjacent.  And I went to Hyde Park Elementary School [Memphis, Tennessee] in the fourth grade. I did one semester there. Then they were moved back over to I think it was Scutterfield. That's in North Memphis, too. That's on the other side of New Chicago.  And I started in the second term of the fourth grade there. My fourth-grade teacher was Miss Carrie Thorpe, T-H-O-R-P-E. She said it was French "Thor-pay", that's what she said.  And she used to talk a lot to those kids. She used to tell us all kinds of stories and things. Tell us about the flood of 1920-somethin', people riding--and riding, going down the street in boats. The water was so high.  And if we didn't want to get into class, we'd just, "Miss Carrie, what about, Miss Thorpe so and so?"  She'd start talking, talked the entire course. (laughs)  That's how we--but I learned a lot. Then I was passed on to the fifth grade.  I did from the fourth grade, second semester fourth grade all the way to twelfth at Manassas. And--
Speaker 2: So Manassas had grade school as well as high school?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 8208
Speaker 1: Our principal when I first started was Mr. J. Ashton Hayes, Mr. Hayes.  And he was crazy about the kids over there, too.  He was like our big father. And he would provide the kids with a lot of things that we would learn, arts and things like that. I remember I was in the fourth grade. I saw W. C. Handy for the first time.
Speaker 2: He came to school?
Speaker 1: He came over there. He was blind.  But they let him out on stage, and he played the trumpet. Played 'St. Louis Blues.'  I witnessed that.  Yeah. So I was a straight 'A' student.  And when I was in the sixth grade, I wrote an article for the newspaper, and Ronnie Vaughn, who lived right next door to me--I was living on 687 Lyman, L-Y-M-A-N, in Scutterfield [North Memphis, Tennessee].  It was between Woodlawn and Tulley, T-U-L-L-E-Y, and Woodlawn, W-O-O-D-L-A-W-N.  We lived next door. And Ronnie Vaughn, we used--he's going to hate me for this. We used to call him 'Baby Dumplin'. And a guy named Robert Simpson. We three were predicted--we were all in the sixth grade--we were predicted to be the senior class president of our graduating class, one of us would be.  Well, Ronnie and I didn't make it.  Robert, maybe.  He was a senior class president of our graduating class.  But I didn't graduate with them because what happened--when I reached ninth grade, you know, you start reaching puberty and noticing girls, and I was noticing that, "Hey, I got holes in my shoes. I got patches in my pants. I can't dress like the other guys."  I was so intimidated, I dropped out of school.  Didn't want to, but going up the steps, you know, when class was passing, changing classes, my shoes was so runned over I didn't want anybody see me walking on my ankles, so I'd go up the step sideways.  So I just dropped out of school.  I love studying because I wanted to be a doctor.  I was taking the subjects that, you know, led to that.  You know, when you start the elective subjects, like biology and things like that, science.  But I dropped out of school, so I had to repeat the ninth grade. I remember a delegation of teachers came over to my house, and they said, "Miss Wade," my grandmother, "Do you know that Isaac has been out of school six weeks?"  "What?" She looked at me, I dropped my head as if to say,  "Wait 'til they leave," with her head spinning. (laughs)  I know I'm going to get it when they leave. Oh, my goodness. They said, "We don't want to lose this young man. He has so much to offer. So we're going to help him stay in school.  We're going to--."  Mrs. Harvey, my guidance counselor, she had her husband--they used to call him--she used to call him Harvey, and he stood about 6 [feet] 5 [inches]. I wore his coats, man. I looked like a scarecrow.  (laughs) But I rolled the sleeves up, and I put newspaper in the toe of the shoes that he would wear to keep them on my feet.  And that's how I survived. I kept staying in school.
Story_ID: 8209
Speaker 1: Remember, I wanted to be a doctor, but a talent show came up, and my voice started coming back then, you know.  The squeaking stopped, and when the voice moved out, it was way down in the basement.  And so I entered into the talent contest. Showed up at the auditorium that evening after school and they were auditioning people to be in the talent show, and I was so shy.  So after it was over, she's like, "All right, we'll be--."  I stepped up.  She said, "What do you want to do?"  I said, "I want to sing."  "Little boy, you want to sing?"  "Yes, ma'am."  "What you gonna sing?"  I said, 'Looking Back' by Nat King Cole.  So William Allen, the guy at the piano, said, "What key?"  I said, "Just--."  She said, "Just start singing. He'll catch you."  So I started singing.  He started playing the broken triples on the piano.  And I started singing.  Well, after school, you know, it was after school in the auditorium and people milling around, and I started singing.  They stopped, started looking back.  Before I got to the bridge of the song, I had everybody's attention. I finished. Ms. Harvey came up--I got a big applause from people just walking around.  Miss Harvey came in.  She went, "Wow, little boy, you're good!  Yeah, you're going to be in the show tomorrow. I'll put you in the show."  (laughs)  So--but I'm nervous as I can be.  And I remember going to the cotton fields.  They would let us out sometime to work during the fall of the year to work in the cotton fields. There was a wino [alcoholic] out there. We used to call him 'Egghead'.  And so we--Egghead, it was a girl.  The farmer that owned it, owned the plantation we were working on, he was a black farmer, Armstrong.  And he had a daughter. She was working, paying off.  So we'd put a sack of cotton up there.  She'd pay us off.  So weigh it and pay us.  And she was a lovely black girl. I had a crush on her.  And so did other guys, but they used me as a whipping boy. "Bubba [Isaac] likes you," "Don't tell her that, man."  You know, anyway, they was embarrassing me. But they were getting their own things out, testing me, running a test, see how she'd react.  She smiled.  She didn't say much, but she was kind.  And so these winos, "Bubba I hear you're on a talent show, going to be on a talent show. Let me tell you what you do.  I know you're crazy about--."  Her nickname was Butch. "I know you're crazy about Butch.  Well, you start singing that song.  You think about you're singing to her.  When you get to the bridge, climax of the song, take the microphone and fall down on your knees."  So I--"Okay, okay, Egghead."  So next day, I did the talent contest. I got to the bridge.  'Once My Cup Was Running Over',  that's the song. (singing) "I gave nothing in return/Now I can't begin to tell you what a lesson I have learned!"  Bam! Fell on my knees, and the girls screamed, the house went crazy!  (laughs) And I almost finished the song before they quieted down before they could hear the end of it.  But, you know, of course, I won.  I won a talent contest.  And then girls started running up to me for autograph. "Little boy, come have lunch. We'll buy you lunch. Come have lunch with us."  Girls two grades ahead of me.  I mean good-looking girls.  I said, "Wow, this singing thing is cool!"  So, career change!  I wanted to be an entertainer.  Didn't want to be--no longer be a doctor. And that's how I really got into music.
Story_ID: 8210
Speaker 1: I took music in junior high school under Bennia Wilson, I think it's B-E-N-N-I-A, Bennia Wilson.  And then I passed on to Mrs. Bobby Blakely Jones in [Manassas] high school [Memphis,Tennessee].  I joined the high school glee club.  And, you know, I went on, I took a year of band under (unclear).  And I started with tuba.  That was too heavy,  in parades too heavy. Then I went down to baritone sax. That was too heavy.  I didn't want that thing breaking my neck.  But I picked up a guy named Lucious (ph.) Coleman, which was the brother of George Coleman, the jazz saxophonist.  They were both from Memphis  of course.  And Lucious taught me so much about music. He taught me about Diz [Dizzy Gillespie], Bird [Charlie Parker], Miles [Davis], Oscar Peterson, Bud Powell, [Frank] Sinatra, Billy Eckstine, Sarah Vaughan, Ella Fitzgerald [jazz musicians and singers].  And he taught me about four chords, minor, major, diminished, and augmented. He said, "Everything is built around that."  And I just listened to a lot of jazz. And I borrowed his saxophone--couldn't afford one, to get in the band.  But he, you know, sometimes he had to work. I couldn't, you know--sometimes I usually borrowed sax. That the board of education supplied so many saxes.  And then we formed a group called The Missiles, me and some guys, and we played proms and things like that.
Story_ID: 8211
Speaker 1: I had a girlfriend that was two grades ahead of me, and I was so poor I couldn't take her to the prom.  So I picked a fight with her, made her get so mad at me, she broke up with me, "It's over!"  So she broke up with me, and somebody else took her to the prom.  I didn't have to face embarrassment, "I can't afford to take you."  But after prom, I made back up with her, you know. (laughs)  That's how I got out of that one.  But anyway, it was--it was interesting in [Manassas] high school [Memphis, Tennessee]. I mean it was some hard times. I mean I used to go to school hungry and come back home hungry. I don't know how I retained anything, but I made it.  I worked sometime on the free lunch program cleaning up the dishes after lunch. They gave me tokens, you know. You do that, and you get a token. You'd get a free lunch.  And I used to--I was on welfare, struggling, because in 1953, my grandfather [Willie J. Wade] died.  I think it was November the 9th, 1953.  And I really had to become the man of the family then.  And we moved a lot of places.  At one time, I was homeless.  I had to sleep in parked cars in the garage. Luckily, it was in the summertime, I was outdoors.  But, you know, I struggled, and eventually the family had a chance to get back together--my sister, my grandmother, and me--and that's when we moved over to Lyman [Avenue, Memphis, Tennessee].  You know, in Scutterfield [North Memphis neighborhood] we lived on Lyman.  And I had all kind of jobs. I mowed lawns, shined shoes on Beale Street, I worked with a wood and coal man delivering the wood and coal for fuel for fires because we had a lot of wood-burning things back then.  And worked with the market man selling produce. Worked with the junkman collecting all kinds of junk so we could take it to the junkyard and sell it. I used to go to the icehouse and get ice for people and the stuff would be damned near melted by the time we got home with a little wagon, but, you know, they paid me to do that.  And we used to go up to Kroger's supermarket, and if I borrowed a bicycle, you know, put those big, tall baskets on the side, "Need a grocery boy?"  "Okay."  Big bags, and so we put the bags in the baskets and, "Give me an address where to take it to."  That's how I made money.  Then I used to work for the--Mr. Lee's store in the 'hood. He sold it to his cousin Tong.  And that's how we got our groceries from there.  I worked--stock boy, delivery boy, and, you know, and I even did cleaning bricks and wrecking houses and things like that, construction, all that to make it.
Story_ID: 8212
Speaker 1: I did a lot of struggling.  Like, like I said, I was working with a construction company.  We cleaned bricks for like a penny a brick, get all the mortar and stuff off because they resell those bricks.  And laying concrete, pouring concrete.  I did migrant work, like as I said, like picking and chopping cotton, chopping in the hot sun ten hours, three hours a day. And we used to pick peaches. Boy, your stomach would get tore up because you ate more than you picked (laughs).
Speaker 2: They still do this in Memphis [Tennessee] when trucks would come to the black community. People would go out and--.
Speaker 1: You go out and--well, you know, I don't think they do it because they've got these--you know, the world of automation, like those cotton pickers and stuff like that.  I don't think they do that anymore.  But when I was, when I was doing my years, my younger years, they used to take--you'd go to the Memphis-Arkansas Bridge if the bus didn't come by your house and pick you up.  And there were always buses going out to Arkansas.  And, "Where you going?"  "We're goin' to so-and-so."  "Okay, how much a hundred?  What are you paying?"  "Well, two dollars a hundred."  When the cotton is real heavy and green, the first season in the fall, later in the year, it's three dollars a hundred, gets lighter, you know.  Or if you go up here around Frayser [Tennessee], they go up in Tennessee, up Highway 51.  If you went down 51 south, you'd go into Mississippi.  So Memphis is in the corner.  Arkansas is across the river, Mississippi's down the south (inaudible), right across the line south.  So you'd have those buses going places where you can, you know, (inaudible) he's on the bus and, you know, pick cotton all day or chop cotton.  But I did that.  And then as a teenager, I wound up dishwashing at a restaurant at North Memphis on Thomas [Street].  And I graduated from dishwasher to busboy, from busboy to short-order cook. And--
Speaker 2: So you were a chef at one point?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was.  But I started cooking in my grandmother's kitchen, you know, licking bowls and spoons and things. "What you doing? What you cooking, Mama?"  I tried my hands at biscuits when I was real young. The guys out in the yard playing basketball. "Hey, man.  Try my biscuits. Try my biscuits."  They were flat, like a hockey puck, hard.  But, of course, I improved later on, you know.  But, you know, then during those times, it was very, very--as I said--difficult times.
Story_ID: 8213
Speaker 1: But one mainstay that I had, I lived, like I said, in a black neighborhood [in Memphis, Tennessee], but it was a carbide plant behind my house.  This white guy worked in there.  His name was Curtis Eans, E-A-N-S. He was kind of like a father figure for me, a white man, back then.  He was a nice guy.  He employed me to cut the grass at that factory, and I would help him roll those tanks inside.  It was carbide, carbide gas mixed with acetylene and--no, carbide mixed with acetone, and pumped those into these tanks, became acetylene, which was used for welding in torches and things like that.  But he taught me all that stuff, and I even--I even explained that in my science class.  I got a straight 'A' for the whole six weeks explaining that.  But he taught me a lot of things. Taught me a work ethic and just about surviving because we had a little wood--what you call it, little house out in the back, you know, you store a lot of things in.
Speaker 2: Woodshed?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  But I chopped it up for wood for fuel.  We didn't have any.  Couldn't buy wood, so I chopped the house down. And Mr. Eans was--I'd sit there and talk to him after school and stuff, and he taught me, you know, the birds and the bees and the facts of life and keep me out of trouble.  My grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] taught me, too.  Of course, she did.
Story_ID: 8214
Speaker 1: There was some old ladies living across the street from me, a mother and a daughter. The mother was real old.  And I would do little chores for them.  And I'd go out and get some chicken eggs out of the chicken house and stuff like that chicken coop, bring them inside. And they'd pay me like, you know, maybe two cents an egg or something like that.  I'd run chores for them and stuff like that and help them cut the grass.  They'd give me a nickel and dime, and so the kids teased me. "Boy, you working for that na-na-na."  But whatever ball going--we play out in the street playing ball and the ball would go in the yard, I was the only one they allowed to go in their yard because they, "Get out of my yard!" tell the other kids that. I could go in the yard and get the ball.  And I respected the adults around the neighborhood.  And when it was time for them to--sometime a guy will go break into places, you know, in the cafeteria at school and get a whole can of fruit cocktail and sometime get a whole box of them weenies hung, strung together, some sausage and ground beef and stuff.  I said, "No, I ain't going y'all, no."  I wasn't afraid, but I knew that was wrong. So, I could've gone either way.  As destitute and as poor, impoverished as I was, I could've gone that way to survive, but I chose not to do that.  I did it the hard way, and I got a validation from my friends.  My grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] turned one hundred, and we gave her a birthday party of out in North Memphis [Tennessee].  And the guys that grew up in the 'hood, the ones that were still alive, that weren't out of their heads on drugs, they came, paid their respects, my grandmother's one-hundredth birthday celebration.  And then they pulled me to the side, "Bubba, come here."  They said, "Man, we just want you to know that we're proud of you."  They said, "Man, you represent us very well.  Every time we see you on TV, hear your record playing, you're from us.  After all that, we wish we had done what you did because it was hard.  We all suffered, but you stuck to it, and you made something out of your life. And we just want to let you know that we appreciate you, man.  We're proud of you."  That really got me because they knew how hard it was, and I think I had the worst of any of them. But, you know, it was a hell of a validation from them because they were there, they witnessed it.  And what a good day to do it on, my grandmother's one-hundredth birthday.  She was still alive.  She lived to be one hundred and five, so that was a good thing.
Story_ID: 8215
Speaker 1: I went on and graduated [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee]. I won seven scholarships in vocal music.  A funny thing happened.  When I turned seventeen, I moved out of the house. I said, "Mama," I said, "If I had stayed in the right grades, I'd be out on my own.  I'd be in school somewhere. I'd be on my own working, so I'm going to move out."  So I moved in with Lucius [Coleman] and then I started staying with two guys, Hotshot and Tash.  They worked at a furniture company.  They'd haul furniture and stuff like that.  They drank a lot. You'd come home drunk at night and go to sleep. We had a little TV and no food. They would find a bag of beans from the store, and we'd have beans that night.  Nothing but beans.  No meat.  There'd be no nothing.  And we had a fundraiser at the high school to raise money for band uniforms and stuff like that, so we--they gave us consignment.  World's Finest Chocolate candy bars. The big long bars with almonds, you know.  And I took forty on consignment.  And, you know, you used to sell them and you'd turn the money in.  Well, I was so hungry.  I was sitting up there one night, box, took one bite. I said I'll just take it, but I'll pay it back.  Well, one became two, and so forth.  And in a two-week period, I ate forty candy bars.  I lived on that.  So it was time to come to turn the money in.  "Well, I don't have the money.  I ate the candy."  The penalty was you don't get no diploma.  Even though you graduate, you don't get that piece of paper, and they held it back.  And, you know, after I became well known in music and stuff, I went back to Manassas [High School], and I gave them a brand new PA [public address] set for the gymnasium and for the auditorium because I knew they needed it, and, plus, I got my start at that auditorium.  But I was too embarrassed to mention I wanted to pay that forty dollars.  I just kept it to myself because I didn't pursue those scholarships anyway because I was--I chose to go the music route performing, and I made it.  And so I said, well, I ain't going to bother with that.  I'm too ashamed to do that anyway.
Speaker 2: At the time though, did the fact that they were holding your diploma up make it easy to decide not to pursue the scholarships?
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't want to--I didn't want to be a teacher.
Story_ID: 8216
Speaker 1: I wanted to perform.  That's what I started doing because, I sang gospel with a group called the Morning Stars on a broadcast from Pleasant Green Baptist Church in North Memphis [Tennessee], on life in Nichols Street.  I sang with a group called Calvin Valentine and the Swing Cats, it was a blues band.  We played Mississippi, Tennessee and Arkansas in the rural areas, you know, juke joints, playing the blues.  I sang doo-wop with the Teen Tones.  It was a quartet we started in [Manassas] high school [Memphis, Tennessee].  And I'd sing with another doo-wop who we called the Ambassadors. I sang jazz at Curry's Club Tropicana in North Memphis.  I sang about two ballads a night with Ben Branch's orchestra.  Ben Branch later wound up moving to Chicago [Illinois], and he with [Rev.] Jesse Jackson's Operation Breadbasket.  Then it became Operation Push [People United to Serve Humanity].  I got my jazz experience.  So and I met my good friend Sidney Kirk.  We were friends from high school all the way up, junior high school all the way up to high school, and thereafter.  Me and Joe Gardner--he was the trumpet player of the band and I was sax, but we--on days when teachers have that faculty meeting on Mondays, we'd get the piano in the hall, and he would play the bass, do-do-do, and I'd play the keys up top, de-de-de-de-de, you know.  And one morning, this long, lanky guy came up, man, coat hit him up here, up his sleeve, you know. "Hey, man, can I play?" Said, "Yeah, man, come on.  You can play."  We were king of the hill, you know.  Sidney sat down with both hands and he wiped us out! (laughing)  Wiped us.  Says, "Hey man, what's your name?"  "Sidney Kirk."  We were friends from them on, and Sidney wound up playing for me because I knew how to play piano. We play with the Calvin Valentine [and the] Swing Cats, the blues band. We went all over the Arkansas and Mississippi, Tennessee.  I remember sleeping on a craps table on my--probably my sixteenth or seventeenth birthday.  And they had--it was a funny thing because, they had a barrel of corn liquor outside the juke joint and a dipper hanging on the wall.  You go out there and get your dipper of corn liquor and drink it.  That's--all the patrons did that.  I mean it was free-flowing liquor, man.  And all the fish sandwiches and stuff, barbecue, oh yeah. There was a guy named Blue, had a cigar box full of harmonicas--process [chemically relaxed hairstyle], Pignose amp [small portable amplifier.]  He could play harmonica, man.  They used to call it a harp, "He can play a harp."  And a guy name Gus had a sax, tenor sax.  Had all kind of rhinestone on it and stuff like that, flashy.  Played the blues. I dove behind the mini piano. The guy walked up in the house and shoot up--shot the boom of (inaudible).  "Hey man, I don't want to hear no, no bugle!"  Micky Gregg (ph.) was playing the blues march, da-det-det-dah-da-da-da-da. "I don't want to hear no bugle!  I heard the bugle when I was in the Army!  Play me some blues!"  Sidney started playing blues.  But those experiences--up in a place called the Blue Flame outside of Covington [Tennessee] prior to, we were playing that night, and he said, "Boy, I took a hit tonight at the craps tables. Feeling like y'all don't sound too good tonight."  He pulled his coat back, .32 (handgun) on his hip. "I don't feel like I'm going to pay you all tonight.  Don't feel like paying you all tonight."  What are you going to do?  "Yes, sir. Thank you, sir, for letting us get out with our heads, without holes in us."  We left, you know. Those were the kinds of things you went through.  The gospel, we would play in the same rural areas, but we made no money.  They gave us gas money to go to one place to the other, but the sisters fed you all the food you could eat.  But them churches, oh!  We had chicken, you know, collard greens and cornbread and turkey and dressing, potato salad and corn and all that stuff.  We ate it.  But we left there with full bellies and a tank of gas.  But that's where it was then.  It was an interesting time.
Story_ID: 8217
Speaker 1: How did you become a studio musician?  How'd you get involved with that?
Speaker 2: Well, first, let me tell you how I started playing piano. I didn't know how to play piano because Sidney Kirk was always playing my accompanist, accompanying me on piano.  But he went to the [U.S.] Air Force, and I was left with nobody to play behind me, but I kept singing with bands and things. But then his sister, Fanny, called me one day and said, "Somebody called here for brother to play piano." I think they called him Bubba, too.  She said, "He's gone to Air Force, and I figured you might need some work, so I told him--gave him your number."  I said, "Thanks, Fanny."  The guy called me.  Got a gig.  It was New Year's gig, a place called the Southern Club.  Now, you've got to understand, during those days, they had a rail around the bandstand because there's still segregation.  On intermission, you had to go to the kitchen or go out back to sit in the car.  You couldn't sit at a table, no.  So I took the gig.  When I took the gig, after the guy hung the phone, I stopped, what did I just do?  I don't know how to play piano.  Shoot.  But I've got to go get the money.  So New Year's Eve, I dressed--all the time I was going down to the club in a taxi, I felt like I was going to my execution.  They'll find I can't play.  No telling what they going to do to me. So I showed up on the gig, I was the first one there.  And the musicians started filing in, "Hey, man, what's up, what's up?"  I said, what am I going to do?  So the main vocalist came in.  He went by the name of Jeb Stuart.
Speaker 1: Like the Confederate--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like the Confederate general, yeah, (laughing) exactly.  So he said, "Hey man," we didn't have time to rehearse.  Of course, a gig like that, you know, guys knew all the regular tunes that you could play, the Sears Roebuck tunes, we'd call them. "Ya'll know 'Twist & Shout'?"  "Yeah."  "Ya'll know 'Do the Twist'?  Ya'll know 'Thrill on the Hill'?"  "Yeah."  Okay. "Ya'll know 'What Did I Say'?"  "Yeah."  I'm saying yeah with everybody else.  I didn't know, man.  I didn't know how to play it.  I knew it, but didn't know how to play it.  So, okay, it was time to kick the tune off.  Jeb kicked it, "One, two, one, two, three."  They started playing.  I gave them the key, but it sounded like crap.  I said, "Oh, you guys sound horrible."  Oh, then they can't tell I can't play either.  Cool!  So, you know, I just playing, and it was New Year's Eve, so all the clientele in the club, all white, and they had a few drinks anyways, celebrating, bringing the year out, new year in.  Say we played "Three Blind Mice," they would've dug it because you've got drums there, the beat, and you've got a bass player playing.  Don't need anything else.  And toward the end of the evening, the club owner--I'm going to call his name, Gabe Tellerico (ph.),  "You know, you boys sound pretty good.  Ya'll want a regular job?"  "Yeah!"  (Laughs)  So we took the gig, and each night, I would learn something different.  Each night, I learned another tune.  Each night I started tightening my thing up.  We got so good, you know, we outgrew that club.  We went to another club. Same success.
Story_ID: 8218
Speaker 1: I left that band and went--joined a band over in West Memphis, Arkansas at the Plantation Inn, Floyd Newman.  Floyd Newman was a baritone sax player.  He's--Floyd was good with jazz.  He played with Ben Branch, and then he was a staff musician at Stax Records [Memphis, Tennessee.]  Now, I had gone to Stax on several occasions auditioning, with the Morning Stars, the gospel group; Calvin Valentine and the Swing Cats, with the Ambassadors, doo-wop; Teen Tones doo-wops, always turned down by Jim Stewart, who was a proprietor of Stax.  But I went there with Floyd.  Floyd was up for a recording, and so me and Howard Grimes, the drummer, we wrote some tunes, Floyd.  And we were in the studio at Stax.  I said, "Damn, I'm inside of Stax."  So we played and recorded the tunes.  Jim Stewart, in his quiet shy way, "Young man, Booker T.--," of Booker T. and the MGs, "Booker T.'s off at school in Indiana," [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana].  He said, "I need somebody to replace him.  Need a staff musician, keyboard player.  Do you want the job?"  "Yeah, yes sir, I want the job!"  So I took the job. That's how I joined the staff at Stax Records.  And it was quite an experience. One of my first sessions, like an Otis Redding album session.  I was petrified, but Otis was so charismatic and so easy to work with.  The guys got in, said, "We got Otis session coming up!"  They had experience with him, but I hadn't.  So Otis came in. "Hey, fellas, what's going on here?"  I was the new guy.  He was nice to me. "Hey, man, how're you doing?"  Well, I was in school.  I was learning.  I learned how he did it, come with the horn line, da-da-da-da-da-da-da.  They did what you call head arranging.  Nothing was written.  You'd just drill it and rehearse it, and drill it and pass out the parts, give out the parts, hum the parts, whatever.  And that's how they did it.  And we all started arranging, getting involved in arrangements. We had the Missiles, the [Manassas] high school [Memphis, Tennessee] combo we did, I did all the arranging for those.  And Jim Stewart went to the studio one time, and I did arrangements for that.  So when they get stumped for an idea, I say, "Hey, man, you wanna try this?"  I was a last resort. "What you got, man?"  I'd give it to them.  And 99 percent of the time it would work.  So each time I said, "Man, why don't you try this?"  After a while, they said, "Ike, what you got, man?"  They started asking me. I said, "Well, try this and try this."  And it started working, working every time.  And I met [songwriter, musician] David Porter. David Porter was--we had gone to rival high schools.  He went to Booker [T.] Washington [Senior High School, Memphis, Tennessee] same high school Maurice White [songwriter/singer] went, of Earth, Wind and Fire [soul group].  They were friends, they grew up together. David--we sang in rival groups, too.  He sang with the Mar-Keys, and I sang with the Teen Tones.  We'd always challenge each other, but I just--I got to really know him personally.  He said, "Man, I write a lot of lyrics.  I can do some music, too, but I'm a main lyric writer.  And you're into music."  He said, "We ought to team up, man.  Come writers just like [Brian] Holland-[Lamont] Dozier-[Eddie] Holland, like [Burt] Bacharach and [Hal] David."  "Why not?"  So we became Hayes and Porter.  We wrote a few messed up things, but we kind of found our little niche, and we wrote a tune for David [Porter] called 'Can't See You When I Want To.'  We wrote a tune for Carla Thomas called, 'How Do You Quit (Someone You Love).'  And they were released on record.  So--wow. Then Jim Stewart said one day, he said, "We got some fellows at Atlantic Records they're sending down here, and we want you all to bring out y'all's best wares. They're going to choose what team they want to produce and then write for them."  So they choose me and David.  And the first song was called--first record was called, 'I Take What I Want', flip side, 'A Place Nobody Can Find.'  And [Mabon] 'Teenie' Hodges, with me and David, "I Take What I Want," Teenie was playing on Al Green's records.  He was working with Willie Mitchell over at Hi Records. That's the guy that (unclear) (making guitar sound) da-da-da-da-da-da-da-da.  That's Teenie.  Mabon Hodges was his name, and we wrote those songs and got a little action. Then me and David wrote a song for them called, 'You Don't Know Like I Know.'  And all the horn lines and stuff, I was doing those horn lines.  And then we wrote, 'Something's Wrong with My Baby,' 'Hold on! I'm Coming'  [for] Sam and Dave [singing duo].
Speaker 2: And then this is the golden age.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Then we wrote 'Soul Man', 'Wrap It Up, I'll Take it,'  'I Thank You,'  'May I Baby.'  We wrote all those things for Sam and Dave.  And we started writing for most of the people on the label.  We wrote 'Baby, B-A-B-Y,' for Carla Thomas.  And we wrote for--Johnny Taylor came to the label.  I wrote his first blues song, "I Had a Dream." We just--we just got hot. That was a golden age at Stax, and that's how I did it.
Story_ID: 8219
Speaker 1: I wanted to be a vocalist. I started out--when I first got out of the [Manassas] high school [Memphis, Tennessee], the word came around the neighborhood, there's a new recording studio up on Thomas Street, and me and Sidney [Kirk] went up there on audition. I auditioned, and those guys called me back.  Called me back, "We want to cut a record on you."  So they called a session date. I showed up.  I recorded two songs.  I had back-up voices and strings and a full rhythm. The tune was called 'Laura, When Our Lives Go Round.'  And the flip side was 'C.C. Rider,' Chuck Willis's old tune. The record was put out. Sold about three copies.  But, boy, I was sitting by the radio (leans forward and turns head as if listening closely to a radio).  "This is my song they playin'" And I was like a celebrity in the neighborhood. (in a high girl's voice) "Boy, sing 'Laura.'  Bubba, sing 'Laura.' "  Hero.  But it didn't go nowhere.  But I knew I had to go back to the drawing board, and that's when I got into Stax [Records, Memphis, Tennessee].  And I worked my way that way.  And in 1967, somebody had a birthday party. Well, we always celebrated birthday parties at Stax by champagne and cake. So me and [Donald] 'Duck' Dunn, the bass player at Booker T. and the MGs, we hoarded a couple bottles of champagne and swiped a big slug of cake and ran to the ladies' restroom and locked the door.  Ate the cake and guzzled the champagne down. (Laughs)  I was--I had a buzz, man. I came out. Al Bell said--Al Bell was our executive vice president at that time.  Al said, "Ike, I want to cut an album on you, man."  "Yeah."  I was feeling no pain. "I don't care.  Let's do it."  We went in the studio, and we didn't have time to rehearse anything.  I just said--told Al Jackson on drums--he was the drummer for Booker T. and the MGs and Duck Dunn, the bass player.  I was at piano. "Maybe you all follow me."  We started out and Al cut the tape on, the tape roll, went out of one tune into another.  And Al said, "I think I got enough."  I don't know how much later on, maybe a couple hours or something.  And I--"Okay, Al, all right, man."  Didn't take him serious. We went up and listened to it. It sounded pretty hip.
Story_ID: 8220
Speaker 1: And we wrote all those things and I recorded, and a few weeks later, maybe two weeks, Al Bell said "Ike, you've got an appointment at the photographer's."  "For what?"  "For your album cover, man."  You hear me, he's serious about this stuff. So I showed up, and they rented me a tux. I had a tux, top hat, tails, a cane, and had the cheap costume jewelry, cufflinks, them big old thick cufflinks, rhinestones, you know.  (Laughs) And I had horn-rimmed glasses.  I was so nerdy, man. But it was called, 'Presenting Isaac Hayes', my first album in 1967.
Speaker 2: At that time, did you wear your hair bald?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was bald then.
Speaker 2: Did you have the beard?
Speaker 1: See, I went bald and beard. The reason I wore the beard because I was--I used to rub my grandfather's shaving brush. They'd say to make--shaving, gonna make your hair grow.  Well, I don't know if it was true, but I grew a beard early, and I was in the NDCC National Defense Cadet Corps, just like ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and I was an officer. I was a first drill team commander. Then I was promoted to adjutant staff. I became a major.  Well, you know, the sergeant said, "Sorry, no beards in the army, son."  So I had to shave my last couple years.  Old Spice and all that stuff.  But, you know, blacks suffer with a thing called folliculitis. That's when the follicle grows back in the skin and it infects it, and you get them bumps.  And to my ring around the collar, I had blood around the collar because shaving, and you'd start bleeding and stuff, and they'd put tissue to stop bleeding and all that stuff. I had to go through it.  And every summer, I'd let my beard grow because I was out of school. Well, when I graduated [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], I just let the beard grow.  And I was a musician, and I had--wore that process [chemically relaxed hairstyle], had my hair slicked and everything.  Sometime I went natural.  But when I started wearing a process, it was hard to keep up.  Had to sleep with stocking cap on and all that kind of stuff.  I had a do-rag.  And your hair sweat in the summertime, and you wake up, if you don't have the do-rag on, it looked like it's spiked, you know. So I just got tired of all that stuff, so I went around the corner from Stax [Records, Memphis, Tennessee] on College [Street], Mr. King's barbershop. "Mr. King, I want you to cut it all off.  I want to grow a new crop of hair."  "Okay."  He cut it all off.  But I was going to go natural.  When I walked outside, I said, "Damn, some breeze out here, man.  It feels good."  So I decided to keep it like that.  I knew I looked weird.  People said, "But he got bald head and beard."  People from the bus, looking out the bus, pointing and stuff, because it was a different sight, you know, but I kept it like that.  And so in '67 [1967], that's what was on, but I had the top hat on.  You couldn't see it.  Not until I recorded 'Hot Buttered Soul,' released in '69 [1969].  That's a bald head. That's when it took off.
Story_ID: 8221
Speaker 1: Now, the first album ['Presenting Isaac Hayes,' 1967] didn't do great, right?
Speaker 2: No, it was fair.  I mean it got more favorable noise from the critics, but it wasn't a huge commercial success.  But it was a prelude of what was to come.  You know, in '68 [1968] is when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed.  And that kind of messed me up a little bit, big time messed me up, really.
Speaker 1: Where were you when Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 2: I was here in Memphis [Tennessee].  You know, in fact, I was almost down to the Lorraine Motel.  Toby was the name of a baritone sax player working with Sam and Dave [singing duo].  And we were recording Sam and Dave.  We wanted Toby to come down and play on the session.  So Toby stayed at Lorraine Motel, and that day, I told Toby, I said,  "I'll come by and pick you up and take you to the studio."  But my wife at the time, she had other plans.  We only had one car. "I gotta go shopping. I gotta go blah, blah, blah."  "Well, I gotta go pick Toby up for the session."  We argued and argued.  I said, "Forget it.  I'll get a taxi."  So I called Toby.  I said, "Toby, I'm sorry, I can't pick you up.  Wife got the car.  So just meet me--take a taxi and meet me at the studio, and I'll reimburse you for the cab fare."  I had to get a cab myself, so I called for the taxi, waited for the taxi to come get me and then take me over to the studio.  When I got to the studio, "Hey, man, what's up?"  Everybody looking at me, so somber. "Hey, what's wrong with y'all, man?"  "Oh, you haven't heard?"  "What?"  "Martin Luther King just got shot down at Lorraine Motel."  "What?"  "Just got shot, man."  And Toby was there.  He said, "Man, I could've been there."  And I thought about it.  I could've picked Toby up at that time.  And if I'd seen Dr. King walking on the balcony, I would've run up there and got an autograph."  You know, I would've been there when that happened 'cause I think Andrew Young, the Reverend [Ralph] Abernathy, and [Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] was on the balcony.
Speaker 1: The Reverend [Samuel] Billy Kyles, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were going to Billy Kyles's house for dinner, and I think Doc was waving at somebody down on the ground.
Speaker 1: Ben Branch.
Speaker 2: Ben, yeah.  And that's when the sniper hit him. I probably would've been there because I know Ben, and I probably would've been down there, you know. You know, it's almost like the song, old gospel song about Christ's crucifixion, "Were you there when they crucified my Lord?"  Were you there?  I could've been there.  It's like I wish I was there. I hated it to happen, but since it did, I wish I would've been there, and I almost was, just a twist of fate.  I mean when that happened, I was in such a state of shock.  I was--felt like my leader was gone.  Saw no future.  All the creative juices stopped flowing.  Tried to do something.  I even got involved in activities.  I started going to gas stations getting gas. A friend of mine called me and a couple of guys went around the corner alley siphoned it off and make Molotov cocktails.  I was so full of hate at that time.  Somewhere down the line, I realized I really became militant, but I realized that I can't do anything sitting here hating.  I can make a difference.  I'm gonna keep creating, so I got back into it.  And I joined with a barber in North Memphis named Warren Lewis.  We formed a group called the Black Knights.  And we started challenging the administration in this city.  We challenged them about police brutality, unequal employment, unequal housing.  We took it to them. I mean the black elected officials did something like that, but I took it from the street level.  And we would--we marched outside of the city jail when James Earl Ray was there, and I know in my pictures, FBI had my--because you saw those guys take a picture, click, click. I know I'm on file somewhere.  But I got back into my music, and we, the Black Knights, were very active in the civil rights, struggle.  I marched with Dr. King that week before he was killed, that march that was interrupted.  Yeah, and I got maced and dogs sicced on me because I was caught outside the church.  Everybody says, "Go back to the church?"  Clavin Temple, they closed the door before I could get there, and they'd maced us, cops shot teargas on us, and dogs sicced on us and stuff.  There was a Catholic church right next door to Clavin Temple, and some of the nuns got gassed.  We had to help them inside, but it was--I had a good buddy named Joe, forget Joe's last name.  They beat him so bad, man, he was just bloody--all on TV--bloody.  That was the times we were living in, and that was the situation in this city. But I started making a difference, and I got so militant. I just started making changes around Stax, [Records, Memphis, Tennessee], me and [songwriter, musician] David [Porter].  "This company depends mostly on black music.  Al Bell needs a black secretary.  We need some clerical people in here working."  We made those demands on Jimmy [Stewart]. He adhered to them because he knew we were right.  And Warren and I, Black Knights, started giving out Christmas baskets to people, needy people during Christmas time because I could relate to that because I used to get those Christmas baskets.  I knew what it meant.  And I would be on the truck after midnight delivering those baskets--rain, shine, sleet, or snow--to elderly people and to poor people.  And just gets you when the kids in that truck, they start jumping up and down, (in a high children's voice) "Ooh, mama, we got food, we got food."  It was something to experience.  And I think that's when my philanthropic thing came in.  One guy was killed at a service station during the holidays and I gave a show down at the Orpheum Theatre [Memphis, Tennessee].  Gave the proceeds to his family. I helped a lot of people during that time. And then I started some kind of foundation. It didn't go anywhere.  Julian Bond [civil rights leader] was on my board, and quite a few important people were on board.  But I founded another foundation later on, a few years ago.
Story_ID: 8222
Speaker 1: Al Bell came to me during the winter of '68 [1968], so I--we had a sales meeting for the next spring, and "I got to get an album on everybody.  Will you help me with it?"  I said, "Yeah. Oh, by the way, can I do one myself, too?"  He says, "Sure."  I said, "Can I do it the way I want to and I will not be under the influence of alcohol?"  He said, "Hey, you got it carte blanche, however you want to do it, man."  So I started working on 'Hot Buttered Soul.'  Al named it 'Hot Buttered Soul.'  And when it was done, he had all those albums displayed back there in Stax [Records, Memphis, Tennessee].  That was--I think it was at a hotel.  I can't remember.  But, mine, it was way back in the back.  I got up and me and David [Porter] sang a Sam and Dave tune, and then I sang, 'By the Time I Get to Phoenix.'  Tore the house down, standing ovation.  People said, "Did you record that?"  "Yeah, it's on his album."  "Where?"  "Back there."  They had to look behind all the other stuff, and you see, 'Hot Buttered Soul' was a selfish act on my part because there were twenty-six other albums released.  I felt no pressure. If it flopped, nobody would've cared. So I did what I wanted to do, and what I had to say could not have been said in two minutes and thirty seconds. I took total artistic freedom, liberties. There's only four tunes on an album, two to a side. 'Phoenix' was eighteen minutes and forty-seven long.  'Walk on By,' was twelve-something [minutes]. I mean 'Walk on By', 'I Stand Accused', something like that--they were long, and well, it revolutionized albums, black albums selling market.  It went platinum, gold and then platinum.  It changed the way that covers, album cover concepts.  It changed that. This is bald head on top.  And I was joking around at the photo shoot, and I said, "Hey, man, shoot the top of my head."  So the photographer got up on the ladder and shot down, and that was the one that he used. And it changed the way that the arrangements went.  Funky rhythm, underneath everything and in there, strings and stuff, orchestral shit on top. 'Rolling Stone' [periodical] panned it.  "How dare he?  That funky stuff--all this funk he wrote, man, he puttin' all those strings in on top and blah, blah, blah."  Whoever wrote that was wrong.  They were proved wrong.  Also, the rapping that I did, talking on top, I set that pace.  But I had no idea what I was doing. I was doing something that felt good to me.  But I didn't know the effect would just cause ripples on down, down the road.  But it did. 'Hot Buttered Soul.'
Speaker 2: (Inaudible) has a classic.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Classic.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That really kicked off a big career.
Speaker 1: Shoo!
Story_ID: 8223
Speaker 1: I did my first gig August of that year, '69 [1969] in Detroit [Michigan] at Masonic Temple, Staple Singers.  I headlined the show. Scared to death.  Asked the DJ [disc jockey] at intermission, "Man, do you think they'll like me?"  He said, "Ike, this thing's been sold out two weeks in advance. What do you think?"  (laughs) But I went out there, and I only had, what, five musicians with myself.  Bobby Manuel, white boy on guitar; Jerry Norris on drums,  Alan-- he became the producer of the Bar-Kays [soul group on Stax Records label], I forget his last name. He's on bass.  And Marvel Thomas was on piano.  I was sitting at an organ.  And I went out and they would do a tune or two. I was so nervous. I was trying to adjust the mic. I was trying to adjust the mic[rophone], and I had a flop hat on, a terrycloth flop hat, a ves-- like a hippie--and some moccasins and some houndstooth designed pants, red, white, and blue.  And the mic was wrong. I said, "Let me adjust this mic."  Went around and adjusted the mic, and I took my cap off and rubbed my head.  Women screamed.  Mental note, my head.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Keep the cap off?
Speaker 1: That's it, I kept the cap off, and then I started talking to them, and I realized that the tension started to dissipate. I had a good contact with the audience, good rapport with them.  I talked to them, brought them in to me.  And I got comfortable then.  I went on and performed and did the thing and slew everybody, you know.  And I just made those mental notes and things that I did.  A guy had a shop in Memphis [Tennessee] on Union [Street] called Vicky's Love, Robert and Kay Quarrels, a white guy.  He says, "I've got something I want you to check it out."  Big old chain necklace and a chain belt went with it.  Bought it from him, and I got an idea.  I used to wear a lot of rawhide things, rawhide vests.  But I looked--shows I had seen, I'd seen the headliners come out on stage, like James Brown, Otis [Redding], Wilson Pickett, or Sam and Dave.  First thing to do is loosen that tie. Then they take the jacket off.  Some of them would take their vest off.  I said, now, why do they do that?  They knew they were going to get hot. I'm not going to do that. I'm going to put some tights on.  If [Mikhail] Baryshnikov [dancer] can wear tights, I can, too."  And I said, I'm gonna put this chain necklace on, put the chains on here.  Why go out there and start taking my clothes off?  Just go out there with no clothes on in the first place.  You stay cooler.  So I did that.  I started doing that.  And the chains evolved in a chain--a guy named Charles Ruben. He said, "I wanna make you a chain vest, man."  Made me a chain vest with sleeves and everything.  Then he started making me all kind of chain, long, tuxedo-like chains, you know, tails and all that stuff. And I start wearing those chains, and I realize that these chains once represented enslavement to a black man in this country. Now, they represent the sound of power.  I said, "I'm making a mockery what chains once represented to us," and I just kept wearing them.
Story_ID: 8224
Speaker 1: Dino Woodard was my security man at one time.  Dino is now a minister at Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem [New York, New York] under Reverend [Calvin] Butts.  But Dino, we was playing somewhere and outside of--there's a college up there, I think Hunter College [New York, New York] up there.  It could have been Rhode Island somewhere up that way.  He said--I did, I think four encores. They were still screaming. He said, "Ike, listen to them.  Man, they love you, man. You're like leadin' the people, man. You're just like a Moses, man.  You Black Moses."  I said, "Dino, don't say that, man.  That's sacrilegious. Don't do that, man. It's sacrilegious."  "No, man, you're the Moses.  You're the Moses."  Well, a writer for 'Jet' magazine, Chester Higgins [writer], got wind of that, and he wrote an article and used the word, "Black Moses."  I was still resisting. "Oh, no, why'd he do that?"  I did a gig in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the Spectrum [arena], eighteen thousand people.  Georgie Woods was a local DJ [disc jockey], plus he was a promoter.  Personality Georgie Woods.  And he introduced me. He said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I bring to you the black Moses of the music world, Isaac Hayes!"  Eighteen thousand people stood, "Yeah!"  The stage is in the middle of the floor revolving. So that 'Black Moses' thing caught on.  Bam!  And Larry Shaw in our marketing department at Stax [Records, Memphis, Tennessee] got the idea, and he titled my next album, 'Black Moses,' and I took that picture standing there down to Lake McKellar in Memphis, and it just caught on like wildfire, spread all over the world, Africa, especially where there were people in the--Africans in the diaspora, Caribbean, and France, England.  It just took off all over Europe and Africa and the Caribbean.
Speaker 2: I know there were posters in every black dormitory--.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Yeah, but when I first went to Africa, I didn't realize how heavy I was till we went to Sierra Leone and come across that ferry before we got to Freetown.  We got in Freetown. Side of a building, Black Moses, a portrait of mine was painted, huge. I don't know how many feet, man, maybe ten or fifteen feet. "Wow, they know me over here?"  "Well, you Black Moses."  So, you know, and I--I found when I went to Europe, the European press almost like they took issues with it because they thought it was a self-ordained thing.  I said, "No, I didn't name myself."  At a press conference, I got it off my chest and let me know, "Hey, I didn't name myself 'Black Moses.'  Somebody else did."  I said, "I accepted it with resistance because I thought it was sacrilegious.  But when I started realizing it had so much relevance to black people, like Moses freed his people against a tyranny of Pharaoh, well, I'm kind of freeing my people spiritually with song in this oppressive society.  So as long as it has relevance and it's not made into a novelty, I'll wear it proudly.  So I straightened him out on that, and that's how it happened.
Story_ID: 8225
Speaker 1: 'Black Moses' came out about, what--.
Speaker 2: 1970--I think in 1970, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's pre-'Shaft.'
Speaker 2: '70 [1970].  Pre-'Shaft'.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Shaft came out in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: You had albums like 'To Be Continued'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'To Be Continued'  followed the 'Movement'.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible).
Speaker 2: Yeah, the 'Movement' followed 'Hot Buttered Soul,' and then 'To Be Continued' followed 'Movement.'
Speaker 1: And then 'Black Moses?'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of production in a short period of time.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: A lot of music--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 8226
Speaker 1: 'To Be Continued,' now is an album that--(inaudible) just me to just present a--older people, older black people (inaudible) Isaac Hayes, as well as young black people.
Speaker 2: Yeah--.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible).
Speaker 2: Exactly. 'Look of Love', 'Our Day Will Come', 'Running out of Fools', and what was the other one?  Oh, shoot, 'Look of Love', 'Our Day Will Come,' 'Running out of Fools', oh--there was four.
Speaker 1: But it's a cross-generational thing--,
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --in that way that I haven't seen any other artist do--I mean work in a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean the college students had it, and their parents had it.
Speaker 2: That's true.  That's true. I can't figure it out.  It wasn't planned. I was just doing what I--where my instincts took me, you know, and I was just expressing myself.
Speaker 1: Unlike today when it seems like the music is polarized.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: Rap and--.
Speaker 2: Hip-hop and all that stuff is one way, and the older people want that old school stuff because they miss that, you know.  You know, I was looking at the BET [Black Entertainment Television] Awards last night.  I didn't look at it long, but that stuff is totally hip hop, totally rap.  And I'm not knocking it because it's out of necessity to communicate, but, you know, it's almost like a lost generation because they don't have a clue about the shoulders that they stand on. They're being exploited by the record company.  Like Magic [Johnson, basketball player/entrepreneur] made a great speech last night. He said, "Look," he said, "I'm getting an award, but this award is for something that I should've been doing anyway."  He said, "I want you kids to understand that you guys making all the money and stuff like, you better save your money, and you better invest it in something and put back in--."  I think--I don't--he might have said put back in the community, but I did when I was elected--when I was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, I said, I wanted to mention to my hip-hoppers and my rap people, I said, "You guys always remember that you are disposable, and it ain't about the bling bling and the Cristal."  I said, "Own something.  Own something, and put back into communities. Think about the kids that are coming up and needing education.  Help them. That's what it's all about, sharing and putting back."  So I hope they--I hope they got it.  But they're getting dazzled by these record companies throwing all kind of money at them, and their managers leading them in the other direction, away from helping their own people. Same thing with athletes, you know.  I try to encourage them to look to learn about their ancestry in Africa.  Africa needs help.  It's being exploited big time, and since the middle passage, they've been on their knees, purposely kept that way.  It's like--do you know what an aphid is? I took biology, you know, like the ants who suck all the nutrition from the aphid, and he just sits there until it dies, and the shell of an aphid's sitting there.  Well, they're like an aphid. They're sucking all the resources and stuff from Africa, but they won't allow them to become independent to do their own developing and things like that.  They keep them that way because the wealth of Africa built the cities of Europe.
Story_ID: 8227
Speaker 1: We were talking about some of the--giving back to the community and--and not only just the black community here, but in Africa too.
Speaker 2: Exactly. We need to do that because I think we as black people been conditioned to ignore our own survival--for survival to serve other people, our captives, and it's been passed down through generations.  We need to think about ourselves. We need to unite and help each other. Like, in America, we need to create more black millionaires. That way we can help each other. And I stress that among black athletes and black entertainers. They're getting paid more than history, more than we have been paid in sports and in music in the history of this country. If I were getting paid what these guys are getting now back in the '70s [1970s], I could retire now, you know.  But they need to use that money wisely and put back into communities and bring somebody else up and help them get to the point where they can make money.  Again, create more millionaires. Then we wouldn't have to depend on other people for our resources.  To jumpstart resources and things like that.  We can finance each other.
Story_ID: 8228
Speaker 1: I was invited to Africa in '92 [1992] with my friend Dionne Warwick.  We were invited over there by brother Agbah Muhammad, who is head of the Ghana mission for the Nation of Islam.  And of course we first went there, we visited all the sites, grave of Kwame Nkrumah, Dr. [W.E.B.] DuBois.  But what really changed my life was when we went to Cape Coast Castle, the Elmina Castle, where the slave dungeons were, where are people were warehoused sometimes for three to four months before shipping to the Middle Passage, and it was a spiritual thing because seeing those dungeons and seeing how they lived, it was like I heard my ancestors voices saying, "We're back home through you. The circle is complete. Now you know what you must do."  I was so overcome with emotion I cried, we all cried, and listened to the guide tell us about all those atrocities that went on inside those walls.  It was an awakening for me; I knew I had to do my mission. When I came back to America, I went on speaking engagements at black expos, encouraging African Americans to go to Africa, interact socially, culturally, and, or economically.  Said, you need to know where you came from because we didn't have black history when I was in school.  We had Negro History Week, and now we have Black History Month.  The shortest month of the year, but still.  We need to have those studies in schools along with English lit and world history.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Keep going.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  But yet, this system failed and because it failed, we're living in the condition that we are today because if those kids, kids like myself, had learned history and like white kids say, European kids say, "Well, we had King of England and King of Austria."  We got King of Nigeria, King of Ghana.  We came from noble birth too.  Then we were equal.  And then they would have understood us better.  Then there would have been a mutual respect, but Africa was always shrouded in mystery, and when you find mystery and ignorance about the fact--ignorance breeds fear and fear breeds hatred, and that's why you have all this stuff in this country now.  But I think had we been taught that sooner, we would not have been afraid to say or been ashamed to be black. Back when I was in school, when somebody called you old black son, you ready to fight because you had been conditioned to think that black was bad.  And you know, like 'Tarzan' [motion picture], that's where we got our education about Africa was through a Tarzan movie. Edgar Rice Burroughs did his job, but the Caucasian race perpetuated it, and then you find here's a white guy going through jungles, telling Africans what to do.  That's not true, but that's what we believed. And just like I'm not getting into religion, but you know, Jesus Christ, blonde hair, blue eyes. You know anything about the Bible. Those years that Jesus was missing, running from Herod, he had to hide somewhere.  He had to hide in a country without black people otherwise he would have stood out like a sore thumb. He had to look like them in order to survive, okay? It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure that out, but it was perpetuated and all that stuff. It was perpetuated in white supremacy.  And then we look at Santa Claus.  He goes on and on. So we had low esteem of ourselves and that was done by design, keep you on the lower rung.  But we're waking up, slowly but surely, but hopefully these younger kids will learn about self through African education, and like earlier mentioned Dr. [Leonard] Jeffries, we need more of him, to teach.  To raise these kids level of awareness of who they are and where they came from and what their responsibilities are.
Story_ID: 8229
Speaker 1: I was telling you a story about how I got to Ghana and speaking engagements and things like that. This princess [Naa Asie Ocansey] heard me speak in Queens, New York, and she called her father back in Ghana and told him what I was doing.  He said, "Let's honor this man."  So in about a week she called me and she said, "Mr. Hayes, would you like to be a king?"  "Yeah, okay.  What do I have to do?"  She said, "I told my father what you were doing and he wants to honor you."  She said, "I know you're on a busy schedule, so we will adjust our schedule around yours, and what would normally take about ten to twelve days," she said, "we can do this in two days."  First is the ritual, which is closed and the outdooring, which the whole community comes out.  Said, okay.  So we picked a time which was late December of '92 [1992] because I had been going over there twice that year in '92 [1992] and that was the third trip, and Agbah Muhammad was there. Senator Marcus Garvey [possibly a Ghanaian government official] was there.  The rap group Public Enemy.  One of Mr. [Louis] Farrakhan's daughters. I had quite an entourage.  And it was very interesting. The ritual was closed and Nina Abaduna took me through my ritual steps, bathed me and did the whole thing. And when that was over, I then--the next day they dressed me, had the outdooring. Chiefs came up and Public Enemy [rap group] was there and he took a lot of pictures. I think Russell Simmons [music mogul] has some of that footage right now.  It was great.
Story_ID: 8230
Speaker 1: And I started quizzing Agbah [Muhammad] about schools.  I visited a lot of places and I saw that they need schools. I saw some lean-to's and things like that.  Some places with no roof. Kids learning. I asked Agbah what it would cost to build a school over there; he gave me a figure.  It was something like ten thousand dollars or something.  And I had in my mind, a school looked like that.  Don't want it like that, I want a good school. So after I was (inaudible) by Nene Kubi, the third prince's father; he was a king maker.  And I say king because they say chief. Chief came from England. They used to say, "No, only one king, King of England."  No. These guys are kings too and that's why I use the word king. I was a 'Development King', and since that time, I've been put in the house of chiefs, locally, district, and nationally. I'm the first African American that ever been in the house of chiefs nationally. The next step is probably dual citizenship and then diplomatic status because I kept going back.  Most African Americans, they'll go over there and get their honors and they don't come back. In the heat of the moment, they come back to America and they forget. I kept going back.  Nene Kubi gave me land to build my palace on. I said, "Nene, no, no, no, no. There's a greater need. You guys need education."  I said, "That's the only way this country's going to develop is with education."  I said, "You need a school."  So at one of the festivals, I announced, "I'm putting this school here in Ghana," in Ada. That's the area that I'm Development King of--Ada, A-D-A.  It's southeastern tip of the country, bordered on the east by the Volta River and on the south by the Atlantic Ocean.  Beautiful place. That was [Kwame] Nkrumah's favorite spot.  So I, you know, I went to work.  I raised, scraped, begged and borrowed, whatever I could do to get the money up, and I put my own--mostly my own money in it.  I formed the Isaac Hayes Foundation and I kept funneling over there. The princess helped me.  She was at ground zero, so she made sure the building and all that stuff went right.  It's architecturally designed.  It's an eight thousand square foot building.  It's beautiful.  We deliver steady technology, which was developed by L. Ron Hubbard, humanitarian and writer [founder of Scientology movement]. Also, we deliver computer technology and health education.  As we speak now, there's probably--I don't know how many doctors over there now. They come every year from schools all over, universities all over America, and they give screenings in villages.  We are up against the HIV [Human Immunodeficiency Virus] and AIDS [Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome] over there and my school is the center in that area for the fight, and we do all kind of community awareness things like bicycle races and things like that that energize people. They can come out, and we get the word out because they think AIDS is a death sentence, so they crawl up in a hole and wait to die. We say, "No, no, no.  You don't have to do that. Let people know you have it.  You can get help."  And we do that and we're fighting this AIDS, everything big time.  That's through my foundation. Some people came from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to help get them the computer education in over there and the Study Tech from L. Ron Hubbard is the greatest thing in the world.  I know he's the founder of 'Dianetics' and Scientology.
Story_ID: 8231
Speaker 1: And I'm a Scientologist, I've been a Scientologist now for ten years.  But it works. That's what people don't realize, and they don't have the right understanding what Scientology is.  It's a religion in this sense that's saying it's an applied religious philosophy, and I tell people, "Look up the word 'applied.' Look up the word 'religious.'  Look up the word 'philosophy.'"  That's what Scientology is. It teaches.  It's educational.  You can be a Baptist, Methodist, Catholic, Jewish, Muslim, whatever you want to be. Be that; that's your religion.  But use the technology of Scientology.  It'll help you understand your religion much, much better, and you will just will expand big time, and you will learn how to survive ethically. We are bound in ethics, and you can overcome any obstacle that runs up against you in life if you've got Scientology tech.
Speaker 2: You were introduced to Scientology in the '90s [1990s], or the '80s [1980s], or?
Speaker 1: '93 [1993]. It's ten years I've been into it, and I stumbled in there by accident.  A Baptist minister got me into Scientology, introduced me into it.  Reverend Alfreddie Johnson who's head of the World Literacy Crusade, and I'm the international spokesperson for that.  And we have locations all over the country and different places in the world, and we find that at the bottom of disease, crime, poverty, drugs, there's illiteracy. So therefore, we try to educate people so they can learn how to take care of themselves, learn how to be more productive and more responsible.  And we have some stats to prove all of this.  In fact, on the 26th of July, we got a place outside of St. Louis [Missouri] called Spanish Lake, that's our headquarters for Applied Scholastics, and teachers and educators is coming from all over the world to learn how to deliver the Study Tech and take it back and set up their own centers because that's the missing blocks in education. L. Ron Hubbard researched and found it.  His research came out of trying to improve upon what he'd already discovered, and he found out that his students were not getting instructions right.  He found out that they ran up against the barriers to study and learning. There are three barriers: absence of mass, too steep a gradient, and the misunderstood word.  Once those kids get that, they can learn, learn, learn, and don't get hung up.  But the teachers have to learn how to teach it.  Once they learn how to teach it and deliver it, the kids get it. It's a win-win situation for both because kids, they don't want to drop out of school, but they get in so many misunderstoods they get frustrated.  They don't see themselves winning, so they just--they drop the whole thing out of frustration. The teachers are doing their best.  If they know the right buttons to push and right stuff to deliver, kids get it.
Story_ID: 8232
Speaker 1: Melvin Van Peebles did a movie called 'Sweetback's Baadasssss Song,' [sic. 'Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song'] and he couldn't get distribution so he had to 'full all' that. That's what they call it, rent the facility insuring the film.  It was a big hit, and Hollywood said, "Hmm. Blacks go to movies. They spend money."  Hollywood [motion picture industry] was kind of fledgling at that point, kind of in trouble.
Speaker 2: You're talking about early--
Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah. Even in the late '60s [1960s]. (Inaudible)
Speaker 1: Late '60s, early '70s.
Speaker 2: 'Uptight' by Booker T. [and the MGs] (simultaneous (inaudible).  Booker T. that you know well from--.
Speaker 1: From Stax [Records], that's right.
Speaker 2: From Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: And I think 'Watermelon Man' was one.
Speaker 2: Godfrey Cambridge [actor, starred in 'Watermelon Man'].
Speaker 1: Godfrey Cambridge, exactly.
Speaker 2: So it was starting.  Black movies were starting up.
Speaker 1: They were starting, and 'Sweetback' did it.  That really pushed it over the top, like black movies.  MGM [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc.], somehow they got the script of [motion picture] 'Shaft,' and they wanted to use a black director, black leading actor, and a black composer.  As far as composing was concerned, I was Stax's biggest gun. So they pulled us all together. We went to a meeting at MGM. I think Jim Aubrey was the president of MGM at the time.  And they spoke to us and I was interested, but I was kind of nervous. I'd never done a movie score before.
Speaker 2: But didn't you do one called 'Maureen' or something?  There was something else that you did in '69 [1969]--a small movie.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No. My first movie score was 'Shaft,' and then followed by  'Three Tough Guys' and 'Truck Turner.' [motion pictures]  So you know, I read the script, and I saw some of the footage.  So I told all those guys, I said, "Look man, you all cast for the lead role yet?"  "No."  "Okay.  Could I try out for the lead role?"  "Sure. But remember Mr. Hayes, you committed to the music."  "Oh, yeah. I'd do that, yeah."  So I came back home, telling the fellas, "Yeah man, I'm going to try out for the lead role in this movie called 'Shaft.'"  I didn't think about the music because I wanted to be an actor, you know.  So a week passed. Guys said, "Hey Ike, you got the call yet, man?"  "Oh, I think I'll call them today, see what's happening."  I called. "Oh, Mr. Hayes. Oh, they haven't told you?" "Told me what?"  "Well, they already cast it.  A fellow by the name of Richard Roundtree got the part."  I was so bent out of shape.  "Oh, man."  "But remember, you're going to do the music, right?" "Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'll do the music." (Laughing) I had no idea I came out like the big winner.
Story_ID: 8233
Speaker 1: This was different from your normal--I mean what you had done before. You've done your smooth, or soulful music, and--,
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --this score required a lot of different things, but the funky beat for the theme song was the thing that everybody remembers.
Speaker 2: Well, you see, I had lessons in funk before other people, like Sam and Dave [singing duo], 'Soul Man,' 'Hold on I'm Coming' and all that stuff. I did (inaudible) the opportunity to produce for somebody else, but for me, I already did the smooth things.  I kind of did--well, 'Hyperbolic,' which is on 'Hot Buttered Soul.'  It had a beat to it.  But, you know, 'Shaft,' Gordon Parks [director of 'Shaft'], I love that old man. Gordon is such a renaissance man.  He was so cool, he had his pipe. He said, "Isaac, think about the characters. Shaft. He's always moving and roving like a cat. Your music has to depict that.  I ain't going to tell you how to write it, but that's what you look for."  "Okay Gordon. All right."  So I started thinking and I thought about those sixteen notes on the high hat (makes a shuffling noise).  Okay, I'll start with that.  Then we had--Van and I had been working in the studio.  We're always working on something. And Skip, that's the guitar player--Michael was too, but Skip--we did something one night in the studio.  You know, you get so far on a tune and you can't take it any further, you just put in on the shelf.  Well, we're not going to trash it, but let's put it back there for a rainy day.  We'll work on it later on.  Almost a year had passed and I thought about that. I said, "Skip, remember that lick you played."  I had the engineer to pull it out.  I said, "I want you to put a wah-wah to it."  I got on my knees and worked the wah-wah pedal.  My hands--he got it.  He started playing that wah-wah and he just--he became a master. Then I thought about the bass. (making sounds) Bohm, dramatic. Bohm, drama.  And that's when I started putting it all together, just the rhythm. Not the topic, just the rhythm.  And so I did that--well, first of all, what happened.  Gordon Parks and George Freeman, they knew I hadn't scored a movie before, so they gave me three pieces of film on 16 millimeter, and they said, "Write me something to this scene, the opening scene where Shaft comes up out of the subway."  He said, "Also write me something to this walk through Harlem [New York, New York], and also write something for the love scene where he and Ellie, his lady, made love."  So it took me two hours to do the rhythm for 'Shaft.'  It took me one hour to write the montage for the music of Shaft walking through Harlem, which became 'Soulsville'.  It took me about an hour to write Ellie's love theme.  I played the vibes on that.  And I took that back there.  I jumped on a plane and took it to New York to Gordon's apartment over there by East Side.  Gordon played it.  He listened. Played the movie over and played the track to that.  "That's good. Okay, you can go to Hollywood [California] now."  (Laughs) So I went to Hollywood and started working in a place called the Penthouse, on MGM's [Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc.] lot upstairs, and me and my band worked on it.  And while we were working on the score, we had a tour going back east.  We'd go out on tour on the weekends.  We left Friday afternoon and come back Monday morning.  That's how we did it, we worked it.  And when I finished the whole score, that's when I went back and finished the 'Theme from Shaft,' the topic with strings and horns and writing the lyrics and stuff like that.  And when I finished, I said, "Oh, thank God. They don't have my head on a block. Those guys are pleased.  I'm glad to know that." That's what I was thinking about. Then I had to go back to Memphis [Tennessee] and do the recording, the album.  I filled in all the empty spaces or the short pieces. I expanded them to whole tunes and things like that. And then they released the album, the thing took off.  T
Speaker 1: There's no popular signature of any song (inaudible) than the wah-wah--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and wah-wah and the high hat.  You hear that (makes shuffling noise).  Even little babies, they hear (makes shuffling noise), they stop.  Gets everybody's attention and that thing, it revolutionized Hollywood--Hollywood's music, movies, and television. I didn't know it, but it happened like that.
Story_ID: 8234
Speaker 1: I think [motion picture soundtrack] 'Shaft' [1971] is my biggest commercial success.  It was all over the world, and you know, it set all kind of records.  You know, I was the first African American to win an Oscar for music, third to win an Oscar totally--by Hattie McDaniel and Sidney Poitier [actors].
Speaker 2: This was ahead of Quincy Jones [musician/composer] and a lot of people that are well known before you even got started, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah. But you know, Quincy--there was a lot of controversy because Hollywood old guard tried to keep me from being nominated.  I was nominated in two categories: Best Score and Best Song.  And Quincy went to bat for me. Quincy, J.J. Johnson [James Louis Johnson], a guy named Dominic Frontiere, television scorer and movie.  And I think Henry Mancini [composer] was backing me up on that too. There were some naysayers, I won't call their name.  But I got the nomination.  Won in one category, which was Song of the Year.  And I had the pleasure of taking my grandmother [Rushia A. Wade] as my date that night of the Oscars, so she was right there in the middle of the mix. I prayed to God let her live long enough for me to reach my pinnacle.  Didn't know what it was, but it turned out to be 'Shaft.'  And that night I won, she was cool.  She wasn't nervous at all.  They called--what was his name the guy that did [film score for] 'Summer 42'? Michel Legrand--he won best score.  She said "Don't worry, you'll win." "How can you say that?" Sure enough, they called my name, I jumped up, and I had the opportunity to thank her in front of millions of people around the world.  That was my blessing.
Story_ID: 8235
Speaker 1: Your involvement with movies was also--you have been able to act in movies, yes?
Speaker 2: Yeah. My first movie was called 'Three Tough Guys,' ['Uomini duri', 1974] with Fred Williamson, Lino Ventura, great European actor; Paula Kelly. Dino DeLaurentiis production. We filmed it partly in Chicago [Illinois] and the other part in Rome [Italy], and I had an opportunity to score that movie. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So 'Three Tough Guys', and then you had--what was that?  'Truck Turner.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, you starred in it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I starred in 'Truck Turner', that was my most fun movie. Alan Weeks, Yaphet Kotto, Paul Heller [sic, Paul Harris], Annazette Chase. It's a fun thing, fun.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: The name "Truck Turner," everybody thinks you're much bigger than you are.  I mean you're not a small person.
Speaker 1: No, but I used to be real big.  Back in the '80s [1980s], I bodybuild, I got real big.  My arms were twenty inches and chest was huge.  I used to wear a fifty-one jacket and all that stuff. Squatting five hundred [pounds].  But, you know, I started taking it off. I wanted to look younger.  (Laughs)  Truck Turner was supposed to be a football player. That's why they called him Truck because he hit like a Mack truck. That's where the name came from. And I was a skip tracer, like a modern day bounty hunter--going and getting my man.  But it was fun, yeah.
Speaker 2: All right. You've been in lots of movies since then. Everything. I mean even at times you weren't recording, you were in the movies.
Speaker 1: Yeah. I did 'Escape from New York', a John Carpenter film.
Speaker 2: Was when you had the car with the chandeliers on the top of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Exactly.  Back in what--'81 [1981].  Yeah, that's when that was. It was a different kind of movie--Kurt Russell.  A lot of all-stars in that, Harry Dean Stanton, Adrienne Barbeau.
Speaker 2: Then you were in one of the most famous spoofs of all time 'I'm Gonna Get You Sucka.'
Speaker 1: 'I'm Gonna Get You Sucka'. Keenan Ivory Wayans--oh, yeah.  That was fun. Bernie Casey, Jim Brown, Keenan, the late Steve James.  And then, you know, Kadeem Hardison and Damon Wayans, Ja'net DuBois.
Speaker 2: So you say that--so, what's your favorite role in a movie so far?
Speaker 1: 'Truck Turner'--my favorite role. Yeah, favorite role.  Most fun movie.
Story_ID: 8236
Speaker 1: There's been lots of television too. You've appeared on every show from the 'Rockford Files' to--you know, there are so many of them.
Speaker 2: 'Rockford Files.'  I did three episodes of the 'Rockford Files'--recurring character. I played the character of Gandolph Fitch. Rockford called him Gandy and I called Rockford 'Rockfish,' and I starred with--first one, starred with my love interest in Truck Turner, Annazette Chase.  She played my daughter, and James--what's Jimmy name?  Oh, God, they played my kids.  And also the second one I was in was--Lou Gossett starred with me in that one, and the third one with Dionne Warwick.  Jim Garner's a great guy to work with. I had a lot of fun doing it.
Speaker 1: He's a very talented actor.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Who had a similar hairstyle to what (laughing) (inaudible).
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean Lou Gossett.  Oh, yeah.  We had a lot of fun. It was a pilot too, the one we did, but he opted to go do 'Lazarus Syndrome,' which was a short-lived television series.  But when you roll the dice in TV and movies, it goes like that sometimes.
Story_ID: 8237
Speaker 1: At the height of your success--now if we can believe what we read in 'Jet' magazine, you'd accumulated a fleet of cars, Rolls Royces and other expensive cars a huge--.
Speaker 2: Motorcycles and, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, everything, and then you had some economic problems.  What happened?
Speaker 2: You know, at the height of my career, I was wearing so many caps. I was producing, writing, arranging, acting, performing, and when you have inadequate people to mind the store and not ethical people, you start losing, you start bleeding.  You don't know you're bleeding until you get weak from blood loss, the dyke too many holes in it and you don't have enough fingers and toes to plug it.  And people think that all my spending led to my demise. The monies I spent was earmarked as 'mad money.'  The real money was soundly invested. Had a lot of investments.  I even built a housing complex in St. Croix, Virgin Islands, for low-income blacks.  But, you know, when you have sometimes weird accountants, weird attorneys, and your record company goes down the tube on you, twelve point some million dollars, what do you do?  I didn't want to jump off the ship.  The captain goes down with the ship.  I could have cut my losses and everybody be all out of work, but I was stuck because I knew they had responsibilities and families, so I hung in there as long as I could for my employees. I had to start all over again.
Speaker 1: So you did, like, lose everything?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everything.  You know, I thought to myself when I realized I had to (inaudible) got to wash out, I said, well, I started with nothing. I can do it again.  I was fortunate.
Speaker 1: Now did you have to--just the average person would probably ask this question, which I am I guess, did you have to sell your house?  Or get another place to live?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did because you go through bankruptcy, you liquidate everything, and creditors take spoils.  I'm going to write a book one day.  In fact, I'm in a process of putting it together.  I'm going to tell the whole story.  I got ripped big time, huge, big time. But I'll tell it exactly how it happened and everything.  Some people should be in jail for that, but you know, they hid behind the law.  Some of these bankruptcy laws are archaical, these books need to be revised. But I'll get into that when I write my book.
Story_ID: 8238
Speaker 1: Do you continue to get residuals from records and songs and that sort of thing that you put out?
Speaker 2: No.  Like I said, I'm going to tell that story. But I don't. I got ripped big time.
Speaker 1: So the rights to a lot of these things are not yours anymore?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's got to be tough to deal with.  To know that your creativity has produced so much--.
Speaker 2: That's true. That's true. What are you going to do?  You don't stop living, just try to out-create it.
Speaker 1: But you've producing again. I mean you never stopped acting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's one thing that you never stopped doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I just spread out my bases. I'm doing radio. I'm doing voice-overs.
Speaker 1: Now you still do the show on KISS FM [WRKS-FM radio station] in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, our contract was out and they tried to get me to resign.  I wouldn't because getting up at four o'clock in the morning was taking away from music.  So you got to get back to the original source and repeated successful actions.  So I'm going to start recording--working on my next CD, and that's what I'm known for, mostly known for, so I want to do that.  I got ideas. Some of that music is missing anyway, so we'll get into that. I have restaurants. I'm in the restaurant business and I wrote a cookbook and I got some sauces, barbecue, hot wing sauce, and jerk sauce, under the heading of Memphis Magic. So I'm getting into the food business too.
Story_ID: 8239
Speaker 1: In your own personal habits, you've changed your eating now.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I've been in health food since 1970.  Do I look sixty-one years old?  I'll be sixty-one in August of this year, 2003, August 20th. I've tried to live a clean life, you know, in all areas.  I mean I'm not a saint.  I mean I eat a hamburger every now and then. I eat some ribs every now and then.  But I take herbs to keep me clean of it.  You know, the herbs I take, it doesn't stay in me no longer than eight hours, and that's the way it should be.  Doesn't have time to sit there, and you know, putrefy and poison your system.  Once I got my system clean, I'm going to keep it clean, and help you keep the weight down too. I juice every day. I had some juice this morning. I'm going to have some juice for lunch.  And I give seminars on juicing too.  Helped save a lot of people because African American community suffer from a lot of things unnecessarily because of lack of information.  So I want to make sure they know it.  I mean Dick Gregory has been a pioneer in this, so I want to join those ranks. And I spoke with Dick, shared the podium with him at a lot of health fairs and things.
Story_ID: 8240
Speaker 1: Who are some of your favorite musicians?
Speaker 2: Musicians.  Well, you go all the way back, start with jazz.  Miles Davis, Bird [Charlie Parker], Oscar Peterson, and today you know, my good friend, Ronnie Laws, a dude here in Memphis [Tennessee], played on most early Whitney [Houston, singer] things--a saxophone player. I just shared--I did a track on his up and coming album.  I'm trying to get his name--his father is a preacher here in town. He's a [Memphis] city council member too.  His father is Whalum.  His name is Kirk Whalum, sax [saxophone] player, awesome.  And [the late] Grover [Washington] is a good friend of mine too.  We shared some great moments on the KISS FM [WRKS-FM radio statoin] radio in New York when he was with us, and I still listen to him. And I just did a gig in Oklahoma with Branford Marsalis [jazz/classical saxophonist.]
Story_ID: 8241
Speaker 1: It's been said too that you started a new wave of smoother music at the time when you came out.  There are people that started to sound more like you and some say that Marvin Gaye kind of tried to change his style a little bit and Barry White, when he emerged, everybody compared Barry White to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They said, you know, "Barry White was certainly inspired by Isaac Hayes," I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think I was out there first.  Yeah.  I'm a romantic. I am, can't help it.  And if I had my druthers, I like to sing the standards and the smooth romantic things.  Now, talk about Barry.  Barry's a good friend of mine and people always tried to say, "Barry White ripped you off."  No, Barry didn't rip me.  People fail to realize that we're both bass baritone singers and bass baritone singers are most effective singing the slow romantic songs.  Most songs are being done by tenors, people in that range. They can sing higher, but there are hundreds of them but Barry and I are few.  So we have to do the romantic things with the strings and horns and--but we're more effective with that.  So he didn't rip me.  He didn't have nowhere else to go. I had nowhere else to go.
Speaker 1: I guess he can't be blamed for being a musician and an arranger too.
Speaker 2: And he's a hell of a musician, man. I learned that when I worked with Barry. We did a single together called 'Dark and Lovely,' and I was smiling and laughing all the way because we've got so much in common.
Speaker 1: You know, that piece isn't heard much, but from what I've read--I've never heard of it, but from what I've read, it's a great piece.  Oh, yeah. I got a CD out called some kind of vintage CD.  Dark and--.
Speaker 2: It's like the best of all your--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but this is a certain name for it.  Anyway, Barry and I--our tune is on there.  Yeah. It's great.
Story_ID: 8242
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: For them to come closer together, become more ethical and more productive, as a people because, unfortunately, we still live in a racist society.  In order for one to survive in suppressing and opposing forces against you, you must be more united and think of the whole body and that's what we need to do. We need to reach back and protect the young, upcoming blacks.  Do not let them get in the wrong path at an early age.  Education is key. And I'm not saying parents should send their kids to school and do that--wipe their hands and let teachers take them.  No, no, no.  You got to get involved in a child's education and stay in communication with the teachers, compare notes, make sure they're getting the right thing.  They should be living the right thing. Make sure the kids are doing the right thing, and keep them drugs off of them.  Also, psych drugs [psychiatric medications] is a bad thing.  You know, you got these mental health centers. If you think about it, in black neighborhoods before the mental health centers were put up, things were better.  They started giving these kids these drugs and things, things started unraveling farther apart. Ritalin, Prozac, all these things should not be in our communities or any, white, black or white should not be because if you look at all these killers in these schools, kids at Columbine [ref. to Columbine High School shootings, April 20th, 1999] and so forth, they would have had some kind of psych contact, a connection or influence.  That's the least common denominator. Investigate and find out that's what's causing these problems, and they're almost like forcing the parents to give their kids these drugs.  Drugs shouldn't baby-sit our kids.  People, that's what our responsibility should be.  The parents have to step up and confront those people, and don't let them threaten you. There are groups out there that they can join to fight this thing and fight allowing their kids to be forced on drugs.  Kids are in a stupor. They can't learn anything when they're on those drugs.
Story_ID: 8243
Speaker 1: When you look back on your lines of work, what do you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know. Sharing, sharing all I had with humanity.  Remembering from where I came.  Remembering how I got there, it took help.  See, you've got to pass that thing on.  You've got to help and share.  At the end of the day, that's what it's about.  I mean people build up wealth and stuff.  You can't take it with you.  Leave some for the kids.  You don't want to spoil them because they have to work for it, then they'll appreciate it.  Give them a silver spoon, they might take it for granted.
Story_ID: 8244
Speaker 1: What are your future plans?  What do you have planned for the future?
Speaker 2: Well, I want to do more in Africa, or to do more about literacy.  In this country I would do more about music education and literacy. There's a lot to do in Africa, and I'm in the thick of it already because I always say when Africa goes free, African Americans goes free.  Every ethnicity in this country has a place to go back to, that they call home. Italian Americans go to Italy. French Americans go to France. Asian Americans can go to Asia. Latin Americans can go to Mexico, Cuba, Middle America, South America.  English Americans can go to Scotland, Ireland, London [England]. We can go to Africa too.  We don't because we're directed in another direction.  We should learn about our ancestors and go back there and get involved.  They want us to, but they have to take what they get.  Asian, European intervention.  If we don't hurry up and get into Africa, there'll be nothing left for us.  We have a right.  We should exercise that right.
Story_ID: 8245
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently now?
Speaker 2: Looking at it, I can't regret it because that's life.  All those experiences, the setbacks, the challenges, the games, made me what I am today.  It made me stronger, so I like it that way because that's how it molded me into what I am.
Story_ID: 8246
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I've got sixteen grandkids so far.  I'm still counting. My grandpop did--Poppy, that's what they called him. Poppy always did the best he could and he always tried to teach us right and set an example. I want to be remembered as a man that gave his best for the cause of the quest for a better world, to leave for us and others like us and other generations on down the line.
