Story_ID: 68473
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns and could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ronne Hartfield, that's R-O-N-N-E, no "I", Hartfield, H-A-R-T-F-I-E-L-D.
Speaker 1: And what's your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Three seventeen thirty-six (March 17, 1936).
Speaker 1: And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: July 3rd, 2002.  I know it because it's my daughter's birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of The HistoryMakers in Chicago [Illinois], on the South Side, very close to where I lived as a child.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I describe myself as a museum educator or a museum consultant, that's what I do now but I've done--I've had many different occupations, most of them have been in the Arts.
Story_ID: 68474
Speaker 1: There are five "People Magazine-ish" type questions we ask, you know, before we get into depth and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: First one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Hum, that's easy for me, barbeque, barbeque ribs.  Loved them all my life.  Treat myself to them, even though I know they're not healthy.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --I love red, most shades of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, always loved Fall, 'cause I loved going back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, my very most favorite vacation destination is New York City [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hum, I could think of one that I have on a painting by one of my friends, Betye Saar, that I like a lot and I quote it a lot and it says, it has a washer woman over a washboard and it says, "We was mostly about survival."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Something I think a lot of people lost the sense of today.
Story_ID: 68475
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, let's talk about your family and your, you know, your origins.  You were born here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, on 40th and Vincennes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your given name was Ronola, right?
Speaker 2: Ronola.
Speaker 1: Ronola, okay.
Speaker 2: R-O-N-O-L-A.  I was never called that except by some teachers and all priests.
Speaker 1: Okay, have people always called you, Ronne?
Speaker 2: People have always called me Ronne.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I had to change the spelling of it when I became a teenager because it looked too much like a boy's name to me.  So, I didn't, you know, at that age you're trying to be very clear about who you are.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I took the "I" out.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your--your maiden name was--was R-O-N-E?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is pronounced--
Speaker 2: Rone.
Speaker 1: Okay, Rone, okay.
Speaker 2: So I had this nice sonorous name, Ronola Rone, but it was such a complex and big name for a little girl, so I was called, "Ronne Rone."
Speaker 1: Okay
Story_ID: 68476
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us about your mother?  Can you give us her name and her birth date and where she was born, and maybe some information?
Speaker 2: My mother was Thelma Shepherd [Rone] and she was born on a plantation outside of a little town called Woodville, Mississippi, eleven miles from the border of Louisiana, way down in that little panhandle of Mississippi.  She's a very interesting woman.  She was born on July 19, 1899 and she lived there until she was 15 and then she moved to New Orleans [Louisiana] and she lived there until she was 18 and then she moved to Chicago [Illinois], and never left.  Always thought she'd go back but as she said, you know, you get rooted here, her children were here, she met her husband, married, raised a family.  So she only went back for vacations.  I just finished a book ['Another Way Home: The Tangled Roots of Race in One Chicago Family'] about her.
Speaker 1: Okay, did family ties, like, cause her to move, I mean her family moved from Woodville to Louisiana, then?
Speaker 2: No, her mother, she'd been an orphan.  Her mother died when she was just six years old and then her father was struck by lightning and killed when she was 15.  And so she came to New Orleans, it was to get her off the farm to give her more of a chance for education and so forth.  So, she and a cousin of hers, moved to New Orleans and roomed they--she was a nursemaid.  She lived in the people's house, in the Garden District, and took care of their little baby for three years and plotted her way to go to Chicago where she had some family.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, she arrives in Chicago, what, about 19--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighteen [1918].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighteen [1918].
Speaker 2: And got a job working in a factory and lived in Chicago on 35th and King Drive.  At that time it was called Grand Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Or was it South Park [Way]?
Speaker 2: No, before South Park.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Grand Boulevard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She lived right next door to where [HM] Etta Moten Barnett has a house.  It was then a boardinghouse, her apartment building.  This cousin of hers ran this boardinghouse.  Everybody in it was from Louisiana.
Story_ID: 68477
Speaker 1: Did she [Harfield's mother, Thelma Shepherd Rone] talk a lot about what life was like in those days--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah,--
Speaker 1: --in Chicago?
Speaker 2: -constantly, constantly.  I mean, she was filled with stories and we heard them and I loved them.  I used to write stories about them even as a child.
Speaker 1: Can you share the stories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: How she ruled, I took a lot of notes.
Speaker 1: Can you share a story with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's tons of them, I mean, I have a chapter in my book ['Another Way Home: The Tangled Roots of Race in One Chicago Family'] called, "On The Place" where she talks about how her grandmother, who raised them, was a seamstress and so their house was kind of a place where people came and went all the time.  And so they got stories of about everything that was happening on the plantation and near it.  Her father [Arthur Shepherd] was a rich British plant--guy who owned the plantation she lived on and he lived in the big house, a little ways from the little house he had built for them.  And he came over regularly.  He bought them clothes in Natchez [Mississippi], in New Orleans [Louisiana], and took things to them and in the book I tell, she talked about it.  She said she didn't much like it when he came because even though he would bring her presents, he would always sort of sit her down and ask her a whole lot of questions about what she was learning and she felt on the spot, basically.  But when she got older, she liked it because she liked the fancy dresses and his promises to send her to New Orleans, which ultimately she got to go.  But all of her relatives worked in the big house and she talked a great deal about that and how they had things to sew and the kind of trading that went on.  They had one big store in the community, which is still there.  It is a landmark.  Nothing is around there now.  That town is about 400 people.  But that Pond Store is still there.  It's the only part of that area that's on the Internet because they sold everything in the world, in the store.  Everything from food to clothing to farm implements to all the records of your life were in there.  We found records of my great-grandmother's birth in there.
Speaker 1: This is in Woodville?
Speaker 2: When we went to visit it, uh-huh, outside of Woodville, in the country.  Just outside.  But she went there.  They had a line of credit.  The children would go and buy things and they'd write down in the book.  And then she had a garden.  She loved gardens and she had to cook.  She had to plan meals and pick the food and cook it, when she was just a little girl, but she learned to be very self-sufficient that way.
Story_ID: 68478
Speaker 1: Now did she talk about the history of the family going back into the 19th Century--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --before the end of slavery and that sort of thing?  Did she?
Speaker 2: She didn't know much about before the end of slavery, at all.  My father's family knew more about that because his father had been a slave.  But my mother's family, her mother [Cornelia Lehmann] was born after slavery [in December 1975] and her mother died [in 1903].  Her grandmother had been born in slavery but she never talked about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her great-grandmother had lived in a slavery.  Had come in as a slave at Baltimore [Maryland].  She used to talk about it, that she was brought into Baltimore.  But she would never talk.  People thought it was something you didn't talk about to children.  So that kind of story she knew very little about.
Speaker 1: Now you've had some family genealogy done?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And she knew her family back to about--well, the white side of the family, all the way back to the 17th Century.  But the black side, only back to about 1820.  She knew it back that far.  And so she knew about this great-grandmother who was born in slavery and her grandmother was born in slavery.  But her mother had been born around 1876 or seven [1877].  So, slavery had been over ten years before she was born.
Story_ID: 68479
Speaker 1: And does the white side of the family [of Hartfield's mother, Thelma Shepherd Rone] acknowledge a relationship?
Speaker 2: They did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They did at that time.  The newer--their children and grandchildren don't--I should say their grandchildren.  My grandfather [Arthur Shepherd], when he--after my grandmother [Cornelia Lehmann] died, he married a white woman and had three children with her and two of them were sons, boys, and they used to come visit us when we were kids.  They totally acknowledged us.  And her father, of course, totally acknowledged his children.  Gave him his name and educated them and so forth.  But we have beautiful pictures of my uncle, particularly as a child, very elegant, with a book in his hand and so forth.  But when we were doing the genealogy and wanted his white granddaughter, who is exactly the age of my sister, to meet with us, she didn't want to to do it.  So, that's changed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was that unusual for those, I mean, for those days for--
Speaker 2: To acknowledge them?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Unusual, yes, not rare.  Not rare.  I've talked to a number of my friends who came from similar families.  It was unusual--what was particularly unusual about him was that he was not married.  He didn't have a second family, a white family.  Those three little colored children were the only children he had and that my black grandmother was the only wife equivalent that he had.  And then after she died, he married a white woman and it was always very disturbing to his mother that he wasn't married and had proper children and so forth.  And my mother and her brothers made fun of them all the time about how she talked, "Got to have legitimate heirs" because they were not legitimate.  But he was very powerful, so no one bothered them.  And interestingly, to this day, that aura around the Shepherd family is still there because my mother's brother, one of them, stayed down there.  They got left a plantation by their father, by a rouse, which I won't go into, is interesting.  He had one of--he had the oldest son declared white.  Had all the records changed so he could leave him one of the plantations.  He had seven plantations and he left the smallest one to him, to his son.  And they tried to get it back but they couldn't do it.  They had enough property, anyway.  Anyway, that little plantation then was for all three of the colored children and they sold out to one brother and he became very affluent because, when electricity came out there, he was a contractor and he built all these houses.  They never had electricity and air conditioning and all that, you know, gas stoves and everything, electric stove.  So he became very affluent and he stayed there until he died.  And his children were raised there.  And one of his children is a Vice Chancellor at Carbondale, SIU [Southern Illinois University].  But anyway, we go back down there with them and all the people still talk about the incredible freedom that my Uncle Ben had because of his father.  His father's long since dead but that kind of power in those little communities, you know, it stays around.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's fascinating a lot of stories about, you know, the race in the United States is quite--it's hard to figure out how things are going to turn out sometimes, I guess.
Speaker 2: Race in the United States is one of the most interesting threads in its history.  I have one, my mother had a great-grandfather, I mean had a grandfather, he's my great-grandfather, her mother, this colored woman, my grandmother, Cornelia, was Cornelia Lehmann, her father was Jewish and Jewish merchant who lived there.  So she was part Jewish, or half Jewish.  Her father, unlike my grandfather, had a Jewish family and he continued to have this long-term relationship with this colored woman, who's my great-grandmother, Emmaline, and he had three girls and one boy with her.  He had the boy sent away to New Orleans [Louisiana] to be raised as white.  The girls stayed down there and he totally acknowledged it was his children, with his name, and he owned that store I'm talking about with his brother.  So they had everything there they ever wanted and needed but it was a disgrace in the community, you see, because he had another family.  So there are intricacies upon intricacies in race in this country.
Speaker 1: I think it's interesting that they--they kept the name, Lehmann?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They carried his name.
Speaker 2: I have tons of black cousins in Chicago right now named Lehmann.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: It is and they find it funny when they go to apply for jobs because people are always surprised 'cause they have this resume from Catherine Lehmann or Theresa Lehmann and then they see them and they're, black.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Lehmann?
Speaker 2: L-E-H-M-A-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 68480
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, well, what about your father's [John Drayton Rone] side of the family?  I think it's probably an equally fascinating story.
Speaker 2: It is, it is.  I mean anybody you talk to, if you go back far enough.  The only difference in our family is all very close.  In other words, these are my parents stories and so they're not grandparents stories or great-parents stories and so they're more vivid and more detailed, but everybody's got this stuff in their history.  My father was the fourteenth child, therefore, his father [John F. Rone] died when he was very young and his mother [Eliza Roberts Rone] died, too, when he was young.  He--his parents were old when he was born.  He was the baby.  His father was--had been a slave, the illegitimate son of another white man who owned a plantation, Drayton Hall, which is outside of Charleston, South Carolina, and his name was Drayton.  My grandfather's name was Drayton.  He was a carriage boy, that's what they called him.  He took care of the carriages and the horses for his father.  His father, we know much less about him because he died, so early, but from my older aunts we know that his father raised all of his colored children to be house servants and they all learned to read and write, which was against the law.  So when--he was born in 1850--1848, actual.  So, in 1865, when slavery was over, he grabbed the carriage and four horses and ran away and ran to Texas, as fast as he could go because he thought he'd be killed, is actually what happened.  And he went to Texas and he married a half-Choctaw woman, named Eliza, and she was kind of a wild woman.  Anyway, he took her and went up to Northern Louisiana.  Nobody knows why he went up there but he started a school up there for newly-released slaves.  And he taught people.  It was in a church and he was called the principal of the school, the headmaster is what they called him.  But he was the only teacher until he raised his older children to be teachers.  Well, this is the John Drayton Rone School.  Somewhere along the way he took this name, Rone, and we don't know where it came from or why he took it but he kept the John Drayton.  Now, he named his sons after abolitionist such as Frederick Douglass Rone.  But by the time he got to his last son, my father, he named him after himself, John Drayton Rone.  And we don't know why that was either.  But that's his story, it's totally interesting.  And my older aunts who would tell the story about how--when they went in for their lessons, they had to--their job was to dust off the pews because the people would come in from picking cotton and there was cotton dust all over the pews.  But they learned to read and write.  Now how he learned it, we don't know.  So that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Very, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a fascinating story.  And we have a picture of him and he's sitting in a chair, like this, extremely proper, totally Victorian dressed, you know, dressed to the nines, big mustache and this Choctaw, half-Indian woman, standing behind him, she's all dressed up too and buttoned up to here and she looks like, what am I doing here?
Speaker 1: You said that she was sort of wild?
Speaker 2: She was kind of a wild woman.  My father [John Drayton Rone] said that she didn't like to eat at the table.  She would serve them at the table because my grandfather, after all, had been a house servant and everything.  He wanted to live like that.  He thought that's the way you lived.  She liked to eat on the ground, the way Indians do.  So she fed them at the table.  She was very dominated by her husband, very, but she would do all these things, secretly, that he didn't know about.  She ate on the ground.  She thought that that was where you were supposed to eat.
Speaker 1: Sort of an odd couple in some respects then.
Speaker 2: I know.  I think he married her 'cause she was pretty.  She was very pretty.  She was very tall, taller than he was.  So, interesting.  She didn't know how to read and write herself.  He taught her to read and write.  My father said she was never very interested in him.
Story_ID: 68481
Speaker 1: Now your father [John Drayton Rone] now, how did he come to--
Speaker 2: Chicago?
Speaker 1: --Chicago?
Speaker 2: He has a very interesting black story, okay. First of all, his parents [John F. Rone and Eliza Roberts Rone] died when he was very young and he was passed around to the older siblings, many of whom were old enough to be his parents.  And some of them were nice to him and some of them were not so nice to him.  He said they worked him to death.  He was a big guy.  So when he was fourteen, he was six feet three and he ran away and joined the Army.  He told them that he was 18 years old.  Well, they found out very quickly he was only 14.  I don't know how they found out but they did.  And they kicked him out of the Army.  So he never was going to go back to--near Shreveport, is where he came from, Northern Louisiana, the opposite end of the state from where my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] came from.  So, he decided he was going to see the world.  So he hopped boxcars and he would go and work in different places, Texarkana [Texas], Joplin, Missouri, and so forth, and he'd tell us his story that when he was 17 years old, this--I'll just tell you how he described it.  "This cross-eyed white gal took a likin' to him and he didn't like her."  And he said, "If I had taken her up on it, I'd get lynched."  "And if I didn't take her up on it, she could have me lynched, so I left and came to Chicago [Illinois]."  So he hopped on a car and came to Chicago and got a job in a paint factory and worked there for years.  Then he met my mother.  He was very--intellectual kind of guy.  Their whole family's like that.  They read incessantly and they're very information oriented and historically oriented.  I got that strain from the Rone's, no question. It's deep in the family.  One of my little granddaughters is just like it.  She's at the encyclopedia or her computer every day--it's just natural.  And my father said we all were like that.
Story_ID: 68482
Speaker 1: So he [Hartfield's father, John Drayton Rone] read all the time but he came up in a time when you couldn't get--black people couldn't get good jobs.  He lost his job during the Depression.  He had two children.  My mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] was pregnant with a third.  I was the fourth, so these are stories.  And I have the story in my book about--he got tapped by these brothers from Henning, Tennessee who made moonshine, the Henning--the Evans brothers.  Henning is where Alex Haley came from and they knew Alex Haley's family.  But anyways, they had made moonshine down there in Tennessee.  So, during Prohibition, they're going to make it up here.  And my father was, as I mentioned, very charming kind of guy, very talkative, very--just people liked him.  So they got him in the scheme where he would be the payoff guy for the police.  In those days, just like now, these things happen.  So my--
Speaker 2: The whole police department actually was corrupted in those days?
Speaker 1: Oh, these are the Al Capone days, you know what that was like (laughter).  So my father was the payoff guy and they had the still in this little business, in our house.  My mother was wretched, I mean, she hated this, okay, but they made money.  This is the thing.  He hadn't had a job for a year and she was sort of living on the largess of her uncle then, you know, it was hard.  So what could she say.  He made money.  One day, they changed the police team to a new team that hadn't been paid off and they broke into the house.  My--they--my parents--my father and the Henning--Evans brothers had a lookout man and they had known this was coming and they grabbed the still and put it in this big trunk my parents had and they put a cloth on top of it and sat my mother down on top of a trunk, with a baby in each arm, and she's pregnant out to here.  And she said, "I sat up there like someone in a Madonna picture" (laughter).  Well, the police didn't make her move.  So they never found the still and still they took my father down to the police station and he came back and he was in good spirts. So I don't know what happened down there but they made it all work.  Anyways, this was '32' [1932] and shortly after that Roosevelt's [President Franklin D. Roosevelt] elected, Prohibition was over, my father got a job in the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  So he never went back to his liquor business.
Speaker 2: What did he do in the WPA?
Speaker 1: He worked in a factory.  He worked in a printing press factory.  That was over on 14th and Damen [Chicago, Illinois] and he just did machinist work.  They couldn't get him in the union 'cause the unions were all white.  So everybody worked and there were these immigrants, Polish immigrants mostly.  And so he had to help them read manuals and that kind of thing 'cause they didn't know the language but they made much more money than he did.  He stayed in that factory until he retired, until he was almost on his death bed.
Story_ID: 66974
Speaker 1: My mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] talked enormously to her grandchildren.  And what happened is I gave them different parts of my book ['Another Way Home: The Tangled Roots of Race in One Chicago Family'] to read and they all learned something, things that they hadn't heard but they also saw things that they had heard and they also had stories from me that I had forgotten, that I could put in.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a--it's a--it was very important to be able to tell those stories, I know.
Speaker 1: Sure, history.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 66975
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you--so we just finished talking about, you know, I guess in general, the history of your mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] and father [John Drayton Rone] and, can you talk about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Chicago [Illinois] and what little Ronne Hartfield was like?  Or little Ronne Rone was like?
Speaker 2: Little Ronne Rone, yeah.  I was--I grew up in an amazingly sheltered, nurturing community.  I can't even--it's unthinkable, even from my children today, to realize how it was where all my older siblings went to the same school, we all went to the same school.  We knew everybody.  Everybody's families stayed in the neighborhood.  It was segregation, you see, and because of segregation, the boundaries of the community were very tight.  And all kinds of black people lived within that community, from very wealthy lawyers and doctors and dentists, to very, very poor people, to people in between, like us.  And so we knew everybody and everybody knew us.  And we felt totally safe.  That my dominant feeling of childhood is the ability to roam, to I loved riding my bicycle.  I learned to ride a bicycle very early.  So my brother was ahead of me and he was like a person who could fix things.  And I would just ride all over the neighborhood and I was--nobody--you didn't have to worry about someone taking your bike, anything like that.  I went to the library once a week and got five books, the Hardin Square Branch Library, which was torn down to make room for the Dan Ryan [Expressway].  And the librarian, of course, loved me.  They loved little girls who liked to read a lot of books.  So they let me read outside the children's section.  So I would read everything I wanted.  And I would read my five books and go back on Saturday and get five other books.  So there was this kind of wonderful feeling of freedom in the community.  And we had a park district down the street from us and I was very poor in sports, inadequate, incompetent, I never liked them and I couldn't run, I couldn't throw, I couldn't catch, nothing, I got hot, I didn't like it.  So I would go in the field house and talk to the grown-ups.  I always loved talking to old people.  And they liked talking to me.  It was like, I heard all their stories.  So I had these kind of older people that were my friends that I would go visit.  I had that and I was great in school.  I loved school.  I had teachers--the teachers were so great.  Our teachers lived in the neighborhood.  And if you were interested in stuff, they would take you everywhere.  They took you to--they took me to Newberry Library.  They took me downtown to performances, you know, they were really interested in kids.  And my mother was this kind of person, my father too, they liked you to feel that the city was yours.  And we were on the bus.  We got to know every bus line because we would go for these long bus rides and we'd get off and buy cookies in Andersonville [Chicago, Illinois].  And we'd buy sausages in the German neighborhood around Milwaukee and Damen.  We just rode around on buses and streetcars, getting a sense that we're--of what we could do, you know.  And as kids we went to the beach, 31st Street beach, in the summer.  We could walk there.  My sister's boyfriend was a lifeguard (laughter).  It was just--we had this sense, it's hard to communicate, of being a part of a village but within a vast city that you could engage as you chose.  We went to museums all the time.  We rode our bikes.  I rode my bike downtown, to The Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois].  You'd just lock up your bike and go in and see pictures and come back out.  My mother sometimes take us on the bus.  But we three younger children, my brother's four years older than I, and my sister's three years younger, we just hung out, you know, with our friends.
Story_ID: 66976
Speaker 1: I remember taking the Cottage Grove street car.  When I was seven years old, I took four little girls downtown to see Santa Claus and we weren't supposed to tell our parents that we had done this so--it only cost four cents.  So you could take two pop bottles to the store and you got four cents.  And I was going to take everybody.  And this one little girl, she was so dumb.  They--Sears gave us a little Santa Claus comic book so she took hers home and her mother saw it and "Ronne took us down there."  So that was kind of a little incident that was big in my mythology as a child.
Speaker 2: How old were you then?
Speaker 1: I was seven, then.
Speaker 2: Seven.
Speaker 1: I took all these little seven, six and five year old girls down to see Santa Claus.  Our parents were taking too long.  We got tired of waiting (laughter).  I knew how to go.  I knew if you got on that street car, it let you off at Wabash and Van Buren and Sears was right there.  So I knew it was okay but Shirley, this little girl--we all had better sense than to take our comic books home, that says, "Sears Santa Claus" right on them.  Anyway, that's the kind of life I led, as a child.  I loved my neighborhood.  I loved the older people that I talked to a lot, that I went to the store for you.  Went to the store, ran errands and they'd give you a nickel.  I loved school.  School was my favorite thing in life.  School and the library.  We had tons of kids in our neighborhood and everybody played outside in the front.  People didn't play in their backyards.  People played in the front of the house and you played these kind of big street games, you know, hopscotch and jump rope, and so there was always somebody to play with if you wanted.  So I had this kind of very nurturing life as a child.  I remember the War [World War II].  We always won the prizes in our school for the most newspapers because my father read four newspapers a day and we'd take them in my brother's wagon to school for the recycling, for the War effort.  Things like that.  I remember my brothers having maps on the wall and you put these little magnet--airplane magnets to show the movements in the War.
Story_ID: 66977
Speaker 1: Did your father [John Drayton Rone] --I'm--I'm starting to worry about him as we talk about.  Did he find it difficult to work in a factory with such an active--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --intellect?
Speaker 2: He did.  He did not like his job and it was a way to make a living.  His life was his family.  And my father went to work every morning very early 'cause he got home at five o'clock.  So he must have worked like eight to four, or something like that.  And he took his lunch every day.  And it was just something to be gotten through, you know.  It wasn't about personal reward or gratification, you just had to get a paycheck every Friday.  You didn't get a check, you got an envelope full of money.  And we had a little tavern around the corner from our house and my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] used to send me and my sister, Audrey [Peoples], to the street car to meet my father every Friday 'cause she didn't want him to stop in the tavern.  He was very generous and he would, like, treat everybody if we didn't get there fast enough to get--he'd be in there just treat--because a lot of guys didn't have jobs, you know.  And he was just that kind of guy.  So we'd go meet him and he always brought us candy on Friday.  And we'd walk home with the little envelope which then my mother had to divide up and give him his money and the rest was the family money and we all got our allowances.  But he lived for that, for coming home, and his weekends with his friends.  He had tons of friends and mostly they hung out at our house.  And I don't know if that was because he was so generous or because there were other reasons, that's where they hung out.  And they were there almost every Sunday afternoon, smoking cigars and stuff.  We had a divided front room, you know, with the doors, and they would take over a part of it.  And he was very happy with his friends and very happy with his children.  Very happy with his home life.  He and my mother had both been orphans and I think that they made up their mind to be like the best mother and father in the world--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and to devote themselves to them because they didn't have any money.  They couldn't take vacations and he had a very unpleasant life at work.  He came home every night and changed his clothes 'cause he had printer's ink on himself.  My mother--he would take a bath.  My mother laid out his clothes on the bed and he would change his clothes.  She ran his bath.  Those are the olden days.  So that's what my husband [Robert Hartfield] thought he was getting when we got married (laughter).  She would run his bath, he'd come in, change his clothes, clean up and we would have the table all set and we all sat down to dinner, every night, at the same time.  And everybody talked about what they did that day.  And he said very little about his work.  He would talk much more about the news, the War [World War II], what was going on in the news.
Story_ID: 66978
Speaker 1: Now did he [John Drayton Rone] have--did he or your mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] --were either one involved in organizational life at all?
Speaker 2: No.  My father, on a marginal degree.  My mother, not at all.  She didn't believe in any organizations, at all.  Not PTA's [Parents and Teachers Association].  When I say she didn't believe in churches, they weren't involved.  If something happened to one of her kids, she would go to school but that was all.  She was not a joiner.  And my father was not a joiner, either, but he joined the American Woodmen and I don't, to this day, know why he did that.
Speaker 1: The American what?
Speaker 2: Woodmen.  It was like a--a Kiwanis [Internationa] or a lodge, it was a lodge.  The American Woodmen was a big thing in the black community in the '40s' [1940s].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?  The last part?
Speaker 2: Like wood men.  W-O-O-D-M-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And he was in that and when he got sick, the Woodmen would come and visit.  And they did little ceremonies.  It was like a fraternity, sort of.  And he did belong to that.  He went to their meetings occasionally but mostly his friendships were informal.  His barbershop group, they went on Saturday morning, that was who he was friends with, you know.  They sat around and drank whiskey.  Told tall stories.  My mother would cook for them.  They didn't belong, they weren't joiners.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brothers weren't joiners either and my oldest sister wasn't a joiner.  Only the two younger girls were joiners, Audrey [Peoples] and I.  So something shifted in there.
Story_ID: 66979
Speaker 1: Now--so where did you go to grade school?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Excuse me?
Speaker 1: What grade school did you go to?
Speaker 2: To John B. Drake [Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a little tiny school.  There were twenty-two kids in my graduating class.
Speaker 1: Twenty-two, that is small.
Speaker 2: It was very small.  That's why we went there.  They didn't want us to go to Douglas, which was a big school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Drake was located, where?  Where was--
Speaker 2: Twenty-sixth and Calumet. [now located at Twenty-sixth and Dearborn]
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's still there but it's big now.  They built on to it.  Our principal was a guy named Bob Lewis.  He had a doctorate from Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Can you imagine that?  His wife became my high school principal, Virginia Lewis.  She had a doctorate from Harvard.  That's where discrimination made possible for little colored children.  Those people couldn't get jobs.  Today they'd be teaching in the universities or working for LaSalle Bank.  But in the '40s' [1940s], they couldn't do anything but work in the public school system and they became principals.  So we had these very demanding kind of school structures, you know, people who were very serious that you would become educated, and I don't mean just me, I mean every child in there--under their ages.  So it was very unusual, very--I recognize it now.  Who would know it then, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the teachers that you remember, that influenced you the most?
Speaker 2: Ms. Cress, that's why I asked you if you knew the Cress family.  Ms. Cress was a very demanding, strict teacher.  A woman named, Ms. Frederick.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Cress for us?
Speaker 2: C-R-E-S-S.  Ms. Frederick, just like Frederick the Great. We used to call her "Frederick the Great".  She was like a little skinny tough lady and she taught music.  And I have a friend who graduated with me, named Jesse Richardson, he's a famous sculptor now in Spain.  Jesse was in what we used to call, "the dummy room" in those days, for slow learners.  And he says Ms. Frederick saved his life because she said to him, "Jesse, you're not dumb, you are an artist."  And he became an artist, because of Ms. Frederick.  She was very partial to my older brother, who was also artistic.  And she liked me 'cause I played the piano and she played the piano for all the assemblies.  I guess she was partial to artistic kids.  But, Grace Frederick, wonderful teacher.  I had a teacher named Ms. Katz, in kindergarten when I first went to school, and she put me out of kindergarten and put me in second grade 'cause I could read and write very well.  So I liked her.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were actually two grades ahead in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's why I graduated college at 19.
Speaker 1: Gee whiz.  Okay.
Story_ID: 66980
Speaker 1: So, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Phillips, Wendell Phillips [High School].  I had an extremely positive experience, actually more positive than elementary school.  The negative part about my elementary school was that I was sort of a teacher's pet and I had--I was not popular with children.  And I made it okay for myself by having all these grownups who were my friends, and these teachers, and, of course, I had my siblings and my cousins so I didn't suffer, deeply, for not having--being popular in school.  But I did suffer and I was aware of it.  For example, one day I got a new coat, it was a lavender coat, I wore it to school and these little girls put chalk all over my coat.  And I never liked it after that.  So there was that thing.  So when I went to Phillips, I had made up my mind that I was going to be popular, okay, and I thought the one reason I wasn't popular is because I had long hair, I had long braids, and the girls sort of talked about that, you know.  Oh gee, you had this long hair and so it was--
Speaker 1: It made you a target, sort of.
Speaker 2: It did.  So I cut my hair when I went to high school and I became instantly popular.  I was very popular in high school (laughter) and I thought it was because I cut my hair but it was really because older girls--I was little, you know, I was twelve years old and these older girls thought I was so of cute and they took me under their wing, you know, and I was smart.  So I was good in school.  I became the head of the Phillips Journal and the President of the Student Council and, you know, blah, blah.  So I had a wonderful time in high school.  We had clubs, we had the Wabash "Y" [Wabash Avenue YWCA], we had swimming parties.  It was so--we had folk sings.  It was so innocent compared to the way things are now.  We had roller skating every Wednesday night at the Park City Bowl, at 63rd, and I had to take the South Park [Way] bus all the way home when skating was over at eleven o'clock, I and this one little friend of mine.  But all those kids--our high school is having its 50th reunion in November [2002] and most of those kids, the surviving ones, are still friends.  We all still like each other.  Everybody has done extremely well.  Why wouldn't we?  We were prepared to do well.  And we had this kind of great nurturing, social system.  Our lives were centered around school.  Our teachers really believed in us.  We had this Negro History Club.  I was in that.  You wrote papers every week about a great figure in Negro history.  We had football and basketball and, you know, it was just a very positive atmosphere.  No gangs.
Story_ID: 66981
Speaker 1: Now who was the--who was the advisor for the Negro History Club?
Speaker 2: A woman named Virginia Tolles.  She was very important in my life, too.  She was very tough.  I had three people who were very important to me in high school:  Virginia Tolles was one, one was a woman, named Mildred Proctor, she was the advisor to the newspaper, to the school newspaper and she loved me.  I used to go in there and talk to her for hours, okay.  So I had her and then I had this woman who taught Spanish, her name was Ternasa (ph.) and Ms. Ternasa--I loved Spanish, and I would love to read Spanish poems and she would give me Spanish novels and things to read.  So she was really important.  And I ended up teaching Literature and Spanish, as an adult, partly because of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were so, I don't know what the word is, individual, they gave you individual attention.  They didn't have that many kids, you know.  How many kids graduated with me from high school?  I think 220 kids, from high school.  It was very small.  Everybody knew everybody. It's just--you know, I was number three in my class.
Speaker 1: That's--the proportions are a lot different now, I guess, in Chicago, in schools.
Speaker 2: Oh, high schools, you have 500 kids.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think that's very detrimental.  You know about the Small School's Movement?  I believe in it a hundred percent because I attribute a great part of my own development, both academically and socially, to small schools.  Kenwood [Academy High School] was very small when my kids went there, about the size of [Wendell] Phillips [High School].
Speaker 1: Okay, in those days people either went to--black people went to, basically, DuSable [High School] or Phillips, right.
Speaker 2: That's right, and Dunbar [Vocational Career Academy High School], some kids went to Dunbar Trade.
Story_ID: 66982
Speaker 1: But we all went--kids from those three schools, we all went to the Wabash "Y" [YWCA] and so I had friends from those three schools 'cause we were all in clubs together.  I was in the club called "Delta Tri-Hi Y".  I became the President of Delta Tri-Hi Y and we had brother clubs, you know, and the kids were from Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], a few, Parker, Hyde Park, not many, a few, but the "Y" was kind of the meeting ground for all the different schools.  But mostly we, you know, you stuck with your own school.  We had enormous pride in our school.
Speaker 2: Can you talk a little bit about the "Y".  The "Y's" historic, that Wabash "Y".
Speaker 1: The Wabash "Y" was a great, great place because they had these social structures and they had events that kids could go to.  I don't think it cost anything.  Maybe it cost something limited to belong, I don't remember that, but I do remember that I was at the "Y" at least twice a week, sometimes three times a week, for either club meetings, swimming parties, these kind of folk sings.  We had--those were once a month--we had, what we call "hayrides".  Somebody would rent a truck and fill it up with hay and then we'd ride all around the neighborhood in these trucks, singing songs, you know.
Speaker 2: Can you remember any of the key figures at the "Y"?  People that were responsible for?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't.  The people who knew teachers at the "Y" were the athletes, the girls who were very active in swimming and basketball and those kinds of things.  I was, as I said, extremely non-athletic.  I learned to swim 'cause they forced you to, otherwise I would never have learned to swim.  But--so my memories are of the kids, you know, the young people who were so much a part of my life then.  The Duster family, they're kind of well-known in Chicago now, they weren't well-known then.  They had five kids and the Rone family had five kids and we were all the same ages so we were friends with them.  The Fitzgerald family.  There were just a couple of these families that were well-known.  The Grants.  I went to two proms with a boy named Carl Grant.  His father was a dentist.  Colonel Armstrong, Dillard Harris.  These are people who became--Wellington Wilson, Clifton Washington went to work for Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  Wellington went to work for the City Colleges [of Chicago, Illinois].  Most of the kids I grew up with went into academics.  A lot of them were, or became, civil servants.  A few did something else.  Colonel became an engineer.  He went to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago] and then moved to Washington, where he still lives.
Speaker 2: His name was Colonel or?
Speaker 1: His name was Colonel.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yup, you know we had those names.
Speaker 2: You're right, that's right--that's right, those famous names, you're right, you name somebody.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the "Deny", the Deny family.
Speaker 2: Or you're a Colonel.
Speaker 1: That's right.  My sister had a friend named "Lawyer".
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 66983
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Wendell Phillips High School], did you have any idea of what you wanted to do occupationally when you graduated?
Speaker 2: No, it's odd to think that but I absolutely did not.  The only thing I ever knew that I loved, a lot, was writing.  And so I had this sort of vague notion I wanted to be a writer but I didn't know anybody who was a writer or so, you know, how would I know that--what a writer did or could do.  So I didn't have any idea and it was--when I went to college, I was very interested in history.  I didn't think about being a star in but I was always interested in the roots of things and the permutations of things through the different centuries or different decades.  And so that's why I majored in history.  But I didn't think of becoming a history teacher or anything like that.  And I lucked out.  When I got out of college, first of all, going to the University of Chicago [in Illinois] was the greatest thing that happened to my lowly young life.
Story_ID: 66984
Speaker 1: How did you end up at the University--how did you end up at the University of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I liked the way it looked, that's really the truth of it.  My mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] used to take us for walks there.  And I had gone--one of my teachers in high school had wanted me to go to Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools] and so she had me take the test to get into the Lab School and I passed the test and they were going to give me a scholarship but they said they were going to put me back two years.  I was a sophomore.  They said you'll have to start at the beginning.  I thought, no, I don't want to do that.  Well nobody told me that you only had to go to Lab School two years.  So had I known that, my whole career would have been different.  But I was so grateful that I stayed at [Wendell] Phillips [High School] because Phillips was a totally nurturing environment.  The Lab School was not.  I went to college with a lot of kids from Lab School and they lacked entirely the security, the social skills, the sense of confidence, that we had at Phillips.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people talk about social I.Q. now being important and--
Speaker 2: I--I was just blessed, that's the way I look at it, I--in many areas of my life.  Let's see, by the time I got to college, I had walked those walks many times with my mother and I had an aunt who lived on 61st and Langley, right near there.  I thought--I just liked the way it looked.  It looked romantic to me, like something in a British movie.  So I applied and one of my teacher's said, you'll never get in there and if you get in there, it will be the worse thing that will ever happen to you.  That "You think you're tops here at Phillips but when you hit the University of Chicago, no."  Now that made me want to go more because my family was that kind of person--family, you know, somebody challenged you and told you you couldn't make it, hey, you were definitely going to make it.  So I took the test.  I took the test for University of Michigan [in Ann Arbor] and I passed that too and a little tiny school that these people in my Methodist choir had told me about which was a little Methodist school up in Indiana, Greencastle, Indiana.  So I took these--I got in all of these schools and then I said, okay, I'm going to Michigan because I didn't want to live at home.  I wanted to go to college and be away, like you're talking about earlier.  And my parents were so generous to me.  They said, "Okay, you can live on campus if you go to Chicago."  So I lived in the dorms, even though my parents lived, at the time, on 49th and Drexel, which is right down the street.  So, I went and lived in the dorms.  I had a great roommate.  I loved every second of the courses and I was always talky, so they rewarded you for that.  I just had a great life.  I had a wonderful life there.  I met my husband [Robert Hartfield], near the end of my first year, and got married the next year [September 4, 1953].  We moved into a little apartment.  My parents said "You can get married as long as you finish school.  Don't get any babies."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by great luck, we didn't get any babies.  I finished college and I got this great job.  I looked up all the publishing companies in the Yellow Pages and I got this job in a publishing company which was run by a man from the University of Chicago.
Story_ID: 66985
Speaker 1: Okay, we're rolling, again.  We're being joined by Julieanna Richardson, as observer, and you were--you were talking about the University of Chicago [Illinois]--you decided to go to the University of Chicago and you--how did you decide to major in history?
Speaker 2: Because I had a great history professor, that's why.  I had a wonderful thing happen in recent years with him.  This guy's name--two things happened to me in college.  I met this history professor named Charles G. Bell and he taught history, included Art History, Music History and Literary History, as a part of the way he taught, and that was totally up my alley, right, so I wrote my paper on William Blake, who was both an artist and a poet and wrote the history of William Blake's time and how he was influenced by the period and his predecessor and so forth.  But Mr. Bell used to invite his students to his house, maybe once a month or so we'd go once every couple of weeks and he would serve us wine.  He served walnuts and wine and it was so romantic.  It was like you just felt like a grown-up, so special.  So I loved him.  He showed up in my life about five years ago.  Somebody called me, a woman who was from St. John's College in [Santa Fe] New Mexico, and she said "I wanted to know if we can rent a room at the Art Institute, if you'll give us a discount rate because we're having this program honoring a professor who's emeritus and he was at the University of Chicago."  So I said, "Oh, who's that?"  "Charles G. Bell."  I said, "You're not going to believe this.  He was a very important man in my life."  So, of course, I gave them the room free.  I did everything.  I went to the program and Mr. Bell--I said, "I know you're not going to remember me, right," he was my teacher in 1955.  He said, "I remember you, but you cut off all your hair" (laughter).  In those days I had this long wild hair and he actually remembered.  That's the kind of teacher he was.  It's his forty years later.  So he was important.  And another guy was important whose name was also Bell.  He was an Episcopal Chaplain, his name was Canon [Bernard Iddings] B. I. Bell.  And B. I. Bell came to visit all the Episcopal students.  So he came to visit me and sat on my bed and we talked about a lot of things and at the end of talking he said, "Ronne, I think you're a poet."  So I said, "Okay."  He said I'm going to bring some poetry books.  So he brought me these poetry books and, these beautiful folios of none other than William Blake.  He wanted me to look at them.  So I consider all this conjunction very mystical.  And all of my life those have been my major interests:  religion, art and poetry, and history, that ties them all together.  So I was totally happy my years there.  I hated to graduate college but I had to get a job.
Story_ID: 66986
Speaker 1: My husband [Robert Hartfield] was working part-time and I was working part-time.  We were living on the fringe.  We lived in a basement apartment, furnished, it had brick walls.  I had never heard of brick walls--anybody living in an apartment with brick walls.  Nowadays it's very chic.  But my husband--I said, "I can't move in here."  My husband said, "I will build walls."  So he built these plaster walls--these plaster board and left one wall brick 'cause it was too hard to fix it.  But we actually were living this very chic Bohemian life and we didn't know it.  Anyway, I got this job in this publishing company.  I was supposed to be an Assistant Editor.  And then, the guy who owned it, his sister decided she wanted to move to Chicago and work for him so he gave her my job but nobody ever told me that.  I didn't know this for about six months.  He had me writing speeches for him.  He was the president of a number of organizations and he gave--he would give you little file cards with notes and I had to put them together in draft speeches and draft big reports and things.  So I ended up being a kind of special assistant to the president for the first year I was there and writing.  And then somebody else there found I could do that and he hired me as his special assistant.  He was never there.  So I got to do everything, and I loved it.  And I stayed there for a couple of years until I got pregnant with my first child [Claire H. Harris].  And they made you leave in those days, 1957.  The minute you were six months pregnant, you had to leave.  It was considered untidy or something--untoward to have a big belly.  Now they work until they carry them out into delivery.  So I never went back to work again for many, many, many years.  So I had my first baby.  We moved to a larger apartment.  And then I had, three years later, twins, and we moved to a larger apartment.  And then I wasn't going to have a child for a while 'cause I was sort of with these--all these babies.  And almost five years later, I had another baby.  My husband said, we should have a boy.  We had another girl, so we have four girls.  And I just stayed home with my kids and wrote a lot of poems and tutored people to make a little extra money.  Did a little copy editing later on but I didn't work full--really at a job for twelve years.
Story_ID: 66987
Speaker 1: Okay, now your husband [Robert Hartfield], you met him in college [University of Chicago in Illinois]?  He was a student in--
Speaker 2: He was in Grad School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in Graduate History Department, that's how we met.  But he left the History Department the next year and went into the German Department because he spoke German and they offered him a very generous Fellowship and we needed money very badly.  So he does that and then he got out and taught for a while in a small private school, which is Harvard - St. George [High] School.  And while he was teaching there, they were kind of a pilot school for model mathematics, new mathematics program, and he was very good at it and the people who were writing the program asked him to come and work for them.  So, that's how he got into the mathematics publishing business.  And he decided to go back to school and get a degree in mathematics.  And he got a great National Science Fellowship and he did that while he was working.  So he got his graduate degree in math and continued to work in math publishing until he took early retirement from there and then went to University of Chicago to work in mathematics publishing for the last fifteen years.  And he just retired.  But he was a grownup--actually he was my guardian, legal guardian, when I got married 'cause I was not 18 and my parents had to sign me over to him until I got to be eighteen.  So, he has those papers that say he was my legal guardian for a while.  We had a great life.  We lived very simply and we had a lot of friends and sort of hung out, you know, it was easy times, the early '50s' [1950s], you know, we ate a lot of pork and beans.  We went to my mother's [Thelma Shepherd Rone] for--once a week for a great dinner.  We hired my sister to come and do our dishes, my little sister [Audrey Peoples].  And I was a sponsor for her club, her Wabash "Y" Club [Wabash Avenue YWCA].
Speaker 1: Okay, were you involved in many organizations and clubs around the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, not in college.  I was very much involved in my studies and then after I got married, I worked part-time.  So, I didn't work until I got married but I was, you know, wanting to do very well and loving the academic life.
Story_ID: 66988
Speaker 1: Can you--are there any stories of that academic life you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: Well, there are a couple of them.  The University of Chicago [Illinois] had no attendance requirement for classes.  You could go or not go, as you chose, and mostly I went to class because I loved the classes.  But I went less to classes that were right after lunch because I had this little group of friends and we would sit around at lunch, and what was called the "C Shop", it's just the coffee shop, and we would talk and we talked about our work, but we had talked.  And I was close friends with a couple of guys who both became quite famous, it was interesting.  The most famous is [Phillip] Phil Glass, who is a composer, who has a play [opera] right now at Goodman [Theatre], "Galileo, Galilei."  Phil was very interested in music and mathematics and philosophy and I was very interested in music and philosophy, so there was that.  Another guy named Jerry Temaner.  And Jerry went out with his friend, Gordon Quinn and started a film company called Kartemquin, which became the company that did 'Hoop Dreams.'  So they all became Gordon--and became very well-known.  And they're still doing their little documentary film business.  But in those days we all did nothing but talk, that's what we did.  We read a zillion books and we talked.  So I went to take my quarterly exam in philosophy and my teacher was this very infamous teacher, he was really a very mean man.  And he leaned over during the exam and he said to me, "Did you have a good time in the C Shop this quarter, Mrs. Hartfield?"  I was horrified.  I was undone.  I thought--I thought I would fail the exam, I didn't.  But actually, I had been talking about my school work and I'd been doing--he was just mad 'cause I hadn't come to class.  So he was not a friend of mine.  A great, great man.  The other one, was the opposite kind of story.  I was in the first class ever taught by a guy named Herman Sinaiko, who later became a Dean at Chicago, and Herman taught Humanities and it was at 8:30 in the morning and I loved that class.  I loved it 'cause you could talk about books.  And he was a very excited, new teacher, you know.  He loved me.  He loved my roommate, former roommate, I was married by then, but we were still close friends.  And we had this talk about [Mark Twain's Adventures of] 'Huckleberry Finn.'  His thesis was that Huckleberry Finn was the greatest book in the American language.  And I thought it was not the greatest book in the American language, by any means.  And he said he thought it was because of the nigger phrase, right.  So I said, "No, it's not because of the language of it, it's because of this noble savage idea."  And we were reading [Jean-Jacques] Rousseau in other classes so I was deep into the noble savage.  And we talked about that.  He was actually fascinated by my arguments and he gave me an "A" in that class because I actually gave him a perspective that he hadn't had.  So we're still friends, you know, right to this day.  So, the University of Chicago allowed for a kind of openness and respect for the individual perspective that I think very few universities had.
Speaker 1: Hum.
Speaker 2: I don't think many places had that.  There were no black teachers.  Think of this.  No black teachers, hardly any black students but I could raise the perspectives from my own life and people were very curious about it and very interested and very respectful, and I think it was that school.  I don't think that was true everywhere.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: From what I heard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 66989
Speaker 1: So, you said [HM] John Hope Franklin and others arrived after you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you left school?
Speaker 2: When I went to graduate school, there were several very significant black professors, Nathan Scott, great theologian who had been hired away from Howard [University in Washington, D.C.], Charles Long, great black historian of religions, and John Hope, who was in history.  They had these three looming geniuses when I went to graduate school and I could sit in on all of their classes.  I went to graduate school for free for years.  I'd just sit in on people's classes and at some point one of my friends and neighbors said, you know, "You ought to go ahead and get a degree."  So I said, "Oh, I'd love to but I couldn't afford it.  He said, "Well let's go talk to the Dean."  So we went and talked to the Dean and the Dean said, "Well, why don't you write me a paper."  So I wrote this big flaming paper about going back to school and getting answers to my million questions and they gave me a complete Fellowship.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful, I mean--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: That's what I mean by being blessed, partly.
Speaker 1: Yes, that sounds like a wonderful life for someone who's a scholar to be able to--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 66990
Speaker 1: And the way that the University of Chicago [Illinois] Graduate Divinity School was, I could take courses in history, with [HM] John Hope [Franklin], I could take courses in anthropology, I could take courses in anything I wanted, as long as I met their requirements.  So I had this kind of wide-ranging academic discourse that was really marvelous.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when that--yeah, a Masters in Theology and Literature, that--that--
Speaker 1: That's because I couldn't do the field work for history and religions.  I was really doing most of my study in history and religions.  I was interested in African and Latin American religions partly because I was trying to--this is interesting.  The Civil Rights Movement was happening around me and I was trying to figure out what my own definitions of being African American were because I--my experience and my inclinations didn't fit the definitions that were being put forward for me which were primarily rooted in the black church which I had never had that experience and my parents and grandparents never had.  It was rooted in a kind of at that moment--all the poetry was like, you know, Nation Time.  "My daddy, he died in the gutter."  It was all that kind of stuff and it wasn't my life.  So I had to figure out where I fit into that and what in my own life and experience was African.  So I started with religion and I found out that a great many of my religious and spiritual understandings of the world were very African.  It was just interesting for me to locate myself in those ways.  A lot of my parents' [Thelma Shepherd Rone and John Drayton Rone]  value systems and structures, a lot of the way I was raised, so I was interested in that.  The Latin American was interesting 'cause I spoke Spanish and I read Spanish.  So I took all these courses.  Then time came I would have had to go--either go to Mexico or South America or to Africa and I had little children.  I wasn't going anywhere outside of Chicago [Illinois] at the time.  So I flipped into theology and literature.  Obviously, I had taken a lot of literature courses and I could pass those exams very readily.  And I didn't have to do any fieldwork.
Speaker 2: Did you study African theology?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Oh, very much so with Charles Long.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Joseph--the work of Joseph Mbithi had enormous influence on my life--on my thinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was Episcopalian--an Anglican priest.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did--well--
Speaker 1: --but he wrote the great book on Africans and how they locate themselves in time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was very interested in time.  I was reading T. S. [Thomas Stearns]  Eliot's poetry on time.  I was interested in African's notions of time.  Vertical--it's when I came to understand that the way I looked at the world was vertical rather than horizontal, which is the way most Western people look at time.  Like you're on a continuum from "A" to "Z" and that's how progress happens.  And Africans look at time vertically.  Everything you do is rooted in the past and everything ellipses back to that.  So that's part of what I mean when I say, I learned how African I was in those ways.
Speaker 2: How does such a--how does such a world view change your approach to life, I mean, if you're looking at it, time from an African perspective rather than a European perspective?
Speaker 1: Part of what I'm trying to say to you is it didn't change my approach to life, it affirmed an approach I already had and gave me a language for it that I hadn't had.  I knew that I did not believe in linear time and linear relations.  It didn't make sense to me.  The world's too old for that.  And my parents had such respect for ancestors and for, you know, my whole notions of church.  I realized that Christianity is a historical religion.  There's something like pre-Christianity and something like pre-Judaism, you know, and all that.  So I already knew that and thought about the world that way and thought about my own life, historically.  So, you know, what studying African history and African religions did for me is give me languages, and that's very important 'cause you--there's a kind of learning when you get a name for something that you don't have when it's amorphous and you don't have a name for it, you just know you're different.
Story_ID: 66991
Speaker 1: Okay, so--and you said '71' [1971] that you start teaching at the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '74' [1974].
Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974], okay.
Speaker 2: I was teaching anywhere I could get a job from.  I went back to work in 1969 when my youngest daughter was five and I got this great job.  I just wanted a few hours a week and I got this job writing press releases for Chicago Children's Choir.  And writing them meant, writing them, typing them, dittoing them, they had ditto machines in those days, carrying them to the newspaper, in my car, with my baby in the backseat.  That's what my little job was.  But it was great 'cause I could take her to school and then go do my work and come back and get her--finish my work.  And after a year of that, they got me--put me in line for a wonderful, one day a week job, working for Urban Gateways, running a program for kids who were gifted in the Arts.  And I didn't have to do the workshops but I got to hire the people.  So I hired one writer, one musician and one actor.  I was going to have a dancer and then I met Patricia Cruz and she was an actress at Goodman [Theatre] and I liked her so much.  She walked in off the street and I said I'm not going to do dance, I'm going to do theater.  So we ran these great workshops for gifted kids from all over the city.  My job was to recruit them and their job was to run the workshops.  We had a lot of money.  So we took them to New York [New York City, New York] once a year for an intensive week.  We got free scholarships to everywhere.  This was late '60s' [1960s], early '70s' [1970s].  Money was growing on trees for programs like that.  So it was wonderful and it was part-time.  So as a result of that job, I was working one day a week, sort of on my own schedule, and I started teaching, just--I taught.  I had a workshop at Malcolm X [City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] so I started teaching at Malcolm X.  I had a workshop connected to DePaul [University in Chicago, Illinois] so I taught a course at DePaul.  They were just starting a school for new learnings so I got involved in that.  I taught a course at the University of Illinois [at Chicago] in literature.  I didn't even have a graduate degree, mind you, at the time.  And I met Patricia Cruz's husband, who was a painter and he was teaching at the School of the Art Institute.  So he said--we talked African literature all the time and Latin American, he was Cuban.  Well, he said, "Why don't you teach this stuff instead of just teaching American Lit?"  So I said, "I'd love to" but I didn't have a degree in it.  He said, well, "Come talk to my Dean at the Art Institute."  So I ended up with a job teaching there.  And after one year, I got hired as a Dean and I said, the way I got hired as a Dean, it was a school full of non-verbal people and I was very verbal.  I could really read and write and so I wrote this big manual for students and they hired me as a Dean, part-time.  And they gave me this wonderful job.  I didn't make any money, but I didn't care.  I was off in the summers.  I could take off whenever my children were off from school.  I could go to grad school and take all my classes.  They were totally flexible and it was a fabulous job for me.  I grew like crazy in that job.  And I got appointed--my Dean appointed me to the National Publications Board for Art Schools, which oversaw all their publications.  Again, because I was so, you know, I was obviously--most of the people were painters and sculptors and photographers.  Also they loved doing their own work.  They didn't want to do all this administrative mess.  Well, after I got appointed to that, I got made the Chairman of it by all the guys who were on the Board because they didn't want to do their work, and I was happy to do their work because I got to travel, the first time in my whole life, all over the United States.  I went to all these private art schools and I stayed in wonderful hotels so I got a taste for great hotels.  And I was wined and dined 'cause I was reporting on everybody.  It was the greatest experience.  It was absolutely a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Really--really, it really does seem great (laughter).  It's just--just snowballing, you know--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --you're just picking up one thing is leading to another and--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --picking up speed.
Speaker 2: I know.
Story_ID: 66992
Speaker 1: It's--but tell us a little--backtrack a little bit and tell us a little bit about Urban Gateways and Jessie Woods and, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, that's how I got to know Jessie.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: She was the Executive Director and she--I had a little Board from my project of five people consisting of principals and her, and Shirley Gunther, who was her Program Director.  And, you know, I did a good job for them.  They were very happy with what I did.  I was very creative and I brought in wonderful people like [HM] Sterling Plumpp, became the director of my theater program--of my poetry program.  [Patricia] Pat Cruz became the director of the theater program.  She's now the head of the entire performing arts programs for one of the university's in New York.  And my music program was Charles Taylor, who was at Malcolm [X, City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] at the time.  He worked for Charles Walton.  And so I had wonderful people doing this work and they were very creative and I always had a kind of eye out to where you could find funding support and where you could get scholarships, go to Aspen Music School, and things like that.  So it was very successful.  I was very successful in that work.  And, of course, it ended up being more than a day's work but I could do it on my own time.  So when I stopped working there to go to the Art Institute School to be a Dean, after seven years, Jessie decided to retire from Urban Gateways and she came back and asked me to take her place.  So I became Executive Director.  And I was--it was perfect timing.  My youngest daughter was just going to college so I could work fulltime for the first time in my life.  I didn't have to have my summers off, you know, to monitor all those girls and I could work at a regular fulltime job and it was more money than I'd been making at the school.  I wasn't making beans.  So I took that job.
Speaker 1: Now Urban Gateways is--
Speaker 2: And I was there ten years.
Speaker 1: That was like a cutting edge organization in terms of arts--
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: --and education.
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: And Jessie Woods, from what I understand, was pivotal--pivotal in the establishment of the expansion arts program at National Endowment, right?
Speaker 2: She was.
Speaker 1: Yup.
Speaker 2: She was pivotal in arts and education in this nation because she piloted programs that hadn't been done anywhere and they became national models.  She was an incredible woman.  She was a volunteer when she first started there but she drew people to her and made all kinds of arrangements with the Board of Ed.  She was very powerful.  And so I came in on her coattails.  And my contribution was that--for the first time Urban Gateways began making money.  So I had more of a business head than Jessie did.  And we had larger impact by selling packages of programs instead of a performing artist here, a workshop artist there.  I created these packages where a school could pay us a certain--many thousands of dollars a year and they'd get the whole number, all tied together thematically.  So you could take a theme that would be "Shakespeare."  You could take a theme that would be "Blues."  You could take a theme that would be "Latin American arts" and go all through your year with performances downtown, performances in your school, teacher training, stuff for the kids, workshops, it was great.  So we grew and grew and grew.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you also applied an infusion of activities that most schools couldn't do on their own, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's absolutely true because we had the artist, you see, and we trained the artist.  This is another one of my contributions was I brought in academics, curriculum specialists and so forth, to train our artists so that we could meet the state guidelines.  And then we trained the teachers in how to integrate the arts into their schoolwork so that you didn't just have an actor coming in, you had an actor who might be teaching Shakespeare and your kids might be reading 'Romeo and Juliet,' so, you know, it was like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the kids were more interested in their school work because of the arts and they were integrated into the curriculum.
Speaker 1: And you'd get actively involved in that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did that with--across the board with dance, theater, music, everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we hired top people, that was our--Jessie's insistence, and I continued it.  And the artist loved it because many of them worked at night in clubs and so forth and they had nothing to do during the day and they could make good money, working for Urban Gateways.  And they liked the kids.  They felt they were doing something useful.
Story_ID: 68483
Speaker 1: I'll say something about Urban Gateways [in Chicago, Illinois].  Urban Gateways was started in 1961 so you need to think about it as a '60s' [1960s] kind of program when a lot of interest on the part of the government was emerging for inter-city schools.  Simultaneously, a lot of interest was emerging in the arts, particularly community arts.  And so there was this kind of conjunction of interest and strengthening black arts in the community and--and strengthening the lives of inter-city kids.  And so Urban Gateways got a lot of model cities' money.  Okay, Jessie [Woods] and some friends of hers, they were always racially integrated, had this deep concern and they started these camps and they started getting tickets from impresarios at the Auditorium and Orchestra Hall and so forth.  When they--after all their halls weren't being filled and so they started saying, "Well, give us your extra tickets, we'll fill it up with students."  And so they did.  And that's how it started with these giving away tickets to poverty schools.  And it grew, and grew and grew to include these camps which were inter-racial, urban/suburban camps, because they were sponsored by institutions in the suburbs, primarily churches, but sometimes community centers.  I wasn't working for them in those days and I wasn't working at all.  I'd just accept teaching a course here and there.  I had little kids.  I was writing poetry all the time.  Poetry is a wonderful occupation for a young mother because you could write it while you wait for your kids to come out of dancing school or you can write it while you're waiting for your diapers to dry or you can, you know, it was a great, great creative time for me.  So I wasn't working for Urban Gateways, but I knew them.  I knew about them.  I knew some of their volunteers.  Jessie Woods' children were in Harvard - St. George School [Chicago, Illinois] when my husband [Robert Hartfield] was teaching there.  So I knew her very slightly.  And many of their volunteers lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], where we did.  Well, they got this infusion of Model Cities' [Model Cities Program] money and they started thinking the children needed some preparation for what they were going to seek because these kids had little or no experience with ballet or classical music or the Harlem Dance Theatre or Alvin Ailey and they weren't ready--the teachers weren't--didn't know how to get them ready.  So they started sending in these teams of artists to get them ready for what they would see and they would prepare these little sheets for the teacher and the kids.  And then they'd start, "Hum, we could get the parents involved in this."  So they started preparing the parents and that's--then grew to become a very large thing, larger than the performances itself, the preparation end of things.  And then, of course, they were training teachers, they were training parents and they were getting the kids ready, which means they were doing what I call "pre-curriculum".  And the government, the National Endowment for the Arts, got interested in them, and gave them a big push up as a model.  The city [Chicago, Illinois] got interested.  They got money from the mayor's office and so forth.  So they were doing quite well there in that second ten years or so--middle ten years.  And then the government money started to dry up and the schools didn't have money to buy these things and so Urban Gateways was giving them away and raising money to give them away.  And it was getting harder and harder to raise money from corporations and foundations, to give kids that kind of programming.  The "back to basics" movement was starting.  People wanted to give money for reading and writing programs and math.  So things got a little tough there.
Story_ID: 68484
Speaker 1: And then I came in, in '81' [1981], right at the heart of their [Urban Gateways] losing money and I realized that packaging was the way--I had gone to business school.  I forgot about--left that little part out.  I just went to business school just to take a couple of courses.  And the reason I went to business school was because I realized that even as a Dean [at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago in Illinois], I needed some business skills.  I needed to better understand structuring budgets and that kind of thing.  So, I learned how to write proposals and that kind of stuff.  So when I got hired, it became quickly apparent to me that Urban Gateways would die if it did not "make" money.  There had to be some overage and how could we get an overage and the Board didn't really want to stop giving programs away.  So the Board had to be changed.  I brought in a strategic planner to change their minds, to help them understand that the whole thing was going to go under if we didn't create a way to get some overage--overhead.  And we were getting free rent but that was drying up, and so forth.  So, I designed these packages and brought in some staff people to help figure out the details of that and we started selling them.  We started having huge marketing efforts.  We hired a marketer which they had never had and we started, for example, taking a suite at the principals conference every year so we could bring in principals and expose them to our artists and help them understand that they should buy our packages.  We started having a principals conference at Lake Geneva [Wisconsin] every year that was funded and we would give them a three-day whammy, those they became believers and how this--could work, really to help them achieve their own goals.  And so we grew and grew and grew.  It was enormously gratifying.  The arts education movement was growing but it was biggest in Chicago because Jessie [Woods] and her crew had done some things, fundamental, that were very right, like including parents, so that, for example, when the school reform movement came in, and parents had the say so about spending money in their schools, we had parent groups all over Chicago who were committed to spending money on Urban Gateways programs.  Nobody else had that.  So that's why we were so--nearly sole providers.  What happened is an odd thing.  Some people in this city became concerned that Urban Gateways was growing too fast and making too much money and becoming too much of a monopoly.  And so they decided they were going to start some other programs, and they did, and they hired Urban Gateways' artists to run them.
Speaker 2: Now what--
Speaker 1: Chicago Arts Partnership for Education [CAPE]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, okay.
Speaker 1: --that's how that started.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what did--did the city have something to do with starting those or--
Speaker 1: Excuse me?
Speaker 2: Who started those?
Speaker 1: Arnie Aprill.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was an Urban Gateways artist.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was hired by Marshall Field's--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --to start that.  Marshall Field's started that program.
Speaker 2: The department store chain.  Marshall--
Speaker 1: Their a corporate giving.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, their a--
Speaker 1: Their a corporate giving.
Speaker 2: --okay, the foundation side of that, okay.
Speaker 1: They felt that Urban Gateways shouldn't have a monopoly, that there should be other options for people.  And I just thought it was singular that all the artists who worked for them were trained by us.  Every single person they hired was trained by Urban Gateways.  And they knew all our techniques and they knew everything we'd done and they knew some parent community groups because of us and they became a major competitor to Urban Gateways.
Speaker 2: It seems--do you think that's a good thing or a bad thing?
Speaker 1: Well, in my judgment I saw no need for it.  I don't--I still don't see anything to be gained by having two organizations that do essentially the same thing, when one was doing it extremely well.
Story_ID: 68485
Speaker 1: So right now the city [Chicago, Illinois]--we have how many doing it?
Speaker 2: Oh, you have many more.  Gallery 37 [Center for the Arts] spun off.  That was all Urban Gateways artists too.  They hired all Urban Gateways artists and they spun off their own thing run by the city and they were subsidized so they could do it for nothing, or very much cheaper, than we could.  So these things started circulating in the city.  Several of our artists started their own little companies.  Whirlwind Dance Company, which was one of our--our theatre company [Whirlwind Theatre Company], was one of our programs and trained by us and they started their own little arts education program and started selling in the schools.  And they're very good.  They're all very good but obviously this had an effect on Urban Gateways, which has not thrived because of all that competition.
Speaker 1: Has it shrank or stayed--
Speaker 2: I was gone by then so.
Speaker 1: --stayed about the same or what?
Speaker 2: It's gotten smaller.
Speaker 1: Smaller.
Speaker 2: And the pie is not--the pie hasn't grown so there are more people who get pieces of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as I said, I was gone by then.  All this started the year I left [1991] so I was lucky, again, 'cause I would have had a much harder time in all those internecine battles.  My successor, Sandra Furey, who had worked for me, was a person who fought a lot of those battles.  I was by then running the Department of Museum Education at the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 68486
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us how you--how you went back to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Well, you know when I was at Urban Gateways, again, a lot is timing.  We became a national model and so I did a great deal of work nationally on national panels for the National Endowment for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, National Education Association, the Kennedy Center, I was always asked to present and work with people on devising strategies.  So I became this kind of very national person.  And as I mentioned before, I love national work.  I love traveling.  So I got recruited by the Art Institute for two reasons.  One, I had been a Dean at the school [the School of the Art Institute of Chicago] and so the president of the museum knew me.  Two, they had decided that they wanted to become more connected to the whole city.  They were kind of hermetic and very parochial and they wanted to change that posture.  So they had a headhunting firm.  They were looking around trying to find someone who had the right stuff.  And so they asked me to come in and I went over there.  I wasn't that interested in going over there at the time but I got very interested in this challenge of extending what was seen as a little privilege thing, to a lot of people.  It was meant a goal--my whole life.  And the Art Institute--I wanted to make sure that the Art Institute really wanted to do that and that they were really going to support me but I also wanted to keep all my national work.  I wanted to keep all my national panels and to be able to travel, nationally, and internationally, 'cause when I was at Urban Gateways I had done some work with developing arts curriculum in Scotland and Northern England.  So I wanted to keep doing all that.  So we danced around for a long time before they finally agreed that I could do that.  And so I had--I got hired.  I decided that this was a great challenge, Urban Gateways was up and running, all these new things hadn't emerged yet and that it was a good time for me to leave and that I could do something that was more academic, running the education department there.  They're related to my academic life.  So I did.  So I moved over there and I think, again, I mean I had an enormously gratifying ten years there, nine years actually, building that department, just like Urban Gateways, I doubled it and doubled in size while I was there.  And because I had the Urban Gateways experience, I had easy channels to communities, to strengthening relationships between the museums and schools and so I was actually able to make connections for them that they never thought about.  I developed a community advisory committee of black people for leadership positions in the city who had helped them think about things they could do, how to widen their audiences.  I brought in a lot of exhibitions of work by black artists that they had never had or thought about having.  And we gave huge benefits.  So we raised a lot of money for our own programs that the black leadership ran those benefits and opened up the museum.  That's really what happened.  And a lot of my funders at Urban Gateways were very helpful in raising money--giving me money to do things with the schools 'cause they wanted it to happen.  So I developed a couple of really national model programs for the museum, one of which was training every high school art teacher in the city and working with another teacher who would be either Social Studies or English and developing curriculum that used our collections.  So we taught and it was fabulous.  Five years.  The Lloyd [A.] Fry Foundation gave me the money for that.  They had been funding me at Urban Gateways then.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Story_ID: 68487
Speaker 1: So things like that--that were really major.  I hired a community person.  I got this money from Lila Wallace [Wallace Foundation]. One of my former students at the Art Institute was in charge of that program, a little guy from Trinidad.  He called me up and said, "I've read that you'd gone to the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] now."  "Do you know about this grant?"  "Oh."  So I got a multi-million dollar grant from Lila Wallace, which was designed specifically to attract black audiences for the Art Institute.  So I had money.  I had money to hire somebody.  I hired Julia Perkins to do all that nitty-gritty, going out into the community, calling people, getting buses for churches to come down, all of that.  We made that thing work.
Speaker 2: Now this is outreach organizing work, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, exact, exact.
Speaker 2: Of talking to people, getting--having one-on-one conversations with people--
Speaker 1: Exact--
Speaker 2: --and getting all excited.
Speaker 1: --it's the only way you could do it.  You can't just send out mailings and say "we've changed."  You can't do that.
Speaker 2: You would kind of agitate people to get them involved?
Speaker 1: Exact.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And you have to give them a lot of free stuff.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: We had to have a lot of free buses.  We had family days with a thousand people down in the museum.  Free food.  Free artists all over the museum.  You know, we had to open that up, use every church we could think of, put it in their bulletins.  So you know it's a big job.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a--so many people don't know what's in a place like the Art Institute--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: --the Field Museum [of Natural History in Chicago, Illinois] and they, you know, and sadly a lot of people will never find out, you know, 'cause they'll never go but what--what you're doing is trying to bring the community into the museum with innovative programs. What did--what were some of the programs that you--what were some of the ways that you brought people?
Speaker 1: Well, that was a big one, "Evenings for Educators."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 68488
Speaker 1: But we developed innumerable programs.  I'll give you some small examples that I thought were really significant.  I hired this other community person to work with high school kids and she got--we did two big projects, one in architecture and one in photography.  And we worked with schools that had photography departments.  And we took small groups.  That was more cycling back to my first experience with Urban Gateways.  Small groups of kids.  Fifteen, ten--fifteen kids.  And we bused them down and cabbed them home.  I knew you had to do that and you had to have the money for that and we got volunteers, young professionals to work with them, of every color.  They were all--the only requirement was they had to be under thirty-five.  And they loved it.  And they worked with those kids and had them building models of the projects.  "How would you change the project?"  One of the interesting things that they said--two things interested me the most.  One was they would build glass walkways between buildings that would be monitored so people could be safe walking from building to building.  They would put in a homework room in each building that would be supervised and would have computers so kids could go there after school, do their homework, have a little food, you know, 'cause so many of them had nobody at home.  And they would plant flowers everywhere.  It was totally interesting to me, to think they were missing flowers.  And they did photo documentations.  They worked with all these guys who are now with the African American Photographers Group and we had white photographers and Chinese and Latino, and women, men.  It was an amazingly successful project and we put out beautiful catalogs from those that they got.  And we had receptions and had exhibitions and had their parents come down.  So that was very successful.  And those things cost a lot of money.  The museum was very supportive to those programs.  Another one was, we have a huge, at the Art Institute, a huge vestment collection, you've seen when you walk through there.  And I decided to have an outreach to the churches to have them come in and bring their parishioners in, their congregations.  And so we had them, well we had this group, including a priest whose name will not be spoken here, who left because we didn't have any African vestments.  He said, "My parishioners are not coming in here."  But most of the priests and ministers were wonderful.  And they decided at the end to have a prayer meeting among the vestments.  Now the curator of vestments, at the Art Institute, had never done anything like this in her life, nor had she ever seen anything like it.  And she thought it was wonderful.  She joined right in the prayer meeting, right there, in the galleries.  It was just a stunning moment for me.  They did that.  And then they went back to their churches and brought their church people down there.  We had lectures on the history of vestments.  We had one of my guys, the Episcopal priest from St. Edmund's [Episcopal Church], who worked and lived in Liberia, to come and show his vestment collection.
Speaker 2: Now, [HM] Father [Richard L.] Tolliver?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he has an incredible collection.  So we did that.  When we had the Jacob Lawrence, Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman show, we had educators from the University of Illinois who came up and talked about the whole history around that.  And we had tons of visitors that the museum never expected, who were white.  Young parents who came in with their kids 'cause they didn't know those stories and their kids were having them in school and they wanted to learn it.
Story_ID: 68489
Speaker 1: Now you all--you were there when the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] purchased this remarkable photograph of Frederick Douglass?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: That--well that happened partly as a result of the work that we did.  The black advisory committee was very encouraging to the museum to buy a major piece of work by a black artist.  And so that's the one they bought.  And that one was extraordinary as a work of art.  It's unique.  It's extraordinarily beautiful, as you know, it's a daguerreotype portrait of Frederick Douglass but you could also use it as an incredible teaching tool and that was my work.  I wanted something that you could teach a whole history through.  So we got it and we built a show around it of work from our print collections, from our American collections.  The museum had never thought this way, you see, that you could use something like this.  They thought if they started having black stuff, it was just going to be black stuff.  But because of my inter-disciplinary academic history, that's never going to be the way I work, it's always going to be contextualized.  So we were able to create this inter-disciplinary exhibition.  It was utterly wonderful, it really was.  And we used that--what--one of the interesting things that happened there was one of the curators was then going to give me a lesson on who Frederick Douglass was.  That's the kind of thing that made my life there sometimes complicated.  And I had to say to him, that I have an uncle named Frederick Douglass (laughter), you know, it's like you just learned about Frederick Douglass, you know.  It became--we own it now.  So those things were always a little difficult moments.
Story_ID: 68490
Speaker 1: That's--that's a nice segue way into 'Stewards of the Sacred,' you know--you know, sacred artifacts, religious culture and the museum, you know--
Speaker 2: It's the last part of my life.  I'm glad to be getting to that.  I'm going to have to go soon.  I never spent much of my professional life drawing from the resource of my academic life.  It just didn't happen that way and I didn't mind the bifurcations, it's fine with me, as I was always reading and--my things, and doing this work over here.  At one point I thought, maybe we could do something in the museum around art and the spiritual.  And my boss was ever wonderful.  I sing Jim [James N. Wood] with praises because he was so inordinately generous to me.  If I had an idea, it's like, okay, go for it.  So, we tried to put together this little exhibition on the spiritual and art but we didn't have a curator who wanted to do it.  So he finally persuaded the curator of, what do you call that, she was the assistant curator of objects, not-- decorative arts, that's what it was, she was a curator--assistant curator of decorative art.  And she came in to see me and she said, "You know, I don't even--I don't--I'm not interested in spiritual and I don't even know what people mean by that but the president's asked me to do this so, okay, I'm going to work with you.  Talk to me about it, we'll figure this out."  So we did.  We figured out this whole little exhibition which was comprised of decorative arts, objects and some paintings, you know, say a big chalice, and a beautiful painting of Mary weeping, some things like that.  And we put in an American landscape in there, at her suggestion, which was a transcendentalist painting, it had nothing explicitly religious about it, but of course impulse was religious and the feeling about it was religious.  So we did it and I programmed it and I got wonderful people to come and talk, including a black artist, [HM] Kerry James Marshall, who could talk very winningly about that.  And we--it was a grand success, the exhibition.  So--and I talked.  I did a talk myself.
Story_ID: 68491
Speaker 1: So I got ready to leave the museum [the Art Institute in Chicago, Illinois] 'cause I had done a lot--there was--it was like Urban Gateways, I mean, you come to an end of things.  I could see that we were really beginning to recycle things I had done.  The Lila Wallace Grant [Wallace Foundation] was running out so we weren't going to have these millions of dollars to program the stuff any more.  And I just said, well, somebody gave me a small amount of money to finish the book I'd been working on in my mother's life and I was two years from retirement.  So I said, "You know what, I think I'm just going to leave early."  And two years of pension is not going to make that much difference in my life, I can finish this book.  I thought if I could just have a project.  I just need a project or two because I can't--I could never just stay home and write.  I'm too much of a social person and I like creating things in groups.  So I just ought to put that out there and I got a phone call one day.  This is the oddest thing in the world.  I got two phone calls, almost in a row.  I got a phone call from Martin Marty, one of my professors at the University of Chicago [in Illinois], he's starting a Center for Religion and Public Policy.  He says, "How would you like to help me out?  Be on--come be on my Board," and I thought, "This is amazing, Marty, I mean, this is what I asked for."  He's telling me the other people who are going to be on the Board.  "You can do something with religion and art--we want to do something with that."  I thought, "This is heaven, okay."  About two weeks later, so of course, I'm going to do this.  Two weeks later I got a call from this former classmate of mine [Lawrence E. Sullivan] at the University of Chicago Divinity School, when I was in history religions, he was in history religions.  And I knew that he had gone on to Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] to run the Center for the Study of World Religion.  And I hadn't seen the man in years.  He called me up and he said, "You know, I got this commission to do content preparation for a Museum of World Religions in Taipei [Taiwan].  And I realized that, I don't know many people who know anything about museums and religion but you do.  Do you think you can come and help me out with this?"  So I said, "This is truly an answer to prayer."  This is why I'm so mystical.  There is no earthly reason why these things happen in this time.  I said, "You know, do you know, Larry, that I'm retiring?  I'm taking an early retirement."  He said, "No, I didn't know you were doing that."  This is perfect.  Why don't you come out here and we'll have a talk.  So I flew out to Cambridge, had a talk with him and devised this whole big plan of things I would do for Harvard.  That I would do six conversations in six different cities over the next six months on how a museum of world religions might work and what might be in it and what people would like to see in it and think about.  You know I love to travel.  It was heavenly for me.  It was the perfect job.  And because they liked the way I did it, they gave me some other things to do and then they gave me a Senior Fellowship, this last year, I'm just finishing up, in Sacred Art.  So I got to do a year of--a major international conference on sacred art where I brought people from all over the world, that I knew, and some that Larry knew from New Zealand that I didn't know, other people he knew, but I brought guys I knew from Japan, 'cause I'd done some work over there and guys I knew from all over the place, and women too.  My former boss, who was part of my hiring team at the Art Institute is now at the Cleveland Museum [of Art in Ohio], she's the president.  She came.  So that was great.  And then we ran some conversations.  So when I came as a Fellow, for a year, I got this little apartment, and my husband [Robert Hartfield] didn't want to move to Cambridge, so I commuted every other week and I created three significant conversations on religion and art, that had never been held at Harvard and invited faculties from many diverse places, such as architecture, anthropology, African studies, things--people who'd never come together to talk about these things, was wonderful.
Story_ID: 68492
Speaker 1: I started helping out the Center for the Study of World Religions [at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] because it was a project that I could work with other people on, I could do some traveling and I could continue writing my book.  And so, that's what I did, that whole summer after I retired.  I worked on that.  The Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois] gave me a consulting contract for a couple of years so they could ask me about things to kind of keep going, what I've gotten started, which was a great thing and I was working with the [Martin] Marty Center [for the Advanced Study of Religion at the University of Chicago, Illinois] which wasn't very time-consuming.  And what happened is I decided on a whim, almost, to apply for a Fellowship to go to Italy.  The Rockefeller Foundation has a scholar's center right on Lake Como, Bellagio in Italy, and I knew some people who had gone there and you get these, like, six-week opportunities to go and you get a studio.  And so I thought, well, I would apply, maybe I could work on my book in a very concentrated way over there.  And low and behold I got the fellowship.  So there I was, with all this Harvard stuff and my Bellagio Fellowship, that I had to go away.  So it was fine, it worked out okay.  We worked it out in terms of timing.  My husband [Robert Hartfield] went with me to Italy after saying he wasn't going to go.  His friends told him he was crazy.  So he decided to go because they put you up in a palace and you get all your meals.  Your husband has to pay his own airfare but that's all.  So I had that six weeks to work five days a week in a studio, a beautiful little round studio all by myself.  And I was very stringent about it.  I told him before we left, I said "Look, I'm here to work, I'm going to work five days a week, two days a week I'm yours, we can anything you want.  So you scout out stuff while I'm working."  I worked from nine to four.  I shipped all my books that I needed over there and every morning I would go and turn this little antique key in this little round studio and it was like heaven to me.  I had never had solitude in my entire life.  When somebody asked me earlier about what that twelve years of not working, well, I had four little children and I was--and twins on top of it.  I was exceedingly busy and I was, unlike my parents, involved in their PTA [Parents and Teachers Association] and their Sunday School, and all that.  And the only solitude I had was in the middle of the night.  And I would get up in the middle of the night and write poems for two or three hours sometimes.  I was young and didn't need much sleep.
Story_ID: 68493
Speaker 1: What did you write about?  I've--I've--I did ask when you first men--mentioned it but--
Speaker 2: I wrote about all kinds of things.  It was a way of expressing my ruminations about life.  If I went to a workshop out in--on--in the suburb like Woodstock [Illinois] which is on the prairie, I wrote a poem about the prairie.  If I went to--if I looked at maps and thought about my mother's journey and how she walked to the river to get on a ferry and then she'd ride down the river, I would write about rivers.  I wrote about being a woman and having babies.  The whole business of being pregnant.  I wrote about religious, the kind of ideas about time and space, abstract kind of poems, whatever I was feeling, deeply, I wrote about.  They were mostly very interior kinds of poems.  One of them, there are two of them in the book, one is a poem called, "Sacred Wounds," which is about how people pass on human life through the blood, the umbilical relation of mother to child.  How little baby boys are circumcised.  My grandmother died in child birth so I was interested in that.  The whole notion of bleeding and wounding and how that's the way human life happens.  The other poem in that--in the book, is this one called, "The Idea of the Holy," which begins with the ride down Cottage Grove Avenue and Martin Luther King Jr. Drive [Chicago, Illinois].  Looking at all those holiness churches with all those names, funny names and those crosses, and that being one idea of the holy, you know, the church itself and how my parents [Thelma Shepherd Rone and John Drayton Rone] and--had different ideas of the holy and how I, as a young mother, I couldn't always remember my children's names and I'd go like, "Whoever you are, come here."  And the right one would always come because they knew who you wanted, who you needed and that's the kind of holy thing to me.  The holiness of relation.  So I wrote about things like that.  There would--what you would call deep poems, as opposed to political poems.
Story_ID: 68494
Speaker 1: So in [Bellagio] Italy, you know, you're sequestered in a room for the first time, isolated, and you can--you can actually concentrate and write?
Speaker 2: Yes, and I could hear my mother's voice.  Originally when I went, I was going to--I had all these books shipped 'cause I was going to write about my own young life, the 40s [1940s] and 50s [1950s].  I took, you know, [Horace] Cayton and [St. Clair] Drake and Cayton's 'Black Metropolis.'  I took Jim Grossman's book.  I took another book called, 'Lost Chicago.'  But when I got there, and I was in that quiet space, I could hear my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] telling these stories.  And so that, in my head, and so that's what I wrote.  I wrote her stories.  I wrote new stuff.  It just came out.  And people tell me those are the best parts of the book.  Her stories about her secret marriage.  She was engaged to this dentist she didn't love and she met my father [John Drayton Rone] and she married him secretly and didn't tell anybody.  Things like that.  It's a fun story.  Her stories about being in New Orleans [Louisiana] as a nursemaid and how she walked down to the French Quarter and they'd have all these people singing in the clubs and she would peek in, you know.  She--she said, "And they had one singer, she was a woman, she dressed all in red and they called her 'Sweet Em.'"  And so I wrote those things and it was so wonderful.  It was one of the most wonderful experiences of my life, really, and then my husband and I would take little boats on the two days off.  And I was shipping the stuff home to my typist, all these hand--I write by hand.  And we copied them on the copier at the Center and I shipped all the copies home to her, to type, so that when I got home, all the stuff was typed up.  And I got a big leap forward on my book but meanwhile I still had to do the stuff at Harvard [University in Cambridge, Massachusetts], right, these two big conferences.  So I did them and I didn't get much work done on my book except revising and editing.  And then when I finished that, I got another big spurt 'cause we were going back to Italy, this time for vacation.  And I said, "You know, I'm going to finish this book before I go to Italy.  I am just going to finish it."  And I just worked like a demon.  I couldn't have solitude.  I didn't have long hours but I finished it.  I got it off to the typist last October [2001].  We went to Italy, came back, she finished it by Christmastime, and I got it to my agent and she said, "You don't send a book out in January."  You're doing this program February 1 [2002] at the Field Museum [of Natural History in Chicago, Illinois], it's got--we'll send that--we'll send it out in February, so it's still out.  It's being reviewed by various presses and I hope to have a positive answer some time in the next weeks, meanwhile I'm editing the conversations that I--from the audio tapes--from the Harvard thing.
Story_ID: 68495
Speaker 1: I had three [conversations at the Center for the Study of World Religions at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts] and they're really wonderful.  One was called, "Habitation and Exile" and it's about how people establish themselves by their geographies, by where they live and what kind of structures they live in and what happens when they're removed from those structures, how they re-invent themselves and how they don't re-invent themselves.  How there's always this rupture from the place of origin, you know.  So that is what that was about.  I had two architects and a priest talking about that.
Speaker 2: Hum.
Speaker 1: One is an architect from Chicago, Stanley Tigerman, who did the Holocaust Museum outside of Chicago [the Illinois Holocaust Museum and Education Center in Skokie] and one was a priest from the Cathedral St. John in New York, because he made a decision to hire all these neighborhood kids, these black and Latino kids, to rebuild the cathedral in Harlem [New York City, New York], "what is that?"  The second one was on tribalism and how tribes decide who's in the tribe and who's out 'cause I call my family a tribe, that's the way we were raised, is that we are our own confines, we're our own boundaries, we make the rules, you know.  The family is it.  And so it was like an old African tribe or an Indian tribe.  So I was interested in how tribalism shapes identity and makes rules.  And the third one was really on how colonialism works and superstructures that take people's beliefs and invert them.  I have a colleague at the University of Chicago [in Illinois], [Thomas B.F.] Tom Cummins, who does this work with the Inca, and he said that when the Spanish came in, they took all the sacred images of the Inca and turned the angels into demons--
Speaker 2: Hum.
Speaker 1: --to convert people to Christianity, things like that.  I had a black guy, [HM Edmund] Barry Gaither, you knew Barry, who came and talked about Yoruba and its transitions from Africa to the Caribbean to New York City and how people invert things and revise them.  I had an artist, a painter, who talked about inversions of the self in painting and how part of it is a sacred impulse and part of it is something that has nothing to do with the sacred.  So all that is now being--it's audiotaped and I'm going to edit it and make a little publication out of it ['Musings on Barbarous Beauty,' published in 2004].  That's where I am in my life, at the moment.
Story_ID: 68496
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you--what are your, I guess, hopes for the black community in terms of, I guess, culture and--and--
Speaker 2: That's a very big question.  I think about it more in terms of my own tribe and where they are and that they are so--they get so far from old ways.  And what I would wish for the black community is that it would valorize its histories.  That little thing you asked me when I first sat down, "we was mostly about survival," and people worked to put bread on the table--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --they didn't feel they had to have fancy jobs.  They--my father [John Drayton Rone] was a brilliant man, self-educated, you know.  He could easily have said, "Who am I to put together machines", you know.  My mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] helped people out at parties and stuff when she needed extra money.  Sewed curtains.  People were about survival and doing the best they could in raising their families and trying to keep the family together and have rules about that.  Not thinking that they have to be happy all the time.  So what I would wish for the black community is more of a return to that-
Story_ID: 68497
Speaker 1: We have so many opportunities now that we didn't have and so frequently what we focus on is what doesn't work and what opportunities we don't have and I find that a sad place for us as a race in the culture to be in.  So what I hope for us is that we get more in the vain of, what does it take for us to survive?  And I mean mentally and physically as well as economically so that we get more invested in creating a climate of emotional--physical, emotional and spiritual health.
Speaker 2: Hum.
Speaker 1: There's so much unhealth in our community today and so much a kind of belligerent--we're vindicated for being unhealthy.  When I was riding down here, they had a show on the Fourth of July and they played one of the rap groups, black rap groups, who was talking about how "we don't believe in the Fourth of July and we're never going to believe in it and so what?  You know, we'll tell you what the real deal is, America."  And I just find those things really difficult.  So with my own children, what I'm trying to do is try to not just instill, it's too late for me to instill values on them, but to try to constantly reaffirm those values as a means of survival, that the values that abound in this country right now are very bad values.  The greed, the economic greed, that's from top to bottom, the open acceptance of lying and cheating that we see at the highest levels of this country and people just say, well--one of the things that's really struck me when Florida [2000 presidential election recount in Florida] happened was not that it happened, we all know these things happen, what struck me was people saying, "Well, [Al] Gore should just get on with it, you know.  Okay, it happened.  There was lying and cheating and stopping people from voting but, you know, I'm tired of hearing about."  I found that appalling and that's what I find appalling in our culture.  So much rampant, "Oh, so what, you know, we're not--they treat us bad and we don't have opportunity.  We don't have a level playing field, so you know, so we kill each other up and our kids are in despair, so we kill each other up on the doorsteps."  I can't stand it.
Story_ID: 68498
Speaker 1: So what I wish for is some turning point away from that and I don't know how it would ever come but I really wish that young black people would eschew the worst values that this country has that are being completely absorbed into black culture and that black people would stop justifying all kinds of terrible evils that we visit on ourselves by saying, "Well they made us slaves and they stopped us from getting opportunities" and--just stop it.  Just stop it and say, "Okay, what am I going to do now?"  That teachers would have the commitment that my teachers had.  That parents would have the commitment that my parents had.  That there'd be some kind of health in there.  And, I mean, I think we're all effected by it.  We are deeply effected by it.  One reason I wanted to write the book about my mother's life ['Another Way Home'] is to talk about that, to affirm that people like my parents [Thelma Shepherd Rone and John Drayton Rone] who didn't have any way of connecting to the Civil Rights Movement, and that was like they weren't brought up to march in the streets so they didn't know what that was about.  But when little Emmett Till was killed, they knew Emmett Till, we knew him.  He lived next door to my cousin.  They realized--this is what they said.  They said, "You know what, we forgot to teach 'em to be careful."  They praised the kind of insouciance that he had, that kind of smart mouth little boy.  You know, black people like that, you know.  He's got some sauce to him.  And they forgot to tell him that you can't do that in Money, Mississippi.  And that's the lesson they took from it, that we got to teach our children while praising them for strength and confidence, we've got to teach them about boundaries and not let them be overcome by it but teach them to be safe, you know, teach them to care for one another.  The older people care for the younger generations.  They took that very personally.  The whole South Side [Chicago, Illinois] did.  Nobody thought, well, okay, you know, that's the way this country is.  And the way people are nowadays is there's such a--an apathy about all this horrible stuff.  There's such a justification.  I heard this guy on the radio, they played him today, talking about what the flag doesn't mean, you know.  And I just--I get so despairing about hearing people talk about what the flag doesn't mean, that somehow we need to talk about what the flag "can" mean.  We need to and that--I feel it very strongly.  Teachers have to feel like they can do something.  The one's who feel like they can do something, are doing something, and they're making a difference.  And I realize it's a lot tougher for young people today than it was when I grew up but a lot of the people were perpetrating the stuff don't have it any tougher than I did.  They don't, you know.  They just don't want to--they want more--they want more and they feel they should have more.  And I wish they would just realize that you can get more by maybe not feeling such a sense of entitlement to more, that getting more is an inch by inch thing.
Story_ID: 68499
Speaker 1: You said earlier--I think you said that we need a valoric history, you know, more, I guess a more heroic look at ourselves in terms of the--some of the things that we consider mundane or small or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or things that we, in the past, have felt ashamed of, in some ways, we need to see as heroic and so that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, I think we have had a very heroic culture.  We--people--when they started all the stuff about back to Africa, I said to people, "Do you know what my homeland, what my old country is?  It's Louisiana and Mississippi.  I know about that place.  I know the roots of it and I know the heroism and courage of all those people who made it down there and made their way out of it.  I know it and I valorize that."  That has more image power for me than things that I read in books, I mean this is stuff I know.  And that we need--I just wish we could valorize our past.  It's a very heroic, very creative, very inventive, very--it was a very deeply spiritual.  People believed in good and evil, they did, and they believe they ought to try to be good, you know.  It wasn't such an apathy.  This apathy is a new thing.  It just started in the '60s' [1960s].  It's very new.  We forget how new it is.  The disrespect for women, women's disrespect for themselves.  This stuff is new.  When I think of how things were just fifty years ago, it's stunning, the slide downward that we've had as more opportunities opened up for us, you know.  And so I wish--I mean I look at the rich black people.  These little young girls writing the MAPP (ph.) Handbook and saying, you're not worth anything if you don't have a--sixty pairs of shoes of--made by a certain manufacturers and--it's silly.  Give me a break here girls.  You gotta--gotta have something else to say.
Speaker 1: We've got a crisis in values here, really.
Speaker 2: It's very American.  That's what they say.  Well, we're just doing what the other girls did.  And I guess--my feelings, we didn't used to do what the other girls did, we didn't, or the other boys.  We felt we had more respect.  More respect for our elders, more respect for our parents, closer relationships with our siblings.  When I went to college, I was shocked at all these people who had bad relationships with their sisters and brothers.  You know, well, my sisters and brothers were helping putting me through college and I helped my younger sister, with my little teeny paycheck.  So I wish we could somehow return to some of that and it is a return.  It is an ellipse.  I think we've lost a lot but it's new, it's only like a couple of generations and it can be reversed.
Story_ID: 68500
Speaker 1: Okay, now you--though you are still young, what would you like your legacy to be?  Or what do you think your legacy will be, first of all?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Passing on some sense of values, that's very important to me.  Passing on valuing yourself.  I can't tell you how many artists I've met who thought that was just something that they liked to do and didn't realize how powerful that is for expressivity in the world, for conveying information.  So valorizing, endeavor--valorizing people's own experience is very important to me.  I thought--I taught a G.E.D. class and I absolutely loved it.  I did it for a friend of mine and I just--it was very--like you were describing your Vista class, they're all kinds of people in it.  There were old mothers who were my age and there were young boys who were 15, 16, trying to get that.  Single parents of all ages and immigrants and all kinds of folks in there.  And I taught this book, which is 'The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman,' and I'm telling you we talked the world through that book and people loved that class.  They came every day.  They wouldn't miss a second of it because they were learning that you could make literature out of your experience and your mother's and your grandmother's.  They were learning that and that they had the intelligence to think about their lives that way.  So that kind of thing is extremely important to me and all of my work, that's been important.  When people come into the Art Institute [of Chicago, Illinois], I had these little young black brothers come in and say, "I don't see any--by my people in here."  And I said, "All this work is by your people.  These are all people talking about their experience, you know, who said that only African Americans or Africans made work about your life and your experience?  Have you ever been sad?  Have you ever been happy?  Have you ever been in a fight?  That's what this is.  That's what it's about."  And they would just begin to think like that, you know, that the world is about them and they're about the world.  So a big part of my legacy in all my teaching has been about that and I wrote a lot about that in my book ['Another way Home'] 'cause my parents [Thelma Shepherd Rone and John Drayton Rone] taught us that--that you know, "You can eat the foods of the world.  You can take streetcars and go everywhere."  You can--you know, people said to me, have you ever been intimidated?  I have never been intimidated in my life by any structures, any global cities, any global culture because, you know, it's made by people and they're expressing their lives and I think that can be very exciting and very affirming.  So, some of my favorite art--one of my favorite pieces of works of art--I used to love to look at when I was a little girl, at the Art Institute, they don't have it hanging there anymore, it's a piece by a French artist of a little girl standing on a hill in a sunset and she's looking out like this and she's got a kind of a scythe with her and she's got a bandana on her head ['The Song of the Lark' by Jules Breton], it's French, pheasant, and I loved this picture.  They used to call it "Ronne's picture" in my house 'cause I would drag the family over there to look at this picture.  And I realized as an adult, of course I got language from when I loved it, I loved her yearning, that was something I knew inside myself.  I loved the solitariness of her, you know, all that.  And I want--that's what I want to pass on to people that, you know, it's about you.  The world's about you and all the sort of built-in environments about you and that you have a place in that so I tried to write this book.  People have asked me, "What would you like to leave--people who read your book, to leave with"--I'd like to leave them with this document of a life, a series of lives, that were healthy in the midst of very stringent circumstances.  So there's some lessons in there for how people laugh and cry.  That's very important to me to put that--I talked to my grandchildren about it and they get like, "Okay, grandma."  But that's what I want them to--to take away with.  I went to my granddaughter's graduation from Eighth Grade, it was so perfect to me.  It's a small little private school, Anacona Montessori School [in Chicago, Illinois], and each child, there were 19 graduates, each child chose a song to march in by and they each chose very different kinds of songs.  They had everything from Mozart's 'A Little Night Music,' to Eminem, to black rap, to Lauryn Hill, I mean they had everything.  And each little kid, they were all different colors and shapes, walked into their music.  And it was so wonderful to me.  And I said to her, "You need to remember this your whole life, that you chose your music and all those people chose their music, you know, and it was all wonderful."  And everybody marched out to Pomp and Circumstance 'cause that's the ritual music and you're in that too.  So, she's like, "Okay, okay" (laughter).  But that's where I'm coming from and at this lofty age I feel it's settling in, you know, as a--what I want to leave as my legacy, all the artists I've worked with.  If I hear any one of those young people say, "You know, you gave me a different way of thinking about my life," then I feel like I've done my work.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 67011
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Just--basically, I think, it'll help us out if you keep it--we just use this to create a caption, Ms. Hartfield, and we're interested in who's in the photo--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  --and where and when it was taken, but not too much added after.
Speaker 2: Okay, Okay.  This is me and my oldest sister, my parent's number one child, Zorita [Patterson], sitting in my dining room.  This is about 1970, when I was home with all my kids, 1970, '75' [1975].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next photo.
Speaker 2: This is me sitting on my rock.  In 1993 the city [Chicago, Illinois] had a "Women on the Rocks" project and they put these bronze plaques on rocks and had them all over the whole city and they put mine in front of the Art Institute of Chicago.  So I'm sitting there on top of my rock.
Speaker 1: Is it still there?
Speaker 2: Excuse me?
Speaker 1: Is it still there?
Speaker 2: No, no, they took the rocks down and they ground them to dust and they're putting the plaques in Navy Pier Park.  So, that's where they're going to be.  That's the plaque that you're holding in your hand.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's the plaque for the rock.  It's the only documentation that I have of that project.  You asked about vacations, so that's a vacation picture.  That is one of my favorite--all-time favorite vacation places.  We go every year to Maine, to this little Inn [Cape Arundel Inn]--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, this one, next one.
Speaker 2: This--yeah, take that down.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Take it down.  That's the little Inn [Cape Arundel Inn] we go to which is right on the sea, as you can see, and it happens to be right across from [President] George Herbert Walker Bush's house, but I love it because the weather is exquisite there and my husband loves it 'cause of the lobsters.  But we go every year.  We've been going every year for thirty years.  So, it's an important vacation place.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is me with the fabled [HM] Etta Moten Barnett at her ninetieth birthday party.  She's now just had her 100th but I didn't get my picture made with her at that one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's me and my husband [Robert Hartfield] at another favorite vacation place in California.  This is when we--we almost bought a Miata.  We were up at Lake Tahoe.  And this picture, you saw these.  I wasn't sure if we would talk about vacations.
Speaker 1: Here's another famous person one.  Let's put that one up of me with Etta--with Gwendolyn Brooks.  This is about two years before Gwen died.  She did a reading at the Northern Trust [Northern Trust Bank] and she had just done her book on little children and I knew her through Walter Bradford, but that's--that's what that is.  It's me and Gwen about two years before she died.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Larry, I think that gold streak, vertically, is actually in the photo.  Is that right?
Speaker 1: It is, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, all right, very good, next.
Speaker 1: This is all of my grandchildren.  I call them the "Magnificent Seven".  There's an eighth one on the way but that's what's taken up an enormous amount of my life and I see it as my legacy, in the world.  They live all over the country but they're great kids.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next photo please.
Speaker 1: This is another one of me with all of them this Christmas [2001].  Both of these were taken at Christmastime, this year, I realized.  This is taken at my sister's house.  Somebody wanted a picture of me with all of them.  They're all dressed to kill.  Okay, you can take that down.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next please.
Speaker 1: This is a clan picture that was taken at one of my daughter's weddings two years ago and it has almost everybody in the family in it.  We're missing two of my brother's sons but it's the closest to a clan photo we have and I call that my mother's [Thelma Shepherd Rone] legacy.  So that one's a real important photo.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next photo please.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of our micro-clan, me and my husband --husband, all daughters [Claire H. Harris, Lisa H. Dave, Karen H. Benedict, and Lynn H. Thoman], all sons-in-law, all grandchildren at the hamburger place in the Dunes where we go.  We go to Michigan for vacations.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: That is in Union Pier, Michigan where our daughter--we go for vacations.  We rent a house and bring everybody in.  And that's where our daughter's wedding was actually, too.  That is four years ago--three years ago--four--four years ago, 1998.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you, Larry.
Speaker 1: This is my favorite picture of me and my husband when we were very young, at a wedding.  We didn't have a wedding.  We got married in City Hall [Chicago, Illinois] and so this is sort of my equivalent of a wedding picture.  It was taken a few years after we were married.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Take some glare off that, Larry, it's bowing.  You've got to flatten it.  It's too bent backwards--to the left.
Speaker 1: It's a copy, you know, so it's hard to get--take some of these.  Okay, the next one is the same kind of--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  {Simultaneous) (unclear).  Okay, go ahead, next, please.
Speaker 1: Next one is the same kind of photo, repro.  This was taken at my graduation from college [University of Chicago, Illinois] with my mother [Thelma Shepherd Rone] and it's an amusing picture because, in those days, 1955, girls wore hats and gloves, white gloves, to their graduations and there I am, with my hair up.  I was nineteen years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Wow, great, next please.
Speaker 1: This is a later one of me and my mother which I love.  It was taken just before she died, in her garden, in 1985.  She died in '86' [1986].  She was so skinny.  I look at it and I used to be so skinny and I got fatter and fatter and she got skinnier.  It was like she was giving me her substance.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next please.  Very nice.
Speaker 1: That one is--I brought because it's when I--it's me with Roche Schulfer, the Director of the Goodman Theatre, when I got the Sidney [R.] Yates Arts Advocacy Award for outstanding arts advocacy.  I must have been, let's see, I left the Art Institute in '99' [1999], '98' [1998], 1998.
Speaker 2: Great, next photo please.
Speaker 1: This is a picture from 1997--from 1990--move it a little.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's all we can do.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], I was hired as a consultant to do some work for the University of Sao Paulo in Brazil to teach them in a--they have a graduate program there in Arts Education, the Museum Education, and I was teaching them how to do that and I love the picture because my hotel had these wonderful chairs.  These were like 17th Century chairs.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next please.
Speaker 1: This is my last picture when I was leaving the Art Institute of Chicago.  "Chicago Magazine" did this article on me.  It's 1999.  They came in the museum and took a picture of me in front of this huge red painting, then.  I look like I'm emerging from the sun or something.  But I love the article.  It's one of the few I liked.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, next please.
Speaker 1: This one was my first big PR [public relations] break.  It was when United Airlines magazine did a story on me just when I was leaving Urban Gateways and going to the Art Institute.  So that was 1991, before they changed their--the name of their magazine to "Hemispheres" [United Hemispheres Magazine], and they used to do these big features on people from all over the country.  So I liked that, that's what that was from.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 1: You did one clan picture, you don't need to do another one, no, that's fine.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, these are the daughters.
Speaker 1: This is all my four daughters, who came in for an important birthday I had.  From left to right:  the oldest, Claire, the next one is the oldest twin, Lisa, the next one is the baby, Lynn, and the last one on the right is the second twin, Karen.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I think we should get a spelling for "Lisa?"
Speaker 1: Lisa's, L-I-S-A.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I thought you said, okay.
Speaker 1: No, Lisa.  Claire is C-L-A-I-R-E.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Lisa's, L-I-S-A.  Lynn is L-Y-N-N, no "E".
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And Karen is K-A-R-E-N.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, we'll make sure we spell it right.  Next please.
Speaker 1: You don't need any more grandkids.  This is a picture of me when my first memory, actually, I was in the Bud Billiken Parade.  I was two and a half and I won this beautiful baby contest and got in the Billiken parade and they took these pictures.  My sister calls it, "My Princess" picture.  But I always loved the picture because I remember it.  I remember the dress.  My mother made it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next photo please.
Speaker 1: And this is the final one.  This will be the final one. This is a painting made by Jonathan Green in 1995 and it's a portrait of me called, 'Solitude.'  So that's it.  That's enough to give a real picture.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You can't say anything about why you're facing backward or anything like that?
Speaker 1: [HM] Jonathan Green paints most people from the back and he said he didn't realize he was painting me until he was halfway through the painting, he realized it was me.  He called me up and said, "I'm painting you, Ronne."  He--that's his traditional style of his, to paint people from the back.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  One more.
Speaker 1: Okay, here's one more which is not a picture but I'd like to have it in here because this was an important work I did with a famous artist named Betye Saar.  We did this CD-ROM in the early days of doing CD-ROM's on people, called "Digital Griot" and I did poems and biographical material on both my mother's and father's families for this project and I love it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Is that still available anywhere?
Speaker 1: No, from the company--from Voyager Company.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they sell it.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Cool.
