Story_ID: 25625
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Bernard A. Harris, Jr., B-E-R-N-A-R-D, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And your middle name is?
Speaker 2: Anthony.
Speaker 1: Anthony, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Anthony.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 6-26-56 [1956], so June 26, 1956, in Temple, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, Temple, Texas.  I was reading that that's the home of Mean Joe Greene [NFL football player, Pittsburgh Steelers] and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Rip Torn [actor].
Speaker 2: Yep, there were a few of us from that little town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, of course, in the middle of Texas.  We call--when you're there watching television, they always advertise it as the heart of Texas 'cause it really--it's right in the middle of the state.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: So, currently, I'm CEO [chief executive officer] and managing partner for Vesalius Ventures, and it's a venture capital firm here in Houston [Texas] that focuses in internal medicine.  I also wear another hat, and that is, founder and president of The Harris Foundation, which supports programs throughout the country, focused in education health and wealth.
Speaker 1: Okay, also, I think we should point out and confirm that you are an MD [Doctor of Medicine].
Speaker 2: I am, yep, I am a medical doctor and an astronaut.
Speaker 1: Yes, right, one of the, the first African American to walk in space.
Speaker 2: Yeah, first African American to walk in space.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the--February the 6th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my offices here at Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 25626
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require or deserve a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do I have a favorite food?  Oh, wow, that's a good one.  Probably at the top of the list if I was just, you know, just one food, it's probably corn.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: All right, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good one.  Time of the year, I would probably say the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's, without a doubt, Montana, in a place called Triple Creek Ranch.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that "Dreams are the reality of the future."
Story_ID: 25627
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's Gussie Lee Burgess, so G-U-S-S-I-E, and then L-E-E and Burgess is B-U-R-G-E-S-S.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ooh, that's a good question.  I believe it is July the 27th, 1932 and she was born in Oakwood, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: So I actually did a genealogy many years ago, trying to trace back where our family--at least on my mother's side, and the family that I could get back, it's in Leon County in Texas.  The closest city, big city that would be recognizable is Palestine, Texas, but don't live there, about fifteen miles sort of west of there in a place called Oakwood, Texas.  And so it's a community of about, probably a total of, I don't know, a hundred folks or so.  They lived on a farm.  My great grandmother, who we call "Honey"--her name was Lizzie Emmanuel, was the person in that generation that I remember as a kid, you know, going to the farm.  They were farmers.  She was married to Raythe (ph.) Emmanuel, and when I did the genealogy, we traced it back to somewhere, they came off of somewhere in North Carolina and ended up in Texas.  I don't have any records outside of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but North Carolina is the tradition in the family that they--
Speaker 2: We think, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know where in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: I don't, actually, because when I, you know, did the, you know, genealogy, I can't remember what county.  Back in that day, you had to go to the county seat and sift through the records.  So, the records that I do have are, you know, in the Leon County Courthouse, and that's, you know, her kids.  I believe she had seven kids in all.  One died very early.  And then, and then, you know, the birth of those offspring.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story at all about how they got from North Carolina to Texas?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of and nothing has been passed down.  The earliest stories that I have, being told about her, is that she was a leader in the community, the matriarch in the family.  Her husband died fairly early.  He was older than she was, and so she was left to raise the six kids.  And one of the, probably the compelling stories is how, whenever there was an emergency or an illness, she would be called.  And she was somewhat of a healer, Christian lady who firmly believed that God could, you know, solve all problems.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe there's a story in your book [titled 'Dream Walker'] about her--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, yeah.
Speaker 1: --being called upon to heal people.  So did she know the herbal medicines and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, it's, you know, the stories that I heard were mostly prayer, you know, so laying on the hands.  There was one story, and I think I do talk about this in the book where there was an accident.  A person was bleeding at the scene, and she basically, when they came to get her, took her bible and went to the person, and put her hands on the person and prayed.  And the bleeding stopped.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the person survived.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she was probably, I'm thinking--she's your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, great grandmother.
Speaker 1: So she would have been born in the nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think she was--I have her birth certificate.  I believe 1863 or seven [1867] or something like that.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: So this is right after slavery or right at the end, tail end--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --of slavery.
Speaker 2: So we figured that she was probably a kid, probably on, you know, a plantation in North Carolina somewhere, you know, probably, and both of them, her husband who was older than she was--and I don't remember how much older he was than she was, was probably, you know, working on the plantation when they, you know, before they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your grandmother and your grandfather?
Speaker 2: So, you know, from her, of course, out of the six kids was my grandmother, and she was--her name was Mary, what she liked to call Mary C. Culpepper, but actually, Mary C. Emmanuel.  And she was born there in Oakwood and finished high school and had my mother.  And then shortly after high school, married a military guy, someone in the [U.S.] Army.  And he was stationed in Fort Hood [Texas].  So she actually moved to Temple [Texas].  That's how the family, part of the family, ended up in Temple, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the person she married was not your mother's father?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: So she had my mother out of wedlock and then later on got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother's father ever, was he ever a part of her life?
Speaker 2: He wasn't, not until later, not until she was older did she meet him and develop a relationship with him.  And his name is Alan Bell--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: -- and was from that area, and actually, ended up living in Houston [Texas] most of his life.  And so I think I met him when I was a teenager and spent, you know, more time, you know, as a family, as a unit, over time, as an adult with him.
Story_ID: 25628
Speaker 1: Now, what did you mother [Gussie Lee Burgess] say about growing up?  What do you know about her early life?
Speaker 2: Well, it was one of those things where my mother was raised both by my grandmother and her grandmother, so my great grandmother.  And in addition to that, she had a third mother, which is my aunt, Aunt Helen, who lived permanently with my great grandmother, Honey.
Speaker 1: So this is your great Aunt Helen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my great aunt, yeah, great Aunt Helen.  Helen Emmanuel Rutledge is her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So growing up there, you know, she had plenty of role models.  My Aunt Helen was a teacher and was probably one of the first people to get a degree in our family and probably started that, because from her, that next generation, just about everybody has a degree, you know, in the family, all the cousins and stuff like that.  She became a pillar in the community.  I think at one point in time, she was principal of the local school there, and certainly was a disciplinarian for my mother and then later on, my sister, who was also raised, in part, there too.
Speaker 1: Okay, where did your Aunt Helen go to school?
Speaker 2: She went to Prairie View A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't give you the date, but, let's see, she would be probably now in her late '90s, yeah.
Speaker 1: So she's still living?
Speaker 2: She's not living--
Speaker 1: Oh, she's not, she would be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She would be--(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, all right.
Speaker 2: If we track back that when she was--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so she would have been born around 1918 or so, or something like that,--
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably somewhere, yeah--
Speaker 1: --in there.  All right.
Speaker 2: --probably somewhere, '15, 1915.  I think it's, yeah.  So we figured my mother was born in '32 [1932], so she was probably principal in the late, you know, like in the, probably '60s [1960s] or something like that, '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Speaker 2: Just adding it up, yeah.
Speaker 1: --so your mom, like--
Speaker 2: 1950s.
Speaker 1: --she went to college to become a teacher--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, so my mother went to, you know, school there in Oakwood [Texas], and then she went to college at Prairie View, following in her [Aunt Helen's] footsteps.  A number of the other cousins also went to Prairie View.  In fact, if you look at my family, my brother went to Prairie View, my sister went to Prairie View.  I went to U of H [University of Houston, Texas], so I was probably the only one who didn't in that generation, go to that historically black institution.
Story_ID: 25629
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's pretty easy.  It's Bernard A. Harris, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, so it's spelled the same way.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know what, I don't know, let's see.  Let me see if I can figure that out.  His date of birth is June the 19th, and I believe either '31 [1931] or '32 [1932].  He and my mother [Gussie Lee Burgess] are about the same age.  And he was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family, and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: So if I, the furthest I can go back is probably to my grandmother, you know, his mother.  Her name was Marian Harris.  And she was married to, I believe my grandfather's name was, I wanna say it was Ambrose, but I don't remember because I never met him.  He died before I got a chance to meet him.  She had, one, two--four kids, I believe, my father, Ambrose--so it was two brothers and two sisters.  And, let's see, Delores, Carolyn, my father, and Ambrose were her kids--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --using that.  And they grew up in Philadelphia off of North Broad Street, you know, in the heart of Philly where most of the African Americans lived back in, back in the day and probably still do today.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a Southern origin for that family, the Harris side of the family?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I don't know.  I gave a speech in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] many years ago, and the Mayor claimed to trace back my lineage to Harrisburg (laughter), so, and he never gave me the, you know, gave me the data.  But, you know, just in his opening remarks when he was introducing me, he was saying, yeah, I've looked you up.  And your Harris's come from this area.  And it's probably true because there was a Harris plantation there, and from that, even the whites that came off of that, you know, came out of that family, are actually responsible for Harris County here in Houston, Texas.  So they migrated all the way here.  So there's probably some truth to that.  So that's Western, I believe Western Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Harrisburg is kind of in the middle, sort of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Pennsylvania, yeah.  That's interesting, Harrisburg, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, so what do you know about how your father grew up?
Speaker 2: So he grew up, you know, as a typical inner-city kid, was back in the day, from, you know, descriptions that he told me.  It was, you know, a tough, you know, neighborhood.  But he managed to make it through, I believe, high school, the first couple of years in high school and dropped out, I think around the tenth grade, tenth or eleventh grade--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --went into the service, was also in the [U.S.] Army, and it was during his stint in the Army, he ended up being stationed in Fort Hood [Texas], again, outside of Temple, Texas, and that's where he and my mother met.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25630
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they [Harris' parents, Gussie Lee Burgess and Bernard Harris, Sr.] met, that they tell?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  That's a good question.  I've never asked that question.  I'll have to go back and before we do our next interview, I'll go back and ask them that question (laughter), and maybe we can, you know, revisit that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you don't know exactly how they met, but they, he was in the Army, and--
Speaker 2: He was in the [U.S.] Army and, you know, I'm trying to wrack my brain here, I believe that they met through either my grandfather or stepfather at that time, who was married to my [maternal] grandmother.  And either those two, between my grandmother and him, kind of made the introduction.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so, okay, so how did their relationship progress?  I mean--I know you were born in '56 [1956]--you're the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was born in '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: --you're the--
Speaker 2: I'm the middle child.
Speaker 1: --middle child, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, middle child.
Speaker 1: Your sister--
Speaker 2: So just to--so, when my mother was in high school, she actually had my sister, my oldest sister, Gillette Emmanuel out of wedlock.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how she ended up staying with my grand--you know, my great grandmother and my great aunt, I talked about a minute ago.  So, it was almost, you know, she had the same upbringing early on that my mother did, you know, having grown up in that environment, very nurturing environment.  She got a chance to experience that for the first few years of her life because my mom finished high school there in Oakwood [Texas] and then went to Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas] and followed in my great aunt's footsteps and became a teacher, both of them majoring in home economics.  You know, that was the degree of the day.  You know, as an African American, you either became a minister or you became a teacher, you know.  That was, you know, that was moving up, you know, back in the day.  So then after she finished college, she stayed with my mother for a while--my grandmother for a while in Temple [Texas], and that's when she met my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in the service, I believe about three years or so while they were married.  And then he got out of the service and ended up getting a job here in Houston, Texas, right along the time that I was born, you know, somewhere, probably a year or so before I was born.  And so we lived in an area here in Houston called the West Side.  Now, they call it the Heights, and the West Side was, again, predominantly African American community, a poor community in this city.
Speaker 1: Now, is this Third Ward or Fifth Ward?
Speaker 2: No, so it's not a ward.  It's called West Side, so it's not--
Speaker 1: It's neither no--
Speaker 2: --even--
Speaker 1: --it's not even in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're familiar with the wards around here, so it--
Speaker 1: Sort of, you know, this--
Speaker 2: --yeah, it would probably be, you know, Third Ward is kind of south of town.  The Fifth Ward and Fourth Ward are kind of north of town, and the West Side is probably the wedge that's in between, so west of downtown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's called the Heights in West Side.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So the family was living there.  Now, when did your parents get married?
Speaker 2: What date did they get married?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, about what year is it?
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, shoots, I don't know, in reference to--you know, I don't know that.  I don't know the date in which they got married, but it was probably a year or so before I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what, about '54 [1954] or--(simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably, yeah, '54 [1954], '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, all right.  So, okay, so you were born in '56 [1956]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and, now, your parents didn't stay together, right?  We know this--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from reading the book.  So, they--but the split up after you were born.  You were around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, a little bit about the history, when my parents got married, of course, my sister came to live, and so we were all together.  So 1956, I was born, 1957, my brother was born.  That's the three kids.  And so we lived together on the West Side in a home on the West Side until I was six years old, so about '62 [1962] or so.  And that's when they got a divorce.
Story_ID: 25631
Speaker 1: So, when they got divorced, my mother [Gussie Lee Burgess] moved temporarily to Temple [Texas] with the kids, where my grandmother was.  And there she, you know, spent time, you know, getting herself together.  You know, divorce is kind of tough, and my dad [Bernard Harris, Sr.] stayed in Houston [Texas] for a little while, but eventually moved back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And so during that year or so, what I call the transition, when we were staying with my mother--my grandmother, my mother couldn't find a teaching job at the time.  And so she actually worked in a diner in Waco, Texas, which is about thirty miles north of Temple.  And so she would do that commute, and we were, of course, put in the local schools.  As my grandmother tells it, she was at the Post Office, and she saw a poster, looking for teachers--, advertisement looking for teachers to work on the reservation, different reservations.  It was a poster supported by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.  And so she, you know, pulled it off the wall, brought it home and showed it to my mother, and my mother applied and went for about, I think it was like a month or three-month training up in Oklahoma, and then she got a job on the Navajo Nation, the largest reservation, you know, in the country.  And so she moved for about six months to a place called Greasewood.  Again, found an apartment, you know, got--you know, in her job, and then I remember that Christmas, came back and got us.  And I think at this point, I think I must have been, I think in the second grade at this point with that year or so.  And so we all moved there.  My dad did come back and visit us--you know, occasionally, while we were there in Temple, he would come and, you know, spend a few days with us and then he ended up moving permanently back to Philly when they--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --knew, of course, that it was not--that they weren't gonna get back together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 25632
Speaker 1: Now, what did your dad [Bernard Harris, Sr.] do for a living?
Speaker 2: So he was, you know, I don't know, odds, you know, different odds and ends, janitorial jobs.  He worked, you know, in folks' homes as maintenance person.  He probably had some other, you know, labor-type jobs through the years, didn't have a formal education.  Eventually, he got into the ministry and so he got into the Pentecostal church, and this was probably, I wanna say the next time that we spent time together, I probably was eighteen, just finished high school, and came for my high school graduation.  And in that interim, you know, I'm not sure what he did.  We had, you know, very little communication, you know, from the time in which we moved to [New] Mexico until the time in which we, until he came to visit me during my graduation.  And shortly after that, he became a minister and, you know, we've, you know, developed, you know, a good relationship over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 25633
Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' personalities or dispositions or sense of humor, how they walk, talk, look--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, if you saw my dad [Bernard Harris, Sr.], immediately, you know--I remember seeing a picture of my dad when he was sixteen, dressed in, you know, what they were dressed in back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and all that sort of thing, and you would have thought it was me (laughter).  I mean I look so much like him.  I have the same, I have his mannerisms and all that sort of thing, so, yeah, definitely.  But I got my mother's [Gussie Lee Burgess], probably, you know, intellectual side and love for education.  After all, she was an educator.  I think she was responsible for, you know, planting that seed in me for achievement.
Speaker 1: Right, in the book, I mean you do look exactly like your father.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The picture of your father holding you as a baby, he looks like you.
Speaker 2: I know.  It's uncanny.  I'd have people, when I was in, as a teenager, and I'd be walking in the streets of Temple, Texas, you know, where they had lived for a while.  And people around his age would stop me and go, "you must be Bernard Harris' son." (laughter)  I'd go, "Yep I am." (laughter) And even though I had not seen him, you know, during that, that interim, you know, it's pretty obvious that I look like him.  My brother also, if he would walk into this room, you would recognize that we look alike too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 25634
Speaker 1: But you had a benefit too, from what I was reading, of the nurturing of all these strong women--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Your mother [Gussie Lee Burgess], your grandmother, your great grandmother, your great aunt [Helen Rutledge].
Speaker 2: Great aunt.
Speaker 1: Your sister [Gillette Emmanuel] even.
Speaker 2: My sister too, yeah.  We don't wanna leave her out, you know, being six years older than me, she was a role model, a second mother at times, when we weren't fighting each other (laughter), but, yeah.  And I think I mention this in the book that, if you, you know, out of the both of us, you know, if I look at who's smarter, my sister's smarter than I am.  But at six years' difference and that gap in our age, when she decided that she would become a nurse, she probably should have been a doctor, you know, with her intellect and ambition.  But she was never encouraged to go into medical school.  It was always, "Gillette, you're gonna be a nurse."  And then by the time I came along, and I was doing well in school, I remember my grandmother saying, you know, you're gonna--"Bernie, you're gonna be a doctor," you know.  And she told my brother, "Denny, you're gonna be a dentist"--I don't know where she got the dentist from.  Dennis was not having it (laughter).  He ended up going into physical education and working with geriatrics, yeah, that's funny.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your sister is--her name is Gillette.
Speaker 2: Gillette, yeah.
Speaker 1: Just like the razor, G-I-L-L-I-
Speaker 2: The razor blades.
Speaker 1: --T-T-E?
Speaker 2: Yep, G-I-L-L-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And she's how many years older than you?
Speaker 2: She's six years older than me.
Speaker 1: Six years, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then it's you, born in '56 [1956]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, then my brother.
Speaker 1: And then your brother, Dennis--
Speaker 2: Dennis, yeah, Dennis John Harris.
Speaker 1: And he was born in fifty--
Speaker 2: '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: We're fifteen months apart, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, when I read the part about your sister being smarter than you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now, that's interesting 'cause, you know, we--you know, the image, I mean, here's a picture, here's the first African American to walk in space, he's an MD [Doctor of Medicine], you know, I read, you're playing a saxophone--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --you're doing all these things.  I'm saying, your sister was smarter than you, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --it's just a--
Speaker 2: --definitely, definitely.  And to this day, you know, if I want to, you know, if I'm contemplating something, a life change or some issue, I go to her and talk to her, and she offers all the, you know, these words of wisdom, like, you know, what can I say?
Speaker 1: That's quite a tribute.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she is something else.
Story_ID: 25635
Speaker 1: Okay, so about that time--now, your mother [Gussie Lee Burgess], once she established herself [as a teacher on the Navajo Nation], she brought the children [Harris, his younger brother, Dennis and his older sister, Gillette]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, to Greasewood [Arizona], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1962?
Speaker 2: Oh, geez, yeah, something like that.  That's higher math, man (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you're in a--now, did you have a chance to go to kindergarten at all?
Speaker 2: I went to kindergarten in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, of course, did one year in the Houston (unclear) school district.
Speaker 1: Let me rewind a little bit back for a--one of the questions we always ask is, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Ooh, what am I thinking about that?
Speaker 1: First thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: You know what, probably--I've never been asked that question before.  Probably, my earliest memory is sitting on the porch at my great grandmother's house on the farm in Oakwood, Texas.  You know, it was that typical, you know, white clapboard building with the wooden porch and sitting in her lap in a rocking chair, her drinking coffee, and, yeah, that's a very fond memory.  And we would, the house was probably about, I don't know, fifty feet or so from the main road.  And I remember in the evening, you know, we would sit there and just rock and watch the cars go by and, of course, wave at everybody that goes, that's going by 'cause you know 'em, you know.  And, yeah, yeah, that's a very fond memory.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she would let you drink coffee too, from what I understand?
Speaker 2: She would let me sip.  Now, I don't know if, you know, the old folks used to have the coffee and the, you know, what do you call that?  The saucer, right?  And she would mix her coffee with lots of sugar and lots of cream, so it was really tasty.  And she would, you know, and they'd boil it on the stove, right, so I'd be exceedingly hot.  So you couldn't just drink it out of the cup.  So she would pour it, and let it cool, and then you would sip it, you know.  And I just remember sipping, you know, sipping her coffee and going, "This is heaven," yeah.
Story_ID: 25636
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights for me, are sitting on that porch [at his maternal great grandmother's house in Texas], you know, through the years of, you know, not only that first memory of sitting on her lap, but the kids and cousins playing in the front yard of that house.  And in front of the house was a pea patch.  You know, these are farmers and so I have this vision of that, of the house and the pea patch and of the farm.  That's probably--and then the smells, that you would find on the farm, you know, the pig sty was not too far in the back.  There were cows in the adjacent field.  The wind, depending on the time of the year would be cool on the skin, you know, if it's in the fall.  And then, of course, in the summer, it would be extremely hot where you'd have to get, you know, find some shade under the shade tree and visions of the two big shade trees that were there.  And you would sit out under the shade tree.  And then the wind would blow.  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 25637
Speaker 1: Now, you went to school--did you go to the same school your mother [Gussie Lee Burgess] taught at in--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, so--
Speaker 1: --in Greasewood, Arizona, right?
Speaker 2: Greasewood, yeah, in Greasewood, Arizona, yeah [on the Navajo Nation reservation].  There was only one school because the way that the Bureau of Indian Affairs established these schools is they put them in different regions of the reservation.  And that would serve as a magnet for the kids in the region.  And it was a boarding school.  So the kids would be brought at the beginning of the year and they would stay there for the most part, through the fall semester, to Christmas, and some of them would be picked up to go home for Christmas.  Others stayed.  And they really didn't go home until the end of the year.  So we were--and, of course, there is a compound that's right next to the school, government compound, where all the teachers and, you know, the staff that supports the school lived in.  And so there was a, you know, one big community, close-knit community, out in the middle of nowhere.  If you look at Greasewood on the map, it's probably, I don't know, 250 miles from the nearest big town, which was Gallup, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Gallup seems to have, has a reputation now as an arts place for some--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of native art and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Gallup, New Mexico.  So, okay, so kind of, was the housing similar to that, what you'd find on military reservations in the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, I mean it was typical government housing.  You know, there were houses for the people who had families, and then there were apartments for those who were single.  And they were the typical stucco--you know, if you can imagine a government house back in the '60s [1960s], stucco on the outside, and, yeah, but very nice house, you know, very nice housing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, usually, it's really roomy.  You'll have like big places--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even though, they're not fancy, but they're big.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, big places--
Speaker 1: Functional.
Speaker 2: --and so when we moved to Greasewood, we lived in an apartment.  And, you know, it was tough.  It was a one-bedroom apartment.  That's all she could afford.  And in the bedroom were two beds, one bed for her, and one bed for my brother [Dennis Harris] and I.  You know, shortly after we got there, my sister [Gilletet Emmanuel] moved back to Oakwood [Texas] and then was, you know, she was older than us.  So she's a teenager.  So what is a teenager gonna do out in the middle of a reservation?  She wanted to move back to Texas.  And so she, in high school, probably middle school, high school, finished that up in Oakwood.  So, same school, went to the same school that my great aunt was teaching at, my mother went to and then she followed, kind of in my mother's footsteps there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't see your sister unless she was visiting or the summertime?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she would come to visit, and we would always go home for Christmas and always go home in the summertime.  And that's when we would, would meet her in Oakwood.  That's where we stayed, Oakwood or Temple [Texas], where my grandmother was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so this is your first basically, school experience.  You're--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --are you the, are you and your brother the only African American kids?
Speaker 2: We were, initially, we were the only African American kids.  And I remember, you know, one of the first memories I have, the first day of class, being introduced to the kids, and most of those kids were Native American.  There were a few Anglo kids there because, you know, there were different, people from different ethnic groups that were there.  You know, their parents were teaching, Hispanic and whites that were there from different parts of the country, which is kind of interesting because you grew up with that kind of experience from folks, you know, mingling with folks from all over.  But we initially were the first African American kids there.  And as such, I remember being on the playground and having the kids kind of surround me, and, you know, I thought, oh, I'm in trouble here.  And it was just to, you know, speaking their language, just to touch my hair because they had never seen, you know, curly hair like this--when I had hair (laughter).
Speaker 1: You got more than I do, so that's--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, okay, so were most of the, well, I guess, were there other Native [American] people there other than the Navajo?
Speaker 2: There were, there were other Native Americans there that were teachers and part of the staff.  But for the most part, in Greasewood, it was mostly the Navajo kids.  Now, when we moved to--we stayed there for about, I believe three years.  And then we moved to another part of the reservation that was in New Mexico in a place called Tohatchi, which is thirty miles north of Gallup.  So that was a big move for us because now we're really close to civilization (laughter).  We could go to the movies.  When I described Greasewood being over 200 miles away--or Gallup being 200 miles away from Greasewood, that's where we would have to travel, you know, about every three or four weeks to get groceries because there was no grocery store.  So we would make that trek, and it would be an all-day trek.  We'd get up in the morning, leave Greasewood, drive into town and we would, you know, shop, go to the movies and then right before we'd head back--that was the routine.  We'd go to the grocery store and get the groceries for the next, you know, three to four weeks.  And then we would drive back.  And just imagine, at that time, my mother was still single, doing all this by herself, you know, in her, probably early thirties.  What a strong, what a strong woman to do that.  And she would do that in the summer and in the winter.  So, even though it's high desert, you end up with snow in the winter.  So, just think about that.  That was probably--she probably had some harrowing moments that she, you know, didn't talk about very much.
Story_ID: 25638
Speaker 1: This is a very unique experience.  You're there with the Navajo, and you learn some things about Navajo culture that, you know, most of us would not learn unless we were in a place like Greasewood [Arizona, on the Navajo reservation, where Harris' mother, Gussie Lee Burgess, was a teacher]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the Navajo.  So, and you're six [years old] at the time.  So I mean, I don't, to the extent you could be acculturated as an African American at age six, I mean, I don't know.  So what was that experience like?  What did you learn there, and what were the--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, getting--you had to get past that initial shock.  I guess me and my brother [Dennis Harris] being an initial shock to the system, you know, first African Americans that they had seen.  But within a short period of time, just like, you know, kids, we found that there were more--we had more things in common.  And then we began to, you know, form bonds and friendships that were very enriching.  They learned about our culture.  We learned probably more about their culture since we were totally immersed in it.  I grew up believing in werewolves.  I would go with them to their ceremonial dances, rain dances and there were medicine men, there were snake charmers, all of these things.  You know, you could imagine being, you know, in elementary school, being exposed to this.  It's like, wow.  The werewolf is kind of interesting because they, their culture really believed in it.  And, of course, I didn't wanna--, that didn't sit very well with young kids, especially at night when we would, we'd go and go to the movies.  And the movies out there was when the school principal got a movie, they would show it for the entire community, in the gym.  So that was our movies.  There was no, you know, there was no place to go to the movies there.  But after the movies, we'd have to come home.  And guess what was on the way home?  The cemetery, where supposedly the werewolf lived.  So it was interesting, just going, to kind of tell that story because I just remember, that was a bonding moment for the kids.  If you can imagine a group of kids, some white, some Hispanic, more Native Americans, and these two African American kids, getting--, you know, leaving the movie, you know, getting to the point where the cemetery is, and then all these stories would come about, and we would run to our respective homes because we didn't wanna get caught by the werewolf or the ghosts (laughter).  Anyway, it was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, that's gotta be interesting at six that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that an American child watching a movie about werewolves like Lon Chaney [American actor] or something in the werewolf, which was shown in those days on TV,--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, true.
Speaker 1: --you would--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we saw that too.  That made it even worse (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause your parents--but your parents would probably tell you that that's just a movie.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But the Navajo kids, it's part of their religious belief--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --system, is what you're saying, I think.  Is that what--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, some of it.
Speaker 1: So they actually would believe it--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --I mean a lot of them would believe actually there were such a thing.
Speaker 2: And spirits and things like that, yeah.  So that would be kind of interesting.  But, of course, you know that, this was the, probably the parents that were my mother's age at the time, you know, probably didn't believe in the (unclear), you know, this is passed down.  They're probably telling their kids the same thing that my mother was telling me, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --it's okay.  Don't believe, don't believe that.  But, you know, there is a strong mystic, mysticism in their culture about the earth and how we fit in in it, and those things I got exposed to, you know, very early in elementary school.  But then when we went to Tohatchi [New Mexico]--I wanna keep going forward, because that learning didn't stop there about the culture.  It continued when we moved to another part of the reservation.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember your friends' names in Greasewood?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember them.  There is--but not in Greasewood because I was probably too young.  You're making me use my brain here.  I should have had this interview like about twenty years earlier.  Maybe I would have remembered.  I don't remember last names.  There was a David, but he was a white kid, David Pearfor (ph.) was his name.  And then, let's see, who else was there?  I was trying to remember some of the other kids' names.  The Pearfors, I remember because David's father was a minister, was the local minister for the non-denominational church there.  I don't remember the others.
Speaker 1: Did the Navajo children have American names or did they have Navajo names?
Speaker 2: Some, so some had American names.  Usually, it was an American name tied to the Navajo last name, like Begay (ph.) or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, I sort of remember hearing that--I've never been out to New Mexico, but I remember hearing that the Navajo kind of retained a lot of their cultural practices where, you know, some Native Americans, especially the ones that were conquered in the East, you know, back in the 1800s, they don't--they have sketchy, you know, memories of what their culture is supposed to be because it was destroyed and stamped out and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, in a lot of ways, so they're not sure, some of 'em are not sure about what it is.  They've been trying to learn--did the Navajo speak their language in, most of the time?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, definitely, definitely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Very proud.  You know, I deal with, you know, a number of different nations, and the Navajo to me, and probably the Cherokee also, are really--, they really want to maintain their culture.  And so a lot of that history is passed, passed on, you know, mostly verbally.  The Navajo, being the largest Native American nation in terms of numbers and also size, pride themselves in maintaining their, you know, their culture.
Speaker 1: And what's surprising, I'll just throw this out just for the sake of anybody watching this, is that you're one of the few people I've interviewed that did not claim an American Indian ancestry.
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, really, 'cause so many--I'd say 80 percent of the people interviewed--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --claim a Native American ancestry.  And I--you know, there's been a lot of genealogists like some of them laugh about it and have little jokes about it, but there's something about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean there's some truth to it, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --everybody thinks they have a Native American ancestry.
Speaker 2: I know, and it's probably true.  I think we're all mutts in this country, right, especially those who have been here, you know, three generations.  There's such a melting pot as it was promised, that has occurred.  And, you know, as an African American, you know, if you look at our skin, we've got something in us, right, because this is not, you know, the color that we were in Africa, our ancestors were in Africa.  So there's some mixture, but, you know, I don't know whether it's Native American or not.
Story_ID: 25639
Speaker 1: So, all right, now, so you're in Greasewood [Arizona, on the Navajo reservation where Harris' mother, Gussie Lee Burgess, worked as a teacher] for three years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about three years, yeah, about three years.  Let's see, which would put me, you know, right at the edge of--
Speaker 1: Third grade?  You'd be about eight, I guess?
Speaker 2: I would, no,--
Speaker 1: Or nine?
Speaker 2: --I would have been nine.
Speaker 1: Nine.
Speaker 2: Nine or ten because we, when we moved from Greasewood to Tohatchi, I was in middle school, a couple of years in middle school.  And then I did a couple of years in high school, so about four years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you're about four years in Greasewood then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so,--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now, was your mother--
Speaker 2: --just so they get that correctly.  When my parents [Gussie Lee Burgess and Bernard Harris, Sr.] got divorced, I was around six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So by the time we went through that year of transition, I was in the second grade when I got to Greasewood, okay, which would make me seven.  So I was probably around ten when we left.  So I was seven when we got to Greasewood, and then when we left I was probably ten or eleven--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So if you started middle school, I guess you'd be about eleven, I guess?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Sixth, seventh and eighth grade or something?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, eleven, so.
Speaker 2: But remember, we didn't have middle school back in the day.  It was junior high school--junior high (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any particular teachers back in Greasewood that you remember in the--what was the official name of the school?  Is there--
Speaker 2: Greasewood.
Speaker 1: Greasewood School.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, everything was Greasewood, Greasewood Trading Posts (laughter).  That's what we had the (laughter), Greasewood School (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother teach you?
Speaker 2: No, no, she didn't.
Speaker 1: So, are there any particular teachers that stand out or, you know--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, I don't, you know, I don't remember, not in Greasewood.
Speaker 1: Or any mentors among the Navajo, any from Greasewood?
Speaker 2: Not in Greasewood--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --that I can recall.  I do, you know, while in Greasewood, I do remember being exposed to, you know, playing, you know, baseball and hanging out with, you know, kind of this multiple--multi-ethnic group, doing different things, you know, hunting and fishing and, when I say that, I mean this is kid things, kid playing, basically, in the creek or, you know, going hunting with sling shots and things like that.  Nobody had BB guns [type of air gun] at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that was certainly some formative years where, you know, I probably, you know, developed some skills, social skills in dealing with people from different, you know, different races.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's mostly outdoor activities in Greasewood, right, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --there's no, a weak TV signal or none?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there was hardly no TV signal out there.  There was--and this was before satellite television, of course.  And so you, you know, most of your entertainment was outside or some type of activity.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you, if you can remember, did you manifest any interest in science when you were in Greasewood?
Speaker 2: In Greasewood, probably not.  You know, you're in elementary school doing--I'm just trying to think of--it was probably more sports and outdoor activities than anything else.  Yeah, that's what I would say--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) you know I'm in elementary school at that point.
Story_ID: 25640
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you're about eleven, the family moves to Tohatchi [New Mexico]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tohatchi.
Speaker 1: Tohatchi, okay.
Speaker 2: Tohatchi, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's--
Speaker 2: --which again is still on the [Navajo] reservation because the reservation extends, Arizona and New Mexico, part of Colorado and Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Tohatchi is closer to Gallup [New Mexico], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, thirty miles North of Gallup.
Speaker 1: Okay, read now that your family now has reception?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, thank goodness, yeah (laughter).  So things changed then, right, 'cause you got TV reception.  It's a larger community.  In fact, the way Tohatchi is, Tohatchi was on one side of the road and on the other side of the road was this community called Chinle.  And it essentially probably quadrupled the population.  Now, the combined population's probably somewhere upwards of a thousand or so people in this area.  So we had trading posts and, you know, a couple of them.  And it actually had a service station which was interesting, and then having, there with this bigger community, we had all the schools.  We had an elementary, a junior high and a high school.  Actually, I take that back.  The junior high and high school were combined.  So the junior high and high school were combined there.  And then across the road in Chinle was an elementary school that also fed into the high school.  And all of these, of course, as you could imagine as this community is, you've got government housing for both Chinle [pronounced 'Chin-lee]--'cause these are both boarding schools.  All these are boarding schools, except for the high school was not a boarding school.  But all the other ones were.
Speaker 1: How do you spell the other place, Chin--
Speaker 2: Chinle?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I believe it's spelled C-H-I-N-L-E, and it's named for the area Chinle Mountains where these, both these communities just kind of sat under the Chinle mountains.
Story_ID: 25641
Speaker 1: Now, did you--now, was it in Tohatchi [New Mexico, on the Navajo reservation, where Harris' mother, Gussie Lee Burgess, worked as a teacher] that you first were, you know, were exposed, I guess, or became cognizant of the space program?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yep--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I was, that would make me about eleven, twelve.  Now, you know, the space program is heating, you know, it's kind of heating up.  We have put a man into orbit, and now we're into the Apollo [space] program.  And so I watched that develop, and when I was thirteen, '69 [1969] was when it really all kind of came together for me.  But, yeah, that's when I--and I also got involved in science.  You asked the question earlier.  That's, now, you're into--you know, you've gotten out of kind of out of the basic elementary, and now you're getting into biology and then in junior high and high school, chemistry.  Now, I'm being exposed to science.  I'm being exposed to, you know, chemistry, to aviation.  I belong to the Rocket Club where we built rockets, Estes rockets [model rockets].  We even built a flying saucer that left a, you know, real big impression on me because I was also, now, I've got television reception, right?  So then I'm watching 'Buck Rogers' and I'm watching 'Star Trek' and, you know, I'm watching sci-fi [science fiction] shows.  It's just feeding the imagination of this kid.
Speaker 1: Now, how--I'm tempted to ask, and when you mentioned the flying saucer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how close Tohatchi is to Roswell [New Mexico].
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know, I know.  Well, this is one of those plastic flying saucers, right?  And it was, what made it interesting is when the teacher introduced this concept of a flying saucer, of course, you know, I was all into it.  And it had a fan.  And he introduced it at the beginning of the year which is in, kind of the late summer, fall, so it was hot.  So I distinctly remember taking it outside, turning the thing on, and it didn't lift off the ground, and then the teacher explaining why it didn't lift off the ground.  First of all, it was hot, and our altitude--I can't remember were we at 5,000 feet, 4,000 feet, just under 5,000 feet.  So the altitude, there was not enough air to get lift.  So when we had our first snow, the exciting thing about it was that we all went outside, and I remember this like it was yesterday, outside of his classroom, and the snow is falling.  It's cold outside.  We turn the flying saucer on and it rises.  So now, he's got, you know, these kids just mesmerized.  Now, why did this happen?  Now, he's teaching us about, you know, aerodynamics and density of air and all that sort of thing.  And I was soaking it up, you know, as a kid.
Speaker 1: So you're about thirteen when this--
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably, probably twelve at this point--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm trying to think about it, though, probably twelve.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, now, you were aware of John Glenn's [first American to orbit the Earth, and the fifth person in space] orbiting the--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --earth when you're a kid?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you, were you aware of Ed Dwight [first African American to be trained as an astronaut; also a HistoryMaker] and Robert Lawrence [first African American astronaut] when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: No, no, not at all.  I didn't learn about those two until I actually started working at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], you know, many years later, you know, in about '87 [1987] is when I first started working at NASA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we can get to that.  That's a story--I have a story around that too, of course.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of information too, coming into the household, did your mother subscribe to 'JET' [magazine] or 'Ebony' [magazine] or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Of course, yeah.  'Ebony' and 'JET' were the main magazines and 'LIFE' [magazine] at the time.
Speaker 1: All right, so I'm just thinking the information flow of what you were getting, and, you know.
Speaker 2: So, you know, the information flow I was getting was, now, getting a lot more because we're closer to, you know, to the city.  And so I'm able to follow the space program and what's happening in the newspapers that we've got and the magazines.  But more importantly, now, we've got a television that has four channels.  Can you imagine that?  Four channels (laughter).
Speaker 1: That was good for 1967.
Speaker 2: It was (laughter).
Story_ID: 25642
Speaker 1: Okay, now, just for the record, Ed Dwight [HM] was the first black astronaut, selected, though he never went into space.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was washed out by the government in a crazy scenario that he told us about when we interviewed him--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --back in 2002.  Robert Lawrence was the, he's acknowledged as the first [African American] astronaut usually by most people, but Ed Dwight did precede him.  Robert Lawrence actually died in training.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right.  And so Robert Lawrence was the first that was officially selected by NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], but then died in training before he actually reported to become an astronaut.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he hadn't even reported yet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was in the process of going through--I can't remember, you know, the story, you know, changes, but when we come in as an astronaut, you're selected, and then you go through astronaut training.  And then you become an astronaut.  You know, you get the astronaut wings or in our case, a pin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, it was during that process that he was killed in a training accident.  And I don't know the details of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--the way this is finally cut out, you know, Ed says that he was trained--, he was in training when they washed him out, but he was, you know, touted on magazine covers all over the world as the first black astronaut and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: He's now a successful sculpture.
Speaker 2: Yep, he's a good friend, and in fact, this sculpture behind us is his.
Speaker 1: Ah, okay (laughter), good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, good, (laughter), good, good.  Yeah, it's an interesting story of Ed Dwight.
Story_ID: 25643
Speaker 1: So, in '68 [1968], Apollo 8, you know, successfully orbits the moon.  Did, and in '69 [1969] when you're thirteen, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin [the first astronauts to walk on the moon; USA] land on the moon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you check that out on television?
Speaker 2: I did.  I watched that on my little black and white television and just was enamored, right, by what I saw.  It's kind of interesting.  Everybody has their own story, and I remember seeing it, and then after, you know, listening to those, you know, wonderful words of Neil Armstrong, running outside to look at the moon, right?  It was just something, you had to go outside and look at the moon just to, you know, say there're really men up there on a different planet, you know, called the moon.  Anyway, it was very, very inspiring to me, this little kid wanting to, you know, be an astronaut and possibly follow in their footsteps.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the--I'm tempted to ask you.  What was the reaction of the Navajo to, in Tohatchi [New Mexico], to the moon landing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know that's a good question, and I think the kids that were, you know, my compatriots there, they were just as excited as I was in watching that.  And I remember, you know, looking at the news reports, folks all over the world were really excited about this.  There was, in that one moment, there were no boundaries, which was kind of interesting, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I know, even in my hometown of Dayton [Ohio], there were some, especially older people that doubted the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--
Speaker 1: --that it took--really happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, did you hear any of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just as a side story, my stepfather [Joe Roy Burgess] didn't believe.  I remember we were watching TV together, and he goes, "They're not really up there, you know.  They didn't really go.  That's probably some studio."  And he was looking at the terrain.  That looks like that place right over here, you know (laughter), because, you know, the [Navajo] reservation [where Harris' mother, Gussie Lee Burgess, worked as a teacher] is pretty--some parts of it are pretty flat and barren (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, I figured that somebody would have to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 25644
Speaker 1: Now, you were in Tohatchi [New Mexico, on the Navajo reservation where Harris' mother, Gussie Lee Burgess, was a teacher]--now, when you were there, you started playing the saxophone too, right?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah, age twelve,  I was--, I start playing music, and I remember going in and applying, you know, to, you know--, walking in, talking to the teacher and I'm trying to remember his name as we're, as I'm telling the story.  Maybe it'll come to me.  And he said, "Well, what do you wanna play?"  And I said, "I wanna play the saxophone."  Why did I wanna play the saxophone?  Because my grandmother told me that, "You should play the saxophone" (laughter).  It's amazing, I think, how parents can have such an influence on you.  I liked music somewhere in there, and she knew that I liked music, and she was a, you know, she was a dancer.  She liked music.  I remember going to her home and always playing music, so I--she probably saw in me that.  So I said, "I wanna play the saxophone."  And, well, you know, we've got all these different saxophones.  "Which one do you wanna play?"  And I said, "okay, that one," which happened to be the alto sax, you know, which is probably the easiest one to play.  So I started playing the a lto sax.  And this was for the concert, what we called the "concert band."  And I caught on so quickly that I then progressed to the tenor sax, baritone sax and mind you, this is a small school, right?  So as we would play different types of music, my music teacher realized that I had this knack for music, picking up instruments.  So I picked up the trumpet, and the trombone, and the baritone and then we needed a tuba player.  Nobody wanted, you know, it was--I remember the day he was, he said, "We need a tuba for this selection.  Anybody wanna learn to play the tuba?"  And nobody, looked around, nobody wanted to play the tuba.  And this is this big concert tuba thing.  And, so I said, "I'll do it."  I had already played the baritone and the keys were--and so I started playing the tuba.  I have this picture.  Unfortunately, I could not find this picture of me.  And this is, of course, I don't know, late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] now, probably late '60s [1960s].  Now, we're beginning, as African Americans to grow long hair, an afro.  So I have this picture of me at twelve--and by the way at twelve, I was not very tall at all.  I was probably like 5'2".  My feet, I think I wore like a size ten shoe.  So my feet grew, but I didn't grow very much.  So I'm a little short kid, sitting under this tuba with this afro, with the big Tuba (laughter) behind me.  So it's really a (unclear) photo, but I played all those instruments.  And I learned them in a year.  During the course of the, you know,--and I was in Band, you know, the entire time through high school, I learned to get proficient in most of those and eventually settled on the tenor sax, is kind of my instrument.
Story_ID: 25645
Speaker 1: Now, did teachers recognize, you know, this kind of talent, I mean, you know, not just the musical talent, but you seemed like a very exceptionally retentive young fellow, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know that--you would think that, wouldn't you?  So the musical talent came out very naturally for me, you know.  You pick up an instrument, you learn how to read music, and you play.  It was great.  I enjoyed the science portion.  I remember being in the science class and biology class, being excited about what we're doing.  Some of the others probably wasn't as excited about (laughter) math and social studies and things like that.  But I was an introvert for the most part.  I was not outgoing, you know.  I wasn't one of those kids that wanted to kind of be out front.  In fact, I remember in, I believe the sociology class, having the teacher call upon me to read my report.  And I was scared to death in going up and standing up in front of the, the kids, other kids to read my report.  I was so nervous about doing that.  And if you talk to some of my friends in high school who eventually moved back here, and you said, "Describe Bernard."  "A smart kid, but quiet." (laughter) Except for when I had my acts and playing in the band.  Then something would happen, and I would come out of my shell (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, Okay. So, were there any teachers along this period of time in junior high school that were like mentors or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: --or roll models?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, my science teacher, who I cannot remember his name, that was responsible for putting together the Rocket Club and the Science Club when I was in middle school and high school, I guess--I keep saying middle school--when I was in junior high and high school.  And then when we moved when I was fifteen, turning sixteen, from Tohatchi [New Mexico] to San Antonio [Texas] where I finished up high school at Sam Houston [High School, San Antonio, Texas].  And there was a Mr. Johnson there who was also an influence, but, of course, my--you know, going back to Tohatchi, my music teacher was really a powerful influence for me because he, some kind of way, he had the ability to tap into this talented kid and get me to do all of these, do all of these things.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's really remarkable.  I mean the music story--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is remarkable.  If you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you didn't have any math or science skills, you could easily, it seems to me, with that kind of ability to play, all those instruments at one time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was, it was--and some of it was just born out of necessity, you know, him saying, okay, we're gonna, you know, we're getting ready for this concert, so here are the pieces of music we're gonna have to play.  We need to have trombone or we need to have trumpet and all that sort of thing. And a number of us would switch around to different instruments, depending on what we, you know, what the requirement was for the song.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You should have seen me in the marching band, just a side story, so we go to the marching band.  Of course, I'm trying, I'm twelve years old, trying to march with this tuba that I can barely carry (laughter); don't have any pictures of that one, but that's pretty funny.
Speaker 1: Was that like a tuba or a sousaphone, which--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, a tuba.
Speaker 1: It's a tuba, okay.
Speaker 2: A tuba, on your shoulder, that type of thing.
Story_ID: 25646
Speaker 1: Oh, I was gonna ask you about your brother [Dennis Harris].  Now, your brother--, you and your brother are close in age.  Were you and your brother sort of best friends growing up?
Speaker 2: Fifteen months apart.  When we were kids, people thought we were twins, you know.  But I was always a little bit bigger than he was.  And he's always been thin.  When we got to, when I got to junior high and high school, I began to grow, like eighth, ninth grade, I just shot up like, you know, young boys usually do.  And he stayed short for a long time and small for a long time.  He was into sports.  So, you know, I went the music route.  I did play basketball, but I wasn't any good at it, and when I--and he played sports, mostly basketball, and he was very good.  He--, when we moved back here to Texas, I tried my hand at football.  It didn't work; tried my hand at basketball, it didn't work.  I was already in music, and I ended up sticking in music, and that was, that was my thing, you know, leading to me playing in the band.  He stuck to sports, and he did really well.  He was like the star player in our high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  This is your brother, Dennis?
Speaker 2: Dennis, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25647
Speaker 1: Well, we may as well talk about the band since we're talking about music.  You were in a band called 'Purple Haze', you know--
Speaker 2: In a band called 'Purple Haze'.  Thank God, my parents didn't know where that name came from (laughter).  They were not into Jimmy Hendrix [American musician] at all, right (laughter).  So, when I got into the band, of course, you know, to this day, I think back, and I guess I started playing when I was sixteen, when we moved back.  So sixteen and seventeen, those two years, and we would play, you know, clubs, you know, night clubs in San Antonio [Texas].  So, you know, every Friday, we would go off, and we'd play and come home about three o'clock in the morning on Saturday, and we'd go off and play our gig and come back at three or four o'clock in the morning.  And they let me do that (laughter).  It's like, are you kidding me?  And so, at any rate, I guess I was--they trusted me.  The thing that I think they hated the most was that we had to practice, and because we were so loud, you know, just thinking of teenagers having practice.  We would practice in the garage.  And I can just remember my stepfather [Joe Roy Burgess] and my mother [Gussie Lee Burgess] saying, turn it down and the neighbors coming in, to turn it down.  And we were so bad--not that we were playing bad, but so loud that we had to rotate between our houses because the neighborhood didn't (laughter) like the fact that we were playing, practicing in their neighborhood.  Anyway, good times.
Speaker 1: What was your music style?  Did you play Hendrix?
Speaker 2: Soul music--
Speaker 1: Soul, okay, Soul (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, yeah, we played Hendrix [Jimmy Hendrix].  We played 'Kool and the Gang'.  We played James Brown, was a big one for us, you know, "Pass the Peas", like they used to say. (laughter)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, you all were really on the Funk thing.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We were definitely on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We, at one point in time, I think when I was a senior, we were the Number One band in San Antonio, yeah, actually went out on the road.  I'm trying to remember, I believe it was either my senior year or my junior year where we actually went out and, you know, played a different place every night.  And that's when I found out that this was not a career for me because that road trip just, it was too much (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, didn't like the road.
Speaker 2: Yep, wasn't a "roadie."
Speaker 1: Now, this was a big band.  I saw a picture of the band in the book.  That's, you know, what did you have, about ten people in it?
Speaker 2: Ten, yeah, ten.  We got up to maybe eleven because, see, this was in the day of the big, big horn section, if you notice.  I guess in the one photo it doesn't, we didn't have our instruments with us, but we had a four or five-piece horn section.  And then you have the drummer and the two guitars and the, and what else did we have, bass player, and then a organist, and, yeah, you get up to ten fairly quickly.
Speaker 1: And that's right.  Those are the, Sly [Sly Stone, Sly and the Family Stone] had a band, like--
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: --'Kool and the Gang', and, you know, 'Blood, Sweat and Tears' had a gigantic horn section.
Speaker 2: Exactly, that was the day, you know, and, of course, we tried to get into--, the band section tried to get into some type of steps like they used to do, you know (laughter), swinging the horns back and forth.  Anyway (laughter).
Speaker 1: That sounds like a, yeah, quite a band.
Story_ID: 25648
Speaker 1: So this is, so you were saying at Sam Houston [High School, San Antonio, Texas], now, were you involved in other activities at Sam Houston?  Did you--what about science fairs?  Did you get involved in science fairs?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember being involved in the science fair when I was in high school.  And I just don't remember that.  I was involved in the Science Club and chemistry, you know, chemistry labs and things like that.  I did serve as, I believe it was vice president of the Student Council one of the years I was there.  And, but mostly, it was, you know, it was the band.  It was the school band that I participated in and then the outside band, 'Purple Haze'.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was good in school, you know, so I did well in school.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you get any special honors in school, for academics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.  And this is, you know, this is back in the day.  And this is probably one of the reasons why I promote education so much because there were talented students like myself that never got recognition.  The counselors were not really counseling like they should, you know.  I probably could have applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] or something like that, but they seemed to--I remember them kind of having their favorites and usually it had to do with their, you know, favorite person in the class, that would get kind of the special treatment.  That's what I remember.  And being an introvert, you know, not being involved and, you know, out front, I come--probably also hindered me in a sense that I didn't stand out enough for them to push me.
Speaker 1: What kind of counseling did you get?  What did they say to you?
Speaker 2: I don't remember getting any college counseling (chuckle), other than do I wanna go to college and actually, I don't know--if I'm honest, I don't know if it would have done any good.  But it wasn't offered to me, you know, those options, because when we moved back from New Mexico and Arizona, the only thing I wanted to do was stay in Texas.  I missed Texas.  And so I applied to two schools, the University of Texas [Austin, Texas] and University of Houston [Houston, Texas].  And I always liked Houston.  So I got accepted to both and decided that I would come to Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about--you had mentioned a Mr. Johnson in high school.  He was, was he a science teacher?
Speaker 2: Political science teacher, actually, he was a political science, of all points, as I recall.  And my science teacher, I can't remember his name.  I don't remember.  I don't remember his name.
Speaker 1: So Mr. Johnson taught political science?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was political science.  And I liked that.  It was kind of interesting.  And then, but, you know, back in those, teachers taught different things.  I think he did history and political science and, you know, the chemistry teacher taught math and, you know, it was, (laughter), you know, 'cause everybody kind of taught everything, depending on the classes.
Speaker 1: But the chemistry teacher was important?
Speaker 2: Chemistry teacher was important.  Why?  Because we did exciting things like blow up stuff (laughter), which always is--it's called interactive education.  That's what they call it now.  And back then, it was just like, hey, let's get our hands dirty and, you know, put chemicals together and blow up stuff or make file chemicals and stuff like that.  That was fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: Things that smelled bad--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I see--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this was, now, was Mr. Johnson somebody that interpreted the political atmosphere of the country for the students (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You know, not in--
Speaker 1: --or tried to--
Speaker 2: Maybe, you know, and I don't remember any particular lesson that he gave, but this.  I think what made him stand out is that he was one of the younger teachers, and he related to the students more than some of the other teachers.  And I think that's what drew us to him because he's very popular.  If you talk to, you know, the kids that were in my class, they would probably all say, "Who was your favorite teacher?", and they'd probably say, Mr. Johnson because he had that way in which to reach out to kids.
Story_ID: 25649
Speaker 1: Another important person from what I've read is, Dr. Frank Bryant.
Speaker 2: Dr. Frank Bryant, yeah.  Yeah, so Dr. Bryant was our family physician.  And, you know, in high school, he wasn't as big an influence as later on when I would come back during college [University of Houston, Texas] and during the summers and began to think, you know, that I wanted to become a medical doctor and pre-med and then start chatting with him about next steps.  You know, so how do I get into medical school?  How do I do that and him taking the time to introduce me to other medical students and to let me come into his office and invite me over to his home.  That was, that was very important.  But I think the other thing is that early on I saw him as a prominent African American doing great things for his community.  And so he became a role model.  I have these two types of role models.  There are role models that are hands-on, that work with you, and there are role models from afar.  So I would say in high school, he was a role model from afar because all--my only contact with him was when we'd go and see him as a physician.  But I saw what he did.  I watched what he did.  I watched how he interacted with the family.  And then he became this hands-on role model.  If I was to back up to, you know, the inspiration I got from the early space program, those were role models from afar that I saw.  So when I got into thinking that I wanted to be an astronaut, you know, Neil Armstrong and Buzz [Aldrin; American astronauts; the first to walk on the moon] were these guys that I had never met, but I watched what they did.  Joe Kerwin who was the first American physician to go into space, I watched what he did.  And it's been kind of interesting being an astronaut, being able to talk to these guys, you know, as a colleague and growing up seeing them, you know, and now being able to sit down and talk to them and going, "Wow, did you really go to the moon?"  (laughter)  And have them say, "Yes, I was there and this is what it was like." (laughter)
Story_ID: 25650
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you graduated [from San Houston High School, San Antonio, Texas], was--now, were you in the National Honor Society?  Did they have that in school?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't.  I wasn't in National Honor Society.  And I'll tell you why.  I missed the National Honor Society cut for two reasons.  One is, I was so in, let's see, wrapped up in my band that I made a D in trigonometry, which reduced my GPA from, I think it was like, 3.8 or 3.7 to 3.48 or whatever.  So that was one reason.  But if I had known earlier and been able to apply, you know, as they do, as Junior Honor Society, would have made that.  So that was the reason.  So it was right on the cusp.  It was 3.5 (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now did, now what was Sam Houston--I didn't ask you about the demographics of Sam Houston in terms of student population.  What was it like?
Speaker 2: So at that time, it was mostly white, maybe 60 percent white, 30 percent African American, and then, you know, 10 percent Hispanic.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you graduated in 1974, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --from Sam Houston.  This is the year the Vietnam War ends, I think, and--
Speaker 2: Thank God because I had registered the year before for the draft.  I was coming up for the draft.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay, you graduate from Sam Houston, and you've already been accepted at University of Houston, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what did you do for the summer?
Speaker 2: For the summer, I--let's see, that summer, what did I do that summer?  I think that was the summer that we did our road trip.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The band, so 'Purple Haze' went on the road.  We went in the studio that summer to do recording.  I don't know where that recording is today, and tried to see, we tried our hand at creative writing, creating music because at this point, we had been mostly, you know, listening to other music and just reproducing it, type thing.  And then we went on that, went on that road trip.  And then I, that convinced me that I indeed was correct to apply to college and so I had no hesitation to go to college, although while I was in college, the band continued to play here in San Antonio or there in San Antonio.  And during the summer, for a couple of summers, I would come home in the summer, and I would just join up with them, and it'd be my summer gig.
Story_ID: 25651
Speaker 1: Now, you said earlier that your father [Bernard Harris, Sr.] came from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to--, down for your graduation [from Sam Houston High School, San Antonio, Texas].  So this is a pivotal--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thing, you know, a good thing to happen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it really was.  The, you know, my brother [Dennis Harris] was, you know, young enough that, you know, he remembered my father, but he didn't have the same relationship that I had.  And so it was really important.  And I can't remember if I reached out to him or he reached out to me in high school, but I remember that was a big deal for him to come.  When I was eleven, my mother got married to my stepfather, Joe Burgess, Joe Roy Burgess.  And so you could imagine, that put a little stress on the family.  You know, here's this guy, hadn't been around for, I don't know, nine years.  And now he's coming to the graduation, and so I'm sure that my stepfather was taken back that he was there, but he knew that, you know, my father wanted to be there.  So, yeah, a little tension there.  But it was all good for me because it allowed me to kind of close the loop, you know, with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it kind of established an ongoing relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Sure did, yep, sure did.  And then I, you know, from that, was invited to come to Philly and visit my grandmother.  By the way, my great--my grandmother on, you know, his mother, would write us and kept in contact with us from time to time, and that was nice to know that we had a family there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 25652
Speaker 1: All right, University of Houston [Texas].  Now, what was the University of Houston like in 1974?
Speaker 2: 1974, University of Houston, it was wonderful.  It was a, certainly a different experience, a new experience, first time I had been away from home.  Probably the people who influenced me the most was a group of African American guys that were part of a fraternity called Kappa Alpha Psi and I gravitated to them initially because of the parties on the weekends, but then as I hung out with them, the leadership was about achievement, they were about, you know, finishing school, they were about social responsibility, and that all fit very well with who I was.  So within, you know, the spring of '75 [1975], so within six months I was on the spring of '75 [1975] line that was pledging Kappa Alpha Psi.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now what was your--now, were you majoring in pre-med [pre-medical track] at--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, so I went there, majoring in biology and pre-med, you know, as the focus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, University of Houston, wasn't there a big football player there at that time that--a guy named Andre Ware?  Was he there?
Speaker 2: Was Andre--
Speaker 1: Was Ware there?
Speaker 2: Ware was there, but I don't think he was--I think there was some overlap with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember when he was there, but certainly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was thinking like somebody of national stature was playing football there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so as a biology major, who were the--was there anyone in the biology department or, you know, or any teachers or administrators there that really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Kaminski.  She was a biology teacher, but also was the advisor for the pre-med group there and was a great influence, very hard-charging woman, no nonsense, that type thing and that to be part of the pre-med society, you had to convince her that you were really serious.  So, and I guess I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the probably the other influential person, so that's on the science side.  On the business side, I think I was in sophomore or junior year--I can't remember.  I took a Black Economics course by Professor Johnson.  I wanna say his name was Leon, but I don't remember.  He happened to own Johnson Funeral Homes, which was a prominent African American business back in the day.  His office was on OST [Old Spanish Trail; highway], and so he was, he influenced me in terms of, you know, becoming an entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 673908
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Bernard Anthony Harris, Jr. [HistoryMaker Dr. Bernard Harris, Jr.], B-E-R-N-A-R-D, H-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, 6/26/56 [June 26, 1956]; and place of birth is Temple, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title.
Speaker 2: I am CEO and president of Vesalius Ventures [Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas], which is a venture capital firm; and also president of The Harris Foundation [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: All right.  And you are also a, you have singular notoriety, I think that you can explain to us, right, now just briefly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'm also a former NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] astronaut and was the first African American to walk in space.
Speaker 1: Right, and you are also a medical doctor.
Speaker 2: And I'm also a physician.
Speaker 1: Right, all right.  Right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's--I don't know.  What is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is March the 4th, I believe.  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: March the 4th, 2014.
Speaker 2: Okay, so March the 4th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 673909
Speaker 1: We're gonna finish an interview that we started last year, it was about a year ago.  And when we left off, we had you in college.  It's, I guess around, about right--about 1977 or so.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, did we talk about--I don't think we talked about you pledging Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]?
Speaker 2: No, actually, we didn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, I arrived at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas], like every other college student, kind of having an idea what I wanted to do, but I was lucky enough to run into some young men that were doing some really kind of exciting things on campus.  And they were the brothers of Kappa Alpha Psi.  And so in the spring of 1975, I pledged.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who is Gerald McElvy [Gerald W. McElvy]?
Speaker 2: So Gerald was one of those dynamic young men of Kappa Alpha Psi that, that I met.  Gerald was about two years older than I.  We called him the, the old guy, and basically, Gerald was one of these people who knew what he wanted to do.  He, he was in business.  He knew he was gonna get an M.B.A., and he went to accomplish some wonderful things, including rising to the ranks of being president of the ExxonMobil Foundation many years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was, you know, part of Kappa Alpha Psi and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Just let me know.  I'm not sure--I know you're going to be cutting and pasting these.  So I don't know how much detail, when you asked me that question, you want it just in relations to me or you want it in relation to that person.  So let me--how do you want me to answer that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Well, in relation to you basically, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: You know, I mean some things you're a witness to that are you know, important.  Other things are important because they're specifically, you know, attuned to you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 673910
Speaker 1: Now, when you're in undergraduate school, you were majoring in biology, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I think I asked you about your mentors, but let's try to, let's--well, let's talk about--I'll just ask you again, you know.  Who were the significant mentors to you and teachers?
Speaker 2: So, you know, and I've had a lot of mentors along the way.  One of the mentors for me in high school [Sam Houston High School, San Antonio, Texas] was a guy by the name of Frank Bryant.  And Frank was a African American physician in San Antonio, Texas who took me under his wing and, and showed me what it meant to be a physician.  And that was one of the reasons when I arrived at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] that I decided that I would, you know, be in pre-med.  When I arrived in, at the University of Houston, in addition to, you know, the fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] that I was involved in, I got involved in the life sciences group there on campus.  And a woman by the name of Ms. Cominsky [ph.] was head of the pre-med society that I joined and was a mentor.  Her whole purpose, of course, was to, to guide these wayward college students into, into medical school.  And with me, she did a pretty successful job.  And in terms of other mentors, there were certainly professors in my biology class and chemistry class, and, in fact, one of 'em by the name of John Bear [John L. Bear] who later became the dean of the college that I was in [College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics] was one of, one of my mentors, providing, you know, guidance and leadership for, for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, so is there anything else about the University of Houston we need to discuss before we talk about graduation?
Speaker 2: I think--and I don't know if we wanna do it now, but maybe--well, let me do it this way, I think might be, worth--.  So, so one of the, probably one of the other mentors that influenced one of my choices later on in life was a guy by the name of Mr. Johnson.  He had Johnson Funeral Homes [sic. Johnson Funeral Home] here in, in Houston [Texas].  And he was the first African American millionaire that I ever knew.  He would teach classes--in fact, he taught a class called Black Economics [ph.], which was very impactful to me, and especially in one day where he proposed this question to the, to the kids.  And that was, was the fact that African Americans lag in, in the economy and in economic success, was it, was it a black or white issue?  And we actually got into a debate and the class was not only filled with African American kids, but also white kids.  And, of course, you could imagine how that sort of, sort of lined up with the black kids saying, you know, society is holding us back, and the white kids saying, you're not taking advantage of those, those opportunities that are there for you.  And so after that debate, he ended and summarized everything with these words, that economic development was not a black or white issue.  It was a green issue.  And I remember, you know, thinking about that green issue, and then he, of course, led us to a discussion around, you know, the quote that many people have heard, that, he who holds the golds, make the rules; and that if we ought to--we, as African Americans want to have a piece of the pie, we essentially have to go and get that piece of the pie.  And that got involved in, in business later on after, you know, becoming a physician and then becoming an astronaut and eventually, it led me back to what I'm doing now, where I'm running a venture capital firm [Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 673911
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in 1978, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: With a bachelor's degree in biology.  Did you graduate with any special honors or distinctions?
Speaker 2: I--no (laughter), in short (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, but, you know, your grades were good enough to get you in medical school, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think, you know, in, you know, for me in undergraduate school [University of Houston, Houston, Texas] and also being involved in pre-med where you're taking, you know, the, you know, top chemistry courses and biology courses as a, as a undergraduate, I wanted to get out of there with good enough grades to get into medical school.  And I think I graduated with a 3.7, 3.8 GPA [grade point average], which was enough, of course, to get me into medical school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, it--let's see.  All right, so, now, you're admitted to the university of--oh, I'm sorry, Texas Tech [Texas Tech University].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Now, where is Texas Tech?
Speaker 2: So Texas Tech is in Lubbock [Texas], and so, and, of course, attended there for, for four years.
Speaker 1: And why did you choose Texas Tech?
Speaker 2: Well, they chose me.  So when I applied to medical school, I wanted to stay in Texas, and I applied, of course, to all of the schools here--or at least a number of schools, not all of them.  And Texas Tech stood out.  They were looking for, you know, sharp students.  They had a affirmative action program that would allow me to apply, and, and they, of course, supported, supported us there in a big way.  And that was really important for me.  And then, you know, this is in the '70s [1970s] when the only way in, in many cases that we as African Americans could, could get into school, medical school, was, was through programs like that.  And I was lucky enough to be accepted and lucky enough to participate.
Speaker 1: Just for the record, I mean, in the past schools had and some stated, some unstated quotas of how many blacks they would take.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, no matter what the qualification.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: We're just taking one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You or two.
Speaker 2: Well, in, you know, that affirmative actions program was a double edged sword too because occasionally, they would, they would use that to limit the number of minorities and students that they would take.  But, you know, I'm one of these folks to admit, right off the bat, that if it wasn't for the affirmative action program, I probably wouldn't have gotten into medical school.  And it's not because of my grades, that I didn't have the grades.  Obviously, I did.  It's because the opportunities weren't there for us.
Story_ID: 673912
Speaker 1: What was medical school [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas] like for you?
Speaker 2: It was hard (laughter), of course.  I think that out of all the professions that one can choose, going to medical school is, is probably right at the top.  I remember in the first year, being dumped into gross anatomy, and this, of course, is where you learn about the human body.  You spend hours upon hours in the gross anatomy lab learning, you know, every muscle, every nerve, every bone in the body and, you know, doing that hands on.  And probably the other course that was tough was pharmacology because of all the different drugs that you had to learn, you know, before you got to your clinical years.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any--how many African American students were in class with you?
Speaker 2: So in my class, there were sixty, and I was the only African American student; and in the whole school, there were six of us.  So if you think about that, what, six out of what, 240 students.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was there any sort of society formed to--of the African American students?
Speaker 2: There was not enough of us to form (laughter) a society of African American students, I should say.
Speaker 1: Club (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: But, but we did--a club for African American students.  But we did belong to the Student National Medical Association, which is the minority group for, for African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I--let me say that again.  So we did belong to a, a organization called the Student National Medical Association, which was the association for, for minority students.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  This is a national organization that covers--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and meets annually, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So you heard of the AMA, the American Medical Association.  So the National Medical Association is the minority group.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: And the SMA [sic.], Student National Medical Association is for students.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So is there any one aspect of medical school that was the toughest?
Speaker 2: I think just the whole volume of information that one must digest in order to, to get through medical school.  I think that's the toughest; and it usually comes in the first couple of years before you get into your clinical years.  So for me, that was the hardest thing.  Once I got into the clinical, and, you know, clinical rotations, where you rotate through, you know, pediatrics and internal medicine--that was much easier because I just had a knack for listening to patients and for providing care.  And it was the reason I chose medicine, is because I, I had that skill set.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So in dealing with the first part of medical school, the intense study, did you--did the African American students form study groups or did it, did it matter, really?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well, you know, as I said before, weren't that many of us in medical school.  We did participate in the study groups, but they were usually, you know, mixed, mixed groups, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, with that said, and, of course, there were some African Americans that were, you know, in the classes ahead of me.  And, of course, we would talk about the, the difficulty of the different classes and be able to--you know, they would share information about, you know, this teacher and that teacher just like you would do, you know in, as, in any school that you were at.
Story_ID: 673913
Speaker 1: So once you--when you, okay.  So you do your clinical rotations, that's the, that's the last part of the school process?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So, you know, medical school is four years, when you do two years of the basic class, where you're in classes, you know, most of the time; and then two years of, of clinical rotations where you rotate through the different specialties.  And then after you're done with that, then, of course, you take boards in order to get your license.  Once you finish your medical school training, then you apply to a residency; and so I applied to, for residency in internal medicine, and I applied to a number of institutions across the country; I applied to Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts] and Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas] and the Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota].  I actually got chose by the Mayo Clinic.  It was my number one choice.  And so that worked out very well for me.  They, during that process had something called a match and this is where you go and you interview at different medical schools.  And they rank you, and then you rank them.  And then they basically match up the, the students with the, with the institutions.  Not very many people get their first choice, and I was--I got my first choice, and especially coming from a new school like Texas Tech [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas].  That was somewhat of a, a wonderful outcome for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And the institution, I should say, by the way, because I was the first out of my medical school to go to an institution like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1982, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yep.
Speaker 1: You're going to the Mayo Clinic.  The Mayo Clinic has a reputation at one time--it still has a high reputation of being the number one medical clinic in the count- I don't know if--Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio] now is up there too--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --but they're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, we like to say at the Mayo Clinic that we are the number one.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Actually, the Cleveland Clinic, the founders of the Cle- Cleveland Clinic actually came from the Mayo Clinic.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we're number one (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Mayo's the father to the Cleveland Clinic.  All right.  We'll accept that.
Story_ID: 673914
Speaker 1: Now, during the time you were at Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota], Guy Bluford [HistoryMaker Guion Bluford] becomes the first African American in space aboard the STS-8.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, are you paying close attention to the activities of the (unclear) U.S. space program?
Speaker 2: Oh, I certainly am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I have to back up and say that, of course, when I was in undergraduate school [University of Houston, Houston, Texas], you know, I focused on, you know, being a pre-med student, making the best grades that I, that I could.  In medical--in medical school [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas], of course, you're doing the same thing.  You just wanna get out of medical school.  And so when I arrived at Mayo, was the first opportunity, kind of take a breath before actually getting into the residency.  And so I began to think about, you know, you know, how do I, you know, navigate a path or chart a path to becoming an astronaut.  And it's kind of interesting.  The first professor--and we call 'em consultants at the Mayo--that was my first, one of my first rotation, was a guy by the name of Dr. Combs [Joseph Combs].  And it turned out that he was one of the physicians that would be out on the ships during the Apollo [Project Apollo] era, and he would be picking up the guys as they splash down in the ocean.  And so when he heard that I was interested in becoming, you know, an astronaut, he kind of took me under his wing and, and helped me kinda chart a course; got me involved in the aerospace department, Aerospace Medicine department there at the Mayo Clinic, and they connected me to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], to, you know, so that I can learn about, you know, how do I get involved with NASA.  That relationship ended up getting me hooked up with a Mayo trained physician who worked at NASA.  And so when I finished my three years in internal medicine at the Mayo Clinic, I had already--had lined up a job working at NASA Ames Research Center [Mountain View, California] when I left.  And I was part of a National Research Council fellowship that I did after, after residency.
Story_ID: 673915
Speaker 1: Ames Research Center [Mountain View, California] is where in--
Speaker 2: It's out in California, so Ames is out in California, in Moffett Field [Moffett Federal Airfield], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at the time, that was one of the leading centers around life sciences, you know, and, in ensuring human beings' survival in space.  And they had the only bed rest facility, human bed rest facility that was used for experimentation.  So in that bed rest facility, what they would do is, is take volunteers, and those volunteers would be put in bed for, on a twenty-four hour clock, so anywhere from a month to a year.  And as fellows and researchers, we would do experiments on them to look at, you know, the simulated effects of zero gravity.
Speaker 1: Okay, so one of the--now, you specialized in body and bone density--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and osteo- osteoporosis.  Now, this is something I remember as a kid that was discussed on NBC when John Glenn took his first orbit of Earth--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and when Alan Shepard came back, they would study bone density and--and how does space affect the muscular, the muscular skeletal system?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, and it's a good question.  We, we are born in a gravity environment, right.  So the size of our muscles, the density of our bones are determined by the gravitational field in which we are developed in.  So when you go into space, the body is very adaptable.  What it tries to do is adapt to that environment.  And in this case, when you're floating around in microgravity, you don't need to walk.  You're not weight bearing, and as a consequence, you lose your muscle and then lose your bone.  And we lose about 1 percent of bone per month, believe it or not.  And on a mission as short as a, a week in space, we can lose up to 20 percent of our muscle mass.  Why?  Because we're not using it.  And it's equivalent to putting your whole body in a cast, and, you know, being in that cast for, you know, a month.  That's about the equivalency of it because if you did that and you put yourself in a cast here on earth for a month, you won't get that.  But in space, things happen much faster.  And so, you know, I, when I, you know, talk to, to young people, I ask them, "How many of you--raise your hand, who have had a broken arm or broken leg?"  And they raise their hand, and I said, "You had a cast on, right?  So what did your arm look like when that cast came out?"  And everybody can picture that, right--very skinny, very weak looking, emaciated arm.  And that's what happens to the entire body when we're up in space.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause you really don't have to exert your muscles--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --your body--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: If you don't use it, you'll lose it, yeah, essentially.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so, this is still, you know, a subject that's studied after every space flight, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they study bone density and how the--atrophy of muscles and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's, and it's an issue that is one of the long poles in the tent for human survival, not only in low Earth orbit like we're doing with the International Space Station right now.  But if we decide to go to the moon or go to Mars--a Mars trip right now, it's about a year or so.  So just think about what I described to you happens to you within a, you know, short period of time, weeks at a time, what would happen if you ended up in that environment for a year and in addition to bone loss and, and muscle loss, the heart actually gets smaller.  Our, our immune system actually diminishes.  We're not able to fight off illnesses like we are here, here on earth, and a whole host of other things in which we study.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There was--that was Dr. Joseph Combs who is the, who used to be the physician for the Gemini mission [Project Gemini]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep.  (Pronunciation) Combs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Combs, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 673916
Speaker 1: So what happened after your residency at the Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I finished up internal medicine at Mayo, and then applied for a National Research Council fellowship, again, under the, the guidance of my advisors, both at Mayo, but also at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] who I had been corresponding with.  And so I started working for a doctor by the name of Sara Arnaud, and Sara at the time was the, the leading researcher around bone metabolism, specifically calcium.  And so I went and worked under her tutelage for a year on my fellowship where we, you know--so I did, did research around bone loss, around disuse osteoporosis.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is at the Ames Research Center [Mountain View, California]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --out in Moffett Field [Moffett Federal Airfield], California.  So, now, now, you met your future wife there too, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You wanna tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yep, I sure did.  So, well, before we go down that route--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm now divorced.  I don't know how much you wanna go (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, it depends on you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think for this one, why don't we not talk about that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, all right
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Maybe we could.  Let me just think, 'cause I would like to rope in my, my daughter [Brooke Harris], (unclear) a wonderful daughter.  So I'll talk a little bit about that.  And, and then however you guys wanna cut it (laughter), we'll do that.  But, yeah, I--it was, it was at Ames Research Center where I got a chance to, to meet Sandra [Sandra Fay Lewis Harris], and--my future wife.  And I got a chance to help her through college.  She was at San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California], and just finishing up her undergrad degree.  And how we met is because she worked at Ames Research Center as a administrative assistant.  And so we met, beautiful young lady; and we later got married, a couple of years later after I, after I left Ames.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, what did you learn at Ames Research Center?
Speaker 2: So at Ames, I learned how to become a researcher.  I learned how to look at things critically.  I amassed the skills that NASA needed in order to address those issues around bone loss, and probably more than bone loss, but about the human's capability or inability in the microgravity environment, in the space environment.  And probably more importantly, after finishing that, that fellowship or maybe in the middle of the fellowship, I actually applied to become an astronaut.  And during that process, got an interview, got all the way to the, the finals--this was in 1987 at this point, wasn't selected during that mission--or during that selection.  But I, I was offered a job at Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas], which is the reason I ended up here many years later (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 673917
Speaker 1: I guess before you applied, the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster occurred--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --in January of '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is, this is the flight that Ron McNair [Ronald McNair] who's the second African American in space is killed.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, so that didn't discourage you at all from--?
Speaker 2: So it actually occurred right at the transition between, you know, me--the Challenger accident happened right at the transition between me leaving the Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota] and coming to Ames [Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California].  And only a few of my friends knew that I was interested at that time in, you know becoming an astronaut.  And I remember when the Challenger accident happened, they asked me, you know, you know, "You're gonna go to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and, you know, didn't you see what just happened?"  And I said, "Yeah, but, you know, this is a dream of mine to, to, you know, to travel in space."  And so, yeah, when you see something like that, it does give you pause.  But if you are goal oriented like I am and have your mind set on the dream--nothing at that moment was gonna, you know, prevent me from at least taking a stab at it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, what are the stats in terms of safety, in terms, you know, on space flights compared to say, auto travel or something that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I wish I knew that, but I can tell you that if you look at the profile of the shuttle, meaning the flight profile where there's the ascent ride, getting into space.  There's the time in which you spend on orbit.  There's--and there's the time in which you come down.  We--so we kind of look at those as three profiles.  So ascent, on orbit; and then coming back.  And what the, what are the risks?  So each one of those have certain risks.  And the highest risk, of course, is going into space and coming from space.  And so we lose a shuttle about one in fifty.  So--and it works out that way, you know, with the, with the Challenger accident, it was about that.  With the Columbia [Space Shuttle Columbia] accident later on, it was about that.  So, yeah, about two in a hundred flights.  So that's about it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, what 2 percent of the flights had some kind of--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, disaster.
Story_ID: 673918
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were just explaining what happened during the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] disaster, you know, when we were off.  But what--can you explain that again?  There was a O ring problem (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the, yeah, so the Challenger accident was an O ring problem.  So the, the way that the shuttle is configured, you have the shuttle and you have the external tank.  That's just the orange thing that's right on--and that provides the fuel, right next to the, to the shuttle itself.
Speaker 1: That's the thing that's like piggybacking on top of the shuttle--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: It looks like (unclear).
Speaker 2: Because it's so heavy, in order to get that whole mass to move, we have the solid rocket motors on the side of that, that tank.  If you combine the weight of all of that, that's five million pounds.  And when you light the engines on the shuttle and then two on the solid rocket motors, they produce a thrust of seven and a half million pounds.  And you can see the dealt in that.  It makes you go up in a hurry.  The problem with the Challenger accident, it was extremely cold that morning.  And so the solid rocket motors were put together in pieces, in sections.  In between each section, there's an O ring that seals it or supposedly seals it, except for that day, because it was cold, the structure, the metal got cold, the O rings got cold and they shrunk.  And there was a gap between the sections.  So about two minutes or so into flight, you know, right before the solids were supposed to come off, there was a leak, the fuel, it came out like a (unclear) torch, hit the external tank, which has the fuel for the shuttle, and the whole thing exploded in an instant.
Story_ID: 673919
Speaker 1: But you, your dream is still to go up anyway, and, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I mean why did you--what were you--what was your thinking?
Speaker 2: What was my thinking at the time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of wanting to still go to space (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, it's--I've wanted to be an astronaut since I was thirteen, since the, you know the, watching the Apollo [Project Apollo] astronauts, particularly Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin.  So that was already here, and that was something I wanted to do.  And, you know, college [University of Houston, Houston, Texas] and medical school [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas] was the vehicle for getting there.  When I, you know, finally got to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at Ames Research Center [Mountain View, California], I felt like I was, you know, that I was in heaven, you know.  This is where I wanted to be.  This is what I wanted to be involved.  So, you know, seeing the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger] accident right before that, knowing that, you know, choosing to go in space is probably not the safest thing to do in one's life, I was still willing to, to take that risk because I wanted to see the Earth from space.  I wanted to have that experience that I have seen, you know, many others before me do that.  And that was probably the motivation.  And, and probably, at my heart, I'm an explorer.  I'm a risk taker, and to me that was the ultimal- ultimate risk and ultim- and ultimate, I would say, high, (laughter) if I can put it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, some would argue, Dr. Harris [HistoryMaker Dr. Bernard Harris, Jr.], you've already--you're a medical doctor.  This is one of the highest aspirations in the black community.  Certainly, a medical doctor seems the highest attainment.  You know, you've already--that's--isn't that a big enough high for you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I will say this to you, that when people ask me, you know, "Who are you?"  I said, "I'm a physician," because I really am.  I'm, I'm a physician who decided to go into space and a physician now who has decided to go into business, into venture capital [Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas].  But, and, and you're right.  That was, you know, graduating from medical school, finishing my residency at the Mayo Clinic [Rochester, Minnesota], doing my fellowship at Ames Research Center--those were all highs.  But they don't get you into space (laughter).  They're the, they're the pathway.  They, they're the pathway to get you there, you know, from an educational and experience standpoint.  But being in space, having that experience is like nothing else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is the '70s [1970s]--well, it's the '80s [1980s] by now, but we've gone through like Carl Sagan series, 'Cosmos' ['Cosmos: A Personal Voyage'] on television, you know, the, you know, 'Star Wars' and 'Star Trek' and all these different, you know, dramatizations of what space might be able to offer that sort of thing.  But, so did you just--you would have been, when you went--you would have been amongst, or you were aiming to be amongst the first, I guess, two hundred or so people to go--
Speaker 2: Oh, at that time?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You mean when I was in the Astronaut Office (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: What group was I in?  Let me think about that.  In the Astronaut Office, I think at the time, we had about 120 or so astronauts, but they were from all over the world.  I remember we had smaller classes, so probably in the neighborhood of just over a hundred or so, maybe 120 or so is when I came in.  I was the fifth African American to, to come into the corps [NASA Astronaut Corps].
Story_ID: 673920
Speaker 1: So you started working at NASA's Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas] in '88 [1988] though it says here that your initial application to be an astronaut was denied.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: They were--what kind of a letter did you get?  Did they call you or did they send you a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --form letter or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was at Ames Research Center [Mountain View, California] when I applied the first time.  And so I got a call early one morning and it was from the head of, of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at the time, Carolyn Huntoon, and she said, you know, "Bernard [HistoryMaker Dr. Bernard Harris, Jr.], I, I'm calling to, you know, report the outcome of the, the most recent selection.  And I have some good news and bad news and the, the bad news is that we didn't select you this time.  But the good news is that we wanna offer you a job to come to Johnson Space Center and work."  And so that's how I ended up at, at Johnson Space Center (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the job was right up my alley.  It was to come in and to work in bone, in the bone lab [Bone and Signaling Laboratory], under Victor Schneider [Victor S. Schneider], who became a mentor and still is a mentor to this day.  And we began to do research, and that eventually led to me being part of the crew healthcare system, which was a system that we were developing to ensure human survival in space.  You know, we were getting prepared for the International Space Station.  We were getting prepared for long duration space flight, possibly to, to Mars; and we had to make sure that we knew all of the issues around, you know, human survivability in, in space.  And so I actually rose up to become the head of the exercise countermeasure facility and lab [Exercise Countermeasures Lab] there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, from what I understand, you were developing inflight medical and exercise devices to extend the time an astronaut can spend in space without loss, significant loss of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  You know, all the loss that I talked about earlier occurs, and it really occurs because of the unloading of the body, you know, the, the muscle, the bone, the heart, all those things are due to inactivity because you don't have to do as much work in space as you do here.  And the body basically adapts to that environment, we call space adaptation syndrome.  And so the number one countermeasure was exercise, so we developed treadmills that could work in zero gravity.  We developed bicycle odometers that would work.  We created a, a device--we call it the resistive exercise device in which you could simulate weight lifting in space.  And so all of those were tested in my lab, flown on the shuttle in preparation for deployment, not only in the shuttle, but also the International Space Station.  And one of the things I'm most proud of is that that, that work actually was the defining work that allowed the equipment to be implemented and the crews to be supported in the International Space Station today.  So pretty happy about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you made a significant contribution.  So, okay so at some point you, you hold the title of project manager--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for exercise countermeasure--for the exercise countermeasure project at the Medical Science Division [Biomedical Research and Environmental Sciences Division] of the Johnson Space Center.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and, you had an outstanding performance rating and you know, you wanna talk about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not sure (laughter).  You mean in terms of, in terms of during that period of time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in '88 [1988], it says here you were given the NS--the NASA Outstanding Performance Rating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  So NASA has several awards and things like that, that they give.  And so I won two awards, one for my work at the countermeasure project, for the countermeasure project.  And the other was for the research that I did.  So, and that was before I got into the Astronaut Office.  Once I got into the Astronaut Office, I, I won two space flight awards too, on top of that.
Story_ID: 673921
Speaker 1: Well, you get married [to Sandra Fay Lewis Harris] in 1989; and then in 1990--now, correct--and fill in the gaps if there's something we're not getting here.  But you're doing the same work basically at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --working on, you know, developing these, improving the health of astronauts--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in space.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, but in 1990, you're selected as an astronaut candidate (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So, so the, the one award was for--you know, both of 'em were for overall work that I've done at NASA, and the one, of course, was for the work for the, exercise countermeasure project, and the other was for the additional efforts that I had done prior to becoming an astronaut.  In fact, one of the things that many people don't, don't know when they look at my bio is that I actually left NASA for a period of time and went to the [U.S.] Air Force.  So I, I went to Brook Air Force Base [sic. Brooks Air Force Base, Texas]--
Speaker 1: So this is in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Aerospace School of Medicine [United States Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine].  So that would be in the nineteen eighty- probably '89 [1989] timeframe, I think.  And so I wanted to become a flight surgeon.  NASA had an agreement with the [U.S.] Department of Defense that if any of their civil servants, particularly physicians, needed training to become a flight surgeon, you would be detailed to the Air Force.  So I actually left NASA, went to the Air Force and did my--became a Air Force flight surgeon; and then came back to NASA.  So, and that was, I probably came back to NASA about six months before the selection in 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now, what does it mean to be a, a candidate--I mean a astronaut in training?  What do you have to--I mean what do they--what do you do?
Speaker 2: In--you mean once you come in to the corps [NASA Astronaut Corps]?  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's your day-to--I mean do they--is there like a boot camp for that or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's like going into the [U.S.] military.  So when you are selected to, to become an astronaut candidate, you spend a year, you know during my time, it was a year.  Now, when the astronaut candidates come in they, they actually train for two years.  And during that year, you spend a lot of time in classes learning things like orbital mechanics and geology and, and astronomy and, you can imagine--engineering.  For those that don't have medical background, they learn about the human body and all the issues around life in space, that type thing.  And then we go through different survival trainings.  So we will go to the desert and do desert surviving.  We'll go to the ocean and do ocean survival.  We actually train with the Navy SEALs [U.S. Navy SEALs] to do our survival training in the ocean.  We learn how to parachute; went into Enid, Oklahoma and got my first experience in parachuting which I don't recommend.  But it was fun (laughter), and something that you have to do.  So we did one jump in the ground and one jump into the ocean when we were out in--.  So that was fun.  And then you go through a T-38 [Northrop T-38 Talon] flight and ground school.  This is where you learn how to fly jets.  Now, I was a pilot before, I was a private pilot, but I had never flown jets.  My first jet ride though was with the Air Force when I did my, my stint as a flight surgeon.  But it was only an introductory ride.  Now, as an astronaut candidate, I had to go through, you know, classes and then spend hours upon hours in a high-performance jet learning how to fly.  And so that's all the ground stuff.  And then you also go through training of the shuttle.  So I came in as a mission specialist.  We have others that come in as pilots, and we stay on the same kind of, same track.  We train together for the first half of year, and then we begin to split where we focus more on science.  They focus more on flight.  But we all learn how to fly the shuttle which was, again, fantastic.  Yeah, an experience, fantastic training program.  And I thought that medical school [Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas] was hard, but astronaut school was hard in a, in a different way.
Story_ID: 673922
Speaker 1: So all the mission specialists, if I'm right, then have a specific or specific tasks that they're gonna perform in space that have nothing to do with the navigation of the ship, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, you know, there are kind of three flavors of astronauts, if I can say that.  There's the pilot who will be responsible for the flight.  There's a mission specialist which is responsible for conducting the science on, you know, on board the missions.  And then there's a payload specialists--the first two are career astronauts.  The payload specialists are not career astronauts.  They're brought in and they trained, a very short training program, just so that they will be able to be prepared for being in, being in space.  And they come in specifically for a payload.  You know, it may be a furnace or it may be a telescope and they come in just for that mission.  And so, but all of the crew, once we're in a crew, everybody participates in doing the experiments on, on orbit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you may take the lead on one, on something that you are--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, so for every experiment, you know, I may be the lead, and then I'll have a backup.  I'll have someone that'll be trained right alongside me in case for some reason I can't do the experiment.  And they come in, and they, and they are the backup.  And so that's how it works.  So we're really a crew.  On my second flight [STS-63], not only was I the mission specialist, but I was a payload commander, which is the highest rank that a mission specialist can, can rise to.  And that is, once we get on orbit, then I'm in charge of completing the mission objectives.  And if it's a science mission, which it was, then that falls on my shoulders to make sure everybody does their job.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's the payload commander.
Speaker 2: Payload commander.
Story_ID: 673923
Speaker 1: So after a year--now, during this year, do you live away from home or are you still living at home or what's the--how does it work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was, I was--I called myself the international guy in that both my missions were international missions, which is good.  You know, I got a chance to, to train.  But I didn't spend a lot of time here in the U.S.  My first mission [STS-55] I lived in, in Cologne, Germany at the European Space Agency training facility [European Astronaut Centre].  And so I would spend, you know, several weeks there, then come home for, you know, short periods of time.  So--because we had training that we would do here in the U.S., but then the bulk of our training was done in, in Europe as part of a, a laboratory in which the Europeans were sponsoring.  On my second flight [STS-63], it was with the Russian government.  I was in the first shuttle to go to the Russian space station [Russian Space Station Mir].  So we spent a lot of time, you know, going back and forth--didn't have to live in Russia.  We weren't prepared to live in Russia.  So as a consequence, we spent a lot of time on airplanes, going back and forth.  But we did a lot of training over in Russia and here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you're at home, and then you're out of town for a period of time, then you come back.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So what portion of time were you actually out of town, do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, shoot, on my first mission, let's see, I was selected for that mission in eighty--I'm sorry, in '91 [1991].  That mission didn't fly until '93 [1993]; so almost two years of going back and forth with the majority of that time spent over in Europe.
Story_ID: 673924
Speaker 1: You became an official astronaut in 1991, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now what was your, what was your--now, you were assigned as a mission specialist for STS-55 which means the fifty-fifth mission of the space shuttle, right, basically (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean you can look at it that way.  STS stands for Space Transportation System, and what they try to do is when they're doing the manifest, every mission gets a number.  And they don't necessarily go in order.  They don't necessarily fly in that order.  But they are assigned in that order, so you could say around--I was around the fifty-fifth mission that flew at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so what was the nature of this mission?  What was the, would you say, the payload of this mission?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so we flew inside the cargo bay of the shuttle, a laboratory, and that laboratory was sponsored by the European Space Agency.  And so that's why I had to train over in Europe because all the experiments were from European universities.  There were some American universities, but actually we had experiments from all over the world, ninety--on that mission, we had about ninety-one different investigations, not individual experiments, but investigations as they call them.  And so when you do that research in space, you may be doing, you know, say if you have a furnace, you may be doing twenty different investigations with that one piece of hardware.  And the same is true for other things.  We had fish that we took up and tadpoles to look at how they would survive in space.  We grew wheat, grew mushrooms.  We had a telescope; and it's just a variety of different types of experiments to get the--you know, that, that we performed.  And that's why, of course, it takes so long to train.  For every mission that we fly, we train about two to three years before that mission because of the complexity of the, of each of the missions.
Speaker 1: Okay, so not only did you have to--do you have to deal with gravitational forces going up and coming down, I guess; and you have to deal with extreme heat and cold, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you're outside.  Remember we're--the majority of the time, especially in a science mission, you're inside the vehicle, and we maintain that around seventy, seventy-two degrees and normal atmosphere, so normal sea level pressure.  Now, if you have to go outside like on my second mission where I walked outside, that requires to put on a full pressure suit which weighs about 350 pounds, going outside.  And now you're exposed to those extremes.  At, and I think I mentioned earlier that, you know, that, you know, the, the force in getting to space is around, you know, 7 and a half million pounds.  That gives you a pretty good kick and that kick can be translated into miles per hour.  So 17,500 miles per hour is the speed in which we need to maintain in order to stay in orbit around the Earth.  And as long as you maintain that speed, then we're traveling around the Earth.  At 17,500 miles an hour, we go around the world every ninety minutes.  We get to see a sunset or sunrise every forty-five minutes.  And so you have forty-five minutes of day and forty-five minutes of night.  At nighttime, the temperature drops down to minus 165 degrees.  During the daytime, when the sun is shining on you, that temperature can get as high as 200 degrees Fahrenheit.  So, yeah, so there is hot and cold and--that the ship has to deal with and that we have to deal, particularly if we, if we walk outside.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, all right, so this is, this mission 55 is on the Space Shuttle Columbia, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so how many people went up with you, and what were you specifically gonna do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so there were seven of, of us in that flight.  I was the mission specialist, but I also was the crew medical officer.  So I was the person responsible for taking care of any, any health issues, along with the research.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, you had like, there were four Americans, two Germans with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, two German payload specialists were, were on this.
Speaker 1: And no women on this one.
Speaker 2: No women on this one.
Story_ID: 673925
Speaker 1: Now, what does it feel--I mean I know you practiced--they, how do they simulate zero gravity on earth before you go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's only--you cannot get away from gravity on earth.  But we can kinda simulate it using airplane, which is called a Zero G Plane [Zero Gravity Plane] or we call it the vomit comet.  And we call it the vomit comet because you get into this 747 [Boeing 747].  They've taken out all of the, the seats.  They've padded the, the walls, and so the plane will fly up to forty thousand feet and then dive down to, you know, thirty thousand feet then back up to forty thousand feet, producing a sin wave in the middle of the air.  We usually do it out here over the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico].  At the top of that wave, we get about thirty seconds of freefall zero gravity, so simulating like you're, like you're in zero gravity.  But, of course, that's only thirty seconds as the plane begins to nose down, and you begin to pull up.  Now, you'll get heavy, you know, kind of like being in a bank, a banking in a turn in an aircraft.  So there we pull about two to three Gs, two or three times your weight in that.  And the only way that we can get enough Zero-G time is to do about forty of these up and down.  We do ten at a time, and then we stop, plane turns around, and we go back in the other direction.  It takes about two hours to do that.  So imagine being in that aircraft or maybe something that's a very similar experience that you've had, a roller coaster, you know, where you go up and come down, being on that for two hours.  And in lies the name vomit comet because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you do any underwater training?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do, yeah.  As--when you're, when you're doing a spacewalk, doing the EVA, extra vehicular activity, the only way that we can train, simulated zero gravity, and it's not really zero gravity, but train, you know, what we would do outside the vehicle, is underwater.  So we have something here called the neutral buoyancy facility, and it's a huge pool.  It's about a hundred feet wide.  It's about 150 feet in length, and it's about sixty feet deep.  And what we do is we submerge simulated pieces of hardware like the International Station [International Space Station] or like the shuttle cargo bay.  And we get into that pressure suit and we then, of course, go underwater.  And for us to stay underwater, they have to add additional weight because the suit has air in it, of course, and if we didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you would tend to float.
Speaker 1: --float, yeah.
Speaker 2: So they put up enough weight so that we don't go all the way down to the bottom where you're somewhere in the, in the middle, neutrally buoyant is then--so that's why it's called a neutral buoyant facility.  And we practice hours upon hours underwater.  Before you can get in that suit though, you have to become a certified scuba diver.  Why?  Because you're in the water, underwater environment, and you've gotta be really comfortable with that environment, can't be claustrophobic neither, by the way because once you're in that suit, and then underwater, if you're claustrophobic you, you'll panic and go crazy.  So (laughter), so we, we make sure that we, we select people out for that before they become astronauts.
Speaker 1: So, do people--well, I suppose people get disquali- they're disqualified along the way for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not being able to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So part of our, part of the, the interview process when you're brought here is not only to make sure that, you know, you meet the minimum requirements, but you go through almost a week of medical tests and physiological tests, testing you for those things.  And so if you're--it's easy to find out if someone's claustrophobic.  You know how you do that?  You, you put them in a very tight, confined space and, you turn the lights off.  And you monitor their heart, and even though they might be able to fake it externally, they're not gonna be able to fake their physiological reaction to it.  So doctors are looking at that, you know, so not only what you say, but how your body reacts to it.
Speaker 1: So they have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we have ruled a lot of people out for--because of that.
Story_ID: 673926
Speaker 1: So, well, what was it like?  Now, this is, this is in 19--I mean sorry, t- '93 [1993], right, when you go?  Is it--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first time [STS-55].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-three [1993].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first time was '93 [1993].  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And, well, what was it like?  Well you're sitting--what's the preparation like, and I mean--not the training, but for that day, and then what do you--can you eat food on that day?  Can you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, you, you get up that morning, and you have what we call the last supper (laughter).  And this is where the crew gets together and we sit on a very long table, and kind of looks like the last supper.  And you get whatever you want to eat.  And they have cooks, of course, that come in and do that.  After that's done, you, you can say, you know, goodbye to your family members, during that time.  Sometimes the family will be there to have--when I say family, adult family because right now you're in quarantine too.  So kids under sixteen can't, you know, come around you for at least a week or so before the, the liftoff because you're in quarantine.
Speaker 1: Say somebody has a cold--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on that week.
Speaker 2: You mean one of the crew members?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So if that happens, then the flight gets delayed.  And what will happen is that people will, they will treat the person with the cold.  We will probably isolate that person 'til they get through the cold.  We'll, we'll fall out of quarantine.  When that person is deemed clean by the doctors, then the whole crew goes back into quarantine; and then we have to complete that period of time, the week before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause what we don't wanna do is to take any illnesses or things into, to space with us because if someone gets a cold, everybody gets a cold because, you know, the way that the germs are, everything kind of intermingles when, when you're in a closed, closed compartment.  So you, so you finish breakfast or dinner or whatever it is before the liftoff.  The next thing you do is you go to the suit up room.  And in the suit up room--it takes about two hours.  We have suit technicians that work with each of us.  We're all in our separate seats.  They're actually recliners.  They help us get into our launch and entry suit.  These are these orange suits that you probably have seen.  They're very difficult to get in without help here on earth because the zipper is in the back.  The only entry is in, in the back.  Kind of describe it like, you know, when, when you have babies, and they had the one piece suit, and the buttons are in the front.  Well, of course, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] has to make it more difficult.  The button is not in, button in the front, but it's a zipper in the back.  So as the suit technicians hold up the suit, you step in with your feet first into the footies and then in your arms.  And then you have to kind of squat down, put your head through the zipper in the back, and then come up through the opening of the suit, which has a diaphragm, kind of a upper diaphragm around the neck.  So once you put the suit on, then put your boots on, and give you your helmet and then you immediately plug into an air conditioning unit to keep you cool because this suit is really heavy, weighs 120 pounds.  And once you get out of the suit, or get your suit on, you head out to the launch pad.  And you've probably seen pictures of us heading to the astrovan, waving at the crowd.  That's when we're leaving the suit up room and heading out to the launch pad.  We'll take that pad--we're about ten miles from, from the pad at this point.  Once we get to the five mile mark in the, in the van, then anyone who has ridden with us, that don't wanna go into space, have to get out.  We go to that last gate, and we go up to the, to the launch site.  And it's kind of eerie, you know, when you get out there, and you look around, and realize that there's nobody around for five miles.  They've cleared out everybody.  There are suit technicians and some technicians that are on the, the gantry that help us get into the elevator, go up to the 100 foot--50 foot level and go one by one into the space shuttle.  Once we get inside, of course, suit technicians help us get in our seats and buckle us up, and then once we're all buttoned up--this is now about two hours before liftoff.  They leave, close the hatch, and we're ready to go.
Story_ID: 673927
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is a question I'm--I've--there's a photo in this brochure here called Black Wings ['Black Wings: American Dreams In Flight'] of a black man who is working with, I think, John Glenn, you know, or, I think monitoring something on John Glenn before or after the flight.  I was just concerned about, is there an African American presence, you know, amongst the, the support staff of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and were there any when you were getting ready to go into space that first time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.  There, there're a lot of African Americans and minorities who are working behind the scenes, you know.  You always hear us thank the thousands of folks who have been responsible for, you know, for our missions.  And I would say that, you know, if I was to guess as to the population of, of minorities within, within NASA, and that kind of support staff, probably be in the neighborhood of around 20, 25 percent, maybe a little bit more, more than that.  And certainly, over the last few years, it's, it's dramatically increased from when I was a kid looking at the, at the space program.  There were no minorities that I could see during that time, although I did find out that there were some working behind the scenes, of course.
Story_ID: 673928
Speaker 1: So then, continue from the sta- now, you were--you said there are some helpers when you get there--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in this isolated spot.  Now, this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yep.
Speaker 1: --is, is this a tower?  You have to sit in a tower or something or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's the launch tower--
Speaker 1: Launch tower, yeah.
Speaker 2: --large complex in which the shuttle is sitting right next to.  And when you get off the vehicle, it feels alive because there are hisses and noises as it's being prepped to go.  Again, we have to get into the elevator, go up to the top of the rocket, essentially; and suit technicians help us get into our seat.  And once we're, we're set.  We're two hours before liftoff usually, around.  When they close the hatch, the suit technicians leave and, of course, they go back to where it's safe, five miles away, and leave us there.  And during this whole time, we are prep--doing prep on the inside, checking switches.  At the same time, the launch control center is doing the same thing, checking all the systems.
Speaker 1: Explain like why should these technicians be five miles away?  I mean is there something gonna happen within this five mile radius (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  Something's gonna happen all right.  It's, if things go wrong, they wrong in a big explosive way (laughter).  And you don't wanna be near that.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: No, it's a, it's a lot of fuel.  I mean you're sitting on a controlled explosion.  And as I mentioned before, seven and a half million pounds of thrust.  That's a lot of thrust.  You know, that's a lot of power.  You know, in the early space program, there were, there were a lot of accidents where you saw explosions on, on the launch pad.  Not many people know this, but probably one of the largest explosion in a launch pad happened in, in Russia [sic. Kazakhstan] when we were racing to see who was gonna get to the, to the moon.  And the Russians were poised to beat us.  And what happened is they had a huge explosion.  And their rocket was very similar to the size of the Saturn V rocket.  So it was huge.  The difference in their launch complex and ours is that we put all of, all of our critical systems behind this, you know, five miles away, a good distance away; whereas theirs is right up next to the rocket.  So you could imagine what happened when the--they not only lost a crew, but they lost hundreds of personnel around the vehicle when it exploded.
Speaker 1: So that set them back.
Speaker 2: It set them back and they gave up, and that's why we became the first that, yeah.  And if you go into Baikonur [Kazakhstan] in that area, there's actually a plaque commemorating the lives that were lost during that, during that period of time, yeah.  So once you're safely, you know, buttoned up and ready to go, about T minus five seconds, we light the main engines of the shuttle.  And then we light the solid rocket motors at T minus zero, and you're off to the races.
Story_ID: 673929
Speaker 1: Now, do you have--does the crew have total control of the vehicle after they get in it, or?
Speaker 2: No, not at all because things happen so quickly on ascent, on the ascent ride, everything is controlled by the computers.  But in the hours and hours of training that we do, we make sure that we're able to take over in case something goes wrong.  And things happen so quickly there, you know, and what we call first stage is the ride on the solid rocket motors.  So, again, seven and a half million pounds when the engines light, you catapult off of the launch tower.  And by the time we clear the launch tower, we're already reaching a speed of 750 miles per hour.  If you're five miles away, you see the vehicle liftoff, but you don't hear anything.  About twelve, fourteen seconds, the ground begins to shake, and another two seconds, you actually hear it and feel it.  And what you're feeling is noise, the (unclear) wave from the noise but also from us going through the sound barrier close to the ground.  Within two minutes, we're at 100,000 feet, going a mere 2,500 miles an hour, and over the course of the next six and a half minutes if you do the math on that, eight minutes, eight and a half minutes to get to orbit, we go from zero to 17,500 miles an hour in that period of time, pulling upwards of three, three and a half Gs on the way.  It's a, it's a very physical ride.  Once you get on orbit and the main engines cut off, you go from being pushed back in your seat, the--you know, three times your weight, to zero gravity.  And it becomes really apparent that you're in space because everything begins to float, including you.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is, I mean can you actually see anything--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --from your, you know, position on the shuttle?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I, on both my, my missions [STS-55 and STS-63], I flew on the flight tank.  I was part of the flight crew.  So I can look out the windows in front of me and then also the overhead windows so I could see.  And so once we, you know, the main engines cut off, and we're in zero gravity, I could just unbutton and just look out the window.  Of course, we're flying upside down to the Earth, so what I'm looking at is the Earth above me, again, moving around at that ungodly speed--or us moving around the Earth at that ungodly speed.  You know that translates to about five miles per second, just for the record (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --hard to think about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Story_ID: 673930
Speaker 1: All right, so once you're in space, so you've gotta get--you know, what's the, what's the weightlessness really like, you know I mean as opposed to the simulation of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, well, very--for one thing, it lasts longer than thirty seconds (laughter), you know.  So it's there.  I remember after about four or five days of my first mission [STS-55] being exhausted because you're constantly moving.  So people think that you go into space and you're in zero gravity, and you just stay still.  But you're--you don't stay still.  Why?  Because the air conditioning moves the air, and you--and the air moves you from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So you're constantly keeping yourself steady.  So you're holding onto things.  You've got your feet in foot loops.  If you wanted to do a switch, for example, a simple toggle switch, you can't toggle that switch unless you hold onto something first.  And if you ever get a chance to take a look at the shuttle, you'll notice that all our switches will have these little rings--we call 'em finger holes, right next to the switch so we can anchor the hand and then do the switch at the, at the same time.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) try to push, the switch wouldn't push.  Your body would move, you know, would rotate, so, yeah.  So it's a different, different experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673931
Speaker 1: So the first part of your mission, I mean you're in orbit, right, and then you're--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're able to see--now what was it like to see, you know, day and night, you know, change--I mean it happens every what?  When you're in orbit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, ninety minutes.
Speaker 1: Ninety minutes.
Speaker 2: So every ninety minutes you go around the world.  And so it changes from day to night every forty-five minutes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that--well, what was that, I mean was it--
Speaker 2: So what's it like?
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So it depends on the transition.  I think my favorite transition--well, they both are, you, if you've seen, can describe your most beautiful sunset here on earth or sunrise on earth, it doesn't compare with it in space.  As the sun comes up, for example, and essentially, the sun is not coming up, of course, because we're ro- we're going around.  So as we go around where the sun now is coming up off the horizon, you can see every distinct layer of the atmosphere, you know.  Just like when the sun rises here, you may see the different colors in the sky until the sun gets fully above you.  Same thing, except for, from that vantage point, it's almost like a, a light is shining through the lens of the atmosphere.  So I remember in school learning the different layers of the atmosphere, and, you know, of course, you see it on a picture, but I got to see that with my own eyes, these different layers.  And you can just say which one's which.  You notice the difference between darkness and, and light by just the intensity of the sun.  It's brilliant.  You can't look directly at the sun.  In fact, we're trained not to do that 'cause it could make you blind, especially if you're doing a spacewalk.  And you notice the heat, you know, especially if you're outside doing a spacewalk.  The opposite occurs when you now go from day to night.  The sun goes down.  Again, you can see the different layers of the atmosphere, that type thing.  But now, what you're focused on is not the atmosphere, but the Earth because now the Earth begins to have this glow.  Even at night, there is a glow in the atmosphere that's, that's beautiful.  And, of course, on the surface of the Earth are the lights from the, the cities.  If you are, happen to be going over a thunderstorm or, or going over a hurricane or something like that, it is so intense.  It feels--it makes you--it almost makes you feel like, that you're there.  If you can--let me explain that a little bit.  So if you're looking at a hurricane, you can actually see the swirls of the clouds and see that movement as it's, as it's going over the land.  If you're going over a thunderstorm, when the lightening happens, you can see lightening go in both directions.  So the lightning strike, you always think it's coming down to the ground.  It also goes into the atmosphere.  So you'll see it at the same time because that energy is being produced in the air, and as soon as it gets that track, it goes up.  And so if you're over it, it feels like it's coming up toward, toward you.  And it lights up the vehicle.  It actually lights up the vehicle, pretty neat to see.
Story_ID: 673932
Speaker 1: How long were you up before your mission actually started?
Speaker 2: Oh, immediately.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean from, from the moment in which we, you know, are sitting on that pad, and we get to T minus zero, that's when our mission starts.  And so there are some prep things that you have to do once you get on orbit.  You're deploying the antennas, you're opening up the cargo bay door.  You're prepping the laboratory and it just continues for that--whatever period of time that your mission is until the time in which you put on your suit to come home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now were you--you were in charge of specific experiments around the musculoskeletal system?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, not only that, but, you know, we did, we did experiments in muscle, but we also did other experiments.  And as, as I explained before, we, we actually are responsible for different experiments.  So you--say in a crew of seven, we may, yeah, I may have ten experiments that I do, that I'm respon- primary responsible for.  Then I have someone that backs me up for, for that.  On my second flight [STS-63], when I'm doing, you know, you know, serving as the payload commander, not only do I have to do the experiments, but I have to make sure that the others have completed their experiments, and that we meet the mission objective.  So it's a, it's a busy time.  It's an exciting time.  We do have some time, you know, in, in the evening--if you can call it that, at the end of our day, where, you know, you can take some time.  And, and my favorite thing to do was not to watch TV or, or watch DVDs or, you know, or listen to CDs [compact disc].  And if I was listening to CDs or--and we had CDs back in my day so (laughter).  Now, of course, now they have the little iPods and stuff like that that they use.  I would be watching--I'd be listening and looking at the Earth because it's I mean, you, you can't beat the view from the shuttle as you're going around the earth.
Speaker 1: Did anything surprise you about looking at the earth?  I mean what--and when you see the lights of the cities at night, I mean do we--I often wondered if--I know it could--I've seen pictures where it looks visually spectacular, but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --do you, looking at the distribution of the human population over the earth, does it look like the Earth's in jeopardy (laughter)?  I mean I've often wondered if it looks like something is eating the Earth up or something (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, not exactly, but I can tell you this.  Over the years, we've watched things like the Sahara Desert grow.  And so you, you know that we're impacting the, the, you know, the atmosphere, you know, impacting the ecology of this, of this earth.  At night especially, you can see where the bulk of the people are, you know, from the, from the lights, from the cities and things like that.  You asked me if anything surprised me.  The lightning was a surprise.  I wasn't expecting that.  One night on my second mission, it was at, of course, night pass.  And I was looking in the distance and I saw these flashes of lights in the distance.  And I said, I wonder what that is.  And we were moving toward it, and as we moved toward it, it was getting bigger and bigger.  And I realized that it was Northern Lights.  And we actually flew through Northern Lights.  That was very surprising; and then as we went through, of course, Northern Lights is this, these energized particles in the upper atmosphere.  And you could see this curtain of fire or light extending way above us and then all the way down where it looks like, to the, to the ground.  And it was just amazing.  And, again, that light was so intense that the shuttle glowed from it as we went through it.  It was the most beautiful sight, I think, that I, that I experienced.
Story_ID: 673933
Speaker 1: Now, what were your, what were your relationships with the other astronauts, I guess, onboard?  I mean did everybody get along?  I mean you're in a real--this is a pressure, well, it's a pressure packed situation (laughter) in a capsule (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it is a pressure cooker (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --so I mean, you know, so I'm sure you're used to them already, you knew something about them already.  But, but, you know, do things ever get, get tense up there (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, one of the things that we test the most when you come in as an astronaut is the, is for minimal disorder (laughter).  And, you know, the, the psychology, individual, you know, psychiatric health of, of the people, you know.  We, we do a pretty good job of that, and then we--there are some examples that we might have failed in, but the thing I think we're most concerned about is whether crews, when they're put together, whether they can get along.  I think the process of being assigned to a crew and then the whole crew then trains together for that two to three years, there's probably very few things that you don't know about each other by the time you're done with that, that sort of training and, including the things that you like and the things that you don't--that you dislike about each other.  But we all have the same objective, and that is to have a successful mission.  So no matter what, you know, falling out that might occur, you usually get that resolved fairly quickly.  And, you know, were there falling outs?  Yeah.  I mean we're humans in, locked up in a tin can for a long period of time.  It's gonna happen, and we expect it, and we have ways in which we, you know, can resolve some of those issues.
Speaker 1: Is there typically a situation that creates the most tension, I guess, up there--or kind of a situation?
Speaker 2: Not--I, you know, not really, nothing that I can point to, you know, other than if there is some issue, some malfunction or something that we're, that we're working on, that's when it, you know, really get, get tense; or say for example, in my, my second mission [STS-63] when we were getting ready to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station [Russian Space Station Mir], the first time it'd ever been done, it gets pretty tense there.  But everybody's professional and knew their roles and it worked out really well.
Story_ID: 673934
Speaker 1: One of the, I guess the toughest things to do, probably, I would guess in space is of, are the bodily functions, eating and (unclear) everybody's gotta use the bathroom, you know.  How are those problems solved and, when you--by the time that you went to space?  I know they, they advertise space food and, you know, dehydrated stuff in the early days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I don't know if that was still being used, I mean or still utilized like that or--
Speaker 2: No, we have, we have two types of food that we use up there, food that's freeze dried, and food that's temperature stabilized; and what that simply means is that the food is cooked.  Both of 'em are prepared.  One we take all the water out, and I--so it requires you to, you know, rehydrate it.  We have special--they're all individually packaged.  We pump water into those, allow some time for the water to absorb in the food, put it in the convection oven and then just eat it out of the package.  Then there's the temperature stabilized food.  It's the food, you know, like military rations.  And so that food you simply, you know, put it in the convection oven and heat it up, if you want it heated up, and eat it right out of the pack- package.  And so that's not a, that's not a big issue.  We, in the shuttle and also in the space station [International Space Station], we have areas that, where we can prepare our food, and where people kind of gather to, to eat.  It's not like your traditional dining room table.  When we all get together for meals, you know, I might be sitting on the floor or floating next to the floor.  I may have one of my colleagues on the wall next to me, and another one on this wall and one above me and one in front of me.  And so you're kinda, you know, looking around as you're, as you're talking to each other about the day, and the day past and the day going, going forward.  So it's, it is--it's a little different.  And, of course, we don't have plates, right.  And we don't--during the Skylab era, they played around with trays to take these individual packages and put 'em in a tray because we thought that would probably be the most efficient, efficient way.  And it turns out nobody ever used them.  So we don't use them anymore.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So people basically eat out of packets--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that's--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, individual.  And every package has Velcro on it, and we used have Velcro lining wherever, you know, wherever wall we are, and you just pull it out, (unclear) heat it up then you stick them on the wall, and you just pull 'em off, eat out of the packet, stick it back on the wall, grab your, you know, eggs and eat those, grab your steak, eat that; put it back on the wall.  And that's how, you know, that's how we, how we eat.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's a--I suppose it's some kind of a filter there being ventilated, I mean sent through the--
Speaker 2: You mean in terms of air (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I mean circulation of the air.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I, and I imagine it's gotta be filtered too in some way because I, I can just imagine how particles, if somebody's messy or something happens, there are all these particles (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --suspended in air.  What are you gonna, yeah--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You have to be like constantly--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there's, you know, the whole ship is being--there's air that's being circulated around.  I mean you can't get around that.  And, yeah, there were built-in filters to cap- to capture particulate matter.  And then we also have like a scrubber to pull out the CO2 [carbon dioxide] so, because, you know, you're breathing, everybody's breathing.  So you wanna scrub that out.  We take up cryogenic hydrogen and oxygen.  The oxygen is bled into the system for pressurization.  We also use nitrogen pressurization.  The hydrogen and oxygen are used in our fuel cells to produce electricity, and the byproduct of running hydrogen and, and oxygen through our fuel cell is water.  So we make our water on orbit.  We don't carry up vats of water.
Speaker 1: And human waste, is that kept onboard or is it somehow (laughter) shot into space?
Speaker 2: Oh, you really wanna know about that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so, so, of course, we have a, we have a toilet up there, and the toilet is made such that all the solid material stays in the tank, and it's brought back.  And the water is separated.  So we have the, in the toilet is a solid, water separation.  And the water is separated and put into a waste water tank; and in the shuttle, what we would do is, is when that tank got full, we would dump it into space which sounds kinda gross, but it really isn't because space is a vacuum, and what happens is that those water molecules and urea and everything that's in that water, immediately begins to break down into their atoms.  So that when you look at them, it looks like it's snowing outside.  You don't wanna be in that snowstorm, but then within a few minutes or so, it's all dissipated and nothing is, is left.  Of course, we won't dump the solid out there because it would take a long time for that, for that to break down.
Story_ID: 673935
Speaker 1: How long was your first mission [STS-55]?
Speaker 2: So our first mission was two weeks, two weeks long.  And it was a sky lab or a space lab mission, as we call it.  And, and so basically, we stayed inside the vehicle, no space walks or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the second mission [STS-63] occurred in--what year was the second mission?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1995.
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995], okay.
Speaker 2: Yep, so, you know, a short two years after my first mission, I was, you know, in, you know, completed my, my second mission, went almost right into training after, you know, flying that first mission.  And that mission was focused on kinda three things.  The first was we, we had a space half module, which is kind of half of a sky lab module, space lab module where we have forty experiments in it that we did, different varieties.  The second objective of the mission was to go to the Russian Space Station [Russian Space Station Mir] and there to rendezvous with it.  We took some beautiful pictures as we circled around the vehicle.  There's a, there's a famous picture that I took that's on the, was on the cover of Aviation Week where we caught the--I caught the Russian doctor [Vladimir Titov] in the window, on the port window looking at us.  And it was beautiful.  In fact, I have it on my wall in my office now.  And then the, the third objective was the spacewalk.  And so we did that, we did that spacewalk, me and Michael Foale; and we had a lot of firsts on that mission.  We had Eileen Collins who was the first pilot, female pilot of a mission.  We had Michael Foale who was the first Brit [British] on that mission; and then me, being the first African American to walk in space.
Story_ID: 673936
Speaker 1: What was your spacewalk about?  You were working on something, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for the International Space Station?
Speaker 2: Yep, we spent--Mike [Michael Foale] and I spent about six hours outside.  The first was to work on, you know, preparation for the International Space Station.  And we were just beginning to build the station, being--put modules up.  This is the first time that the U.S. had ever worked with these kinda large modules, putting 'em together.  So we did something called mass handling.  And this is where we took the satellite that weighed about three thousand pounds and we had special devices on it to, to move it back and forth to, to see, how do we handle these masses.  So that was the mass handling experiment.  The other was to test the suit integrity.  Now, in the past NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] had done spacewalks many times before.  Most of the time it was in a low inclination orbit, around 26 degrees inclination, closer to the equator.  Now, we were building the International Space Station in the 52 degree inclination, so much higher.  And just like here on earth, the higher latitudes are colder.  Astronauts would come back to NASA, and they would tell NASA that, you know, it's cold.  You know, the suit is not, you know, taking care of us.  It's just too cold.   And, of course, the engineers would go, "How cold?"  You know, they wanted a number.  And so we didn't have a number until our flight.  So we made, or NASA made a special thermometer for space that measured the ambient temperature in space.  It'd never been done before.  At the same time, they put temperature gauges at various points inside our suit to measure the temperature that we were experiencing.  So we got in, and about half way through our spacewalk, they turned the vehicle into the coldest attitude, which meaning, turned us--here we are floating in the cargo bay on the end of a robotic arm.  They turned the vehicle so its pointing to deep space, and so all our heat is radiating out.  And I have to tell you that when the sun went down on our night pass, within ten minutes, the temperature went from two hundred degrees to minus 165 degrees in just that short period of time.  My feet were frozen.  My hands were frozen.  Our core body temperature, we found that, afterwards was twenty degrees.  And this is with the suit heating system as maxed out as it could be.  We, we, we almost didn't make it.
Speaker 1: So this had to be a frightening time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a little scary, yeah.  It was a little scary in a sense that nobody had been experienced to that, you know, to that extreme, you know, like, we, we were.  We did it on purpose, right, to test the suit.  And what made it a little bit more complicated and kind of humorous is that the, the person that was on mission control, our CAPCOM [Capsule Communicator], our communications person who was an astronaut, Story Musgrave, and we had a code to let him know when we were getting cold, and when we reached our limit.  Well, I don't know if he was distracted or whatever, but he missed the code, and so (laughter) he, so finally, when we kept making calls to Houston [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas] and say, you know, "We are at," you know, "we are number five--five," and you could hear 'em on the other end go, "Oh, five."  And then soon as they get the call, five, there're certain things that they were supposed to do to warm us up.  And one was to change our attitude, the shuttle.  So now, take that shuttle and turn it back toward the Earth.  A minute ago, I mentioned about the glow that you have from the Earth.  That's from the energy from the sun.  So when you're pointing toward the Earth, you're actually picking up some of that heat that comes off of the Earth.  And that was enough--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Even at night (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --to keep us warm.  Even at night.  That was enough to keep us, to, to heat us up to the point that we could survive another twenty, twenty-five minutes until the sun came back up.  And guess when the sun came back up, you know, we immediately went from freezing temperatures to now, you know, two hundred degrees Fahrenheit.  And we didn't do that anymore (laughter), didn't turn the ship, you know, we didn't turn the ship (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So did it get too hot in the, all of a sudden (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: So, it turns out that the suit works very well for hot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It can stand hot fairly easily, and it's because of the way that the suit is, is made, we're able to dissipate the heat much easier than we are to conserving the heat, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I would imagine your blood would boil if it got, you know, you would be, you know, two hundred degrees all of a sudden, you would be (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, the, the description of blood boiling really has, has nothing to do with temperature, but it has to do with atmosphere.  So if, for some reason, there is a hole in the suit, and we lose the atmosphere in the suit, then our, our blood would boil--meaning that the gas inside our, our blood wouldn't wanna get out.  So that's the--that's that phrase, you know, your blood's boiling.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, now, what did you--how long was the second mission [STS-63]?
Speaker 2: Second mission was nine days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So nine days to accomplish those three things that I talked about.  And it, it went--we were, we were very pleased with the outcome of that mission.
Story_ID: 673937
Speaker 1: What about reentry?  What's that like?  We haven't discussed that yet, what it's like to go back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was describing, you know, there are three phases that you always worry about, right, ascent is dangerous because of all of the, you know, the--that controlled explosion.  On orbit, because you're in now a pure vacuum in space, and so if you have a leak--and we did, by the way, had a leak on our first mission [STS-55], which we had to find and seal, which we did; but then the next dangerous point is coming back in.  So, in order to stay in orbit we have to maintain that velocity of 17,500 miles an hour.  To come home, we do just the opposite.  We slow down.  So we'll take the vehicle.  We'll flip it around so that the main engines on the back of the spaceship are pointed in the direction in which we're going, and we fire those engines.  That slows us down from that 17,500 miles an hour to around 12,000 miles an hour.  That's enough of a difference that now, gravity tends to wanna pull the vehicle back into the atmosphere.  As we get pulled in the atmosphere--of course, we turn the vehicle around, and we put the belly of the vehicle down so that when it hits the atmosphere, it begins to slow us down.  Now, when we hit at that speed, the air is moving across really quickly, (unclear) just sliding across.  And because of that speed in which we're hitting, the, the air essentially catches on fire and it turns into plasma.  That completely engulfs the vehicle.  So if you're looking at us from the, the earth, we look like a falling star.  That's exactly what's happening, but we have the protective tile and the flame envelopes the vehicle, and then comes back at the top of the vehicle.  It looks like a condensation trail except for the trail is on fire.  It's not your normal, you know, airplane, you know, condensation trail.  And that fire will stretch out for twenty-five miles until it dissipates, you know.  It's like a (gesture) (unclear) and then it dissipates.  As we come in, we slow down.  As we get through the atmosphere, we do these big long S turns, and again, to cut down through the atmosphere, get us closer to the ground.  And then when we get over the, the landing spot, then we'll do a little, what's called a HAC, heading alignment curve, and the curve down and then land.  In terms of what we feel on the inside, we're cool, even though the ship's on fire on the outside.  And the only thing that we are experiencing now, is we're getting heavier and heavier as we get closer and closer to the Earth.  We get heavier, heavier.  And I remember when we were about one-tenth gravity on the gravity meter.  It felt normal to me, you know, nah, it's not so bad (laughter).  As we got closer, we got heavier and heavier, and I almost didn't--on my first flight, I almost didn't make it back to my seat in time because I was so heavy, I couldn't lift my body.  And so I finally got into my seat.  Plus, you know, I've got my suit on now, my entry, launch and entry suit back on.  So I got into my, my suit, buttoned up and, and was able to, you know, ride it down.  Landing is easier than, you know, an aircraft landing here on, on Earth.  And, again, the hardest thing is that first step, when you try to get up.  It takes you a few times to get up.  And then you feel--I felt like I was a baby again, you know, trying to get used to being in gravity, and kind of shuffling around, but, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's kind of like coming out of a swimming pool or something, maybe and--maybe even worse.
Speaker 2: It's--no, no, no.  I, you know what, I--the--I don't think the swimming pool is a good analogy.  The, you know, kind of wobble that you had maybe like you're, you know you're on a boat, a small boat, and the boat's saucing and you're fishing and you're doing that all day.  And then when you get off the boat, it feels like you're still moving, when you first step out.  That's probably the experience, you know, that's a neurovestibular experience.  The heaviness, I don't know if you can simulate other, other than, you know, maybe, you know, being real tired and getting up, you know, for the first time.  You're a little unsteady.  You may feel a little heavy until your body get used to--
Story_ID: 673938
Speaker 1: What were some of your findings in your experiments, I mean the significant ones that--anything really stand out or do you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, for, for me, being the crew medical officer, and then, you know, payload commander, we--my focus was on, kind of the human experiments and things like that.  And that was, that was eye opening, you know, the loss of bone, loss of muscle.  One of the things that, that I found out on my first mission [STS-55], that I, that--that I actually wrote about but didn't get proven until just recently, on my first mission, I did the first physical examination in space.  So another first.  And where, I did a hands-on physical, and one of the things I did is I, I looked into the eye and looked at the optic nerve.  And what I saw in the optic nerve was what we call a flattening of the disc when you look in there.  And not being a physician, what we're looking for is not only for any bleed in the back of your retina, but we're looking to see if there's any increase in pressure in the brain.  And so what I saw was a flattening of the disc.  So normally, the optic disc is like this (gesture), and this is where the nerve bundle comes from the brain and then spreads out to become the retina, and we can see.  In space, there's an increase in inner-cranial pressure, causes the pressure on the nerve.  It pushes the nerve out into the eye, and it flattens the disc.  And when it flattens the disc, it's an indication of increase in the cranial pressure, which I documented.  We just proved in the International Space Station that that happens to about 30 to 40 percent of the astronauts on orbit.  And we're now measuring that, but I could actually see it.  So that's a, that's a finding that was--it was new at the time.  And now, we're trying to figure out, how do we prevent that from happening and why is that important?  Because that 30, 40 percent of folks, with that flattening also are becoming bli- developing blind spots, sco- scotomas.  You know, when you go to the doctor and the doctor asks you to (gesture), you know, how many fingers am I holding up, he's checking your visual fields.  And so they're losing parts of their visual field.  It's a big issue at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] right now that we're trying to solve.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) those are--so you're actually discovering what the physical risks are long term (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --you know, for, you know, going into space.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so we, so part of the experiments that we're doing, that I did and what the astronauts are doing now is to, to look at how physiology changes in space and if those changes cause issues like a scotoma, for example, or headaches or backaches or, you know, muscle atrophy or bone loss--see, you have to know that first; and then the next step is to develop countermeasures, develop some remedies for, for that.  So now, we're at the stage where we're trying to, within terms of that, what I just described, trying to quantify that and then figure out what the ideology of that is, the cause of that is, and then develop--we'll develop countermeasures for, for that.  I have no idea what countermeasures we're gonna use for that to be honest with you, except for artificial gravity, you know, coming up with artificial gravity.
Speaker 1: So is that something on the horizon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not, not in our near-term horizon, but in, I think long term, if we're going to, you know, travel in space and spend, you know, long periods of time in space, we're gonna have to develop some system of developing artificial gravity.  And I'll give you an example of how difficult that is.  If we were to spend--and everybody knows you can use centrifugal force to simulate being in, in gravity.  If you go to the fair, right, they have this big spinning drum.  You get inside.  They spin it, and you stick to the wall.  So that's using--so you can do the same thing in, in space except for to get the equivalent, one gravity experience, that effect on the body's similar to here on earth.  The diameter of that spaceship would have to be one kilometer, yeah, so a half a mile.  So that's, that's a lot.  So we don't have the technology yet to do, to do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, so, so long space flights, you know, would necessitate some sort of simulated gravity.
Speaker 2: Yep, exactly.
Speaker 1: If humans are gonna survive them--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because they wouldn't be able to survive otherwise, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, exactly, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we, you know, I had no doubt that we will accomplish that, you know.  We, we have a brain that God gave us, and, you know, we'll figure that out, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It'll be my kids, though (laughter).  It probably won't be me (laughter).
Story_ID: 673939
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about mustering out of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so after my, my second flight [STS-63], I got the, the bug to leave.  I had accomplished all the things that I wanted to do.  Had flown in space twice.  I had three launches--I always count that as a mission because when you go through--my first mission [STS-55], which I didn't really talk about, had trouble getting into space, and one of those we had a, a malfunction on, on lift-off where we lost an engine.  And so we went the whole experience of loading into the vehicle, getting down to T-minus five seconds.  The engines light at T minus three seconds.  The engines fail, and we're stuck on the pad with a fire down below.  And so that whole emotional ride that we took--of course, they put the fire out, got us out, then we, we flew again, you know, thirty days later.  I count that as a mission (laughter).  It qualifies (unclear) a mission, but anyway, as aside.  So after I had, you know, been in space twice, served as payload commander, done a spacewalk, done this, the, you know, space lab mission, gone to the international--you know, the Russian space station [Russian Space Station Mir], I felt that I had accomplish all the things that I wanted to do at NASA.  So I decided to go after another dream, and that dream was one that I shared a, you know, a while back.  It came from sitting in Mr. Johnson's Black Economics [ph.] class back at the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] where he said that he who holds the gold makes the rule, and how wealth was important for our community, for the African American community.  And so I decided to go and explore that.  I left NASA and worked for a company called Spacehab [Spacehab, Inc.; Astrotech Corporation, Austin, Texas].  It was a venture backed aerospace company that was trying to commercialize space.  And so I joined them for about three and a half years, realized that I had no expertise in business; and so I went back and got an M.B.A. at the University of Houston [University of Houston-Clear Lake, Houston, Texas].  And then realized that the company's future was limited.  Now, that I had knowledge, business knowledge, and--but was exposed to venture capital.  And because of that I started looking at, you know, you know, entre- true entrepreneurship, and getting involved with helping to bring technologies to the market.
Story_ID: 673940
Speaker 1: So, and you received your M.B.A. from University of Houston at Clear Lake [University of Houston-Clear Lake, Houston, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, now, this is in, yeah, 1996 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah I believe--
Speaker 1: --six [1996]?  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I believe--let me think.  When was that?  Was it nine- I think it was '99 [1999], 1999 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999], okay.  Now, did you go back to school to earn a master's degree in biomedical science too?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now that's, is that before?
Speaker 2: That was before.  So when I was at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and it was right after I had--right before I had joined the Astronaut Office.  So I was at NASA Johnson Space Center [Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas].  I was doing, doing research in basically, you know, what I had mentioned before about, about the physical examination in space.  And based on that research, I have a master's in medical science (unclear) at The University of Texas Medical Branch [Galveston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, so--oh, this is somewhere in here, between '96 [1996] and '99 [1999], you served as vice president for Space Media Incorporated--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?  Now, what was Space Media?
Speaker 2: So Space Media was part of Spacehab [Spacehab, Inc.; Astrotech Corporation, Austin, Texas], the company that I joined right after.  This was during the Dot Com days, and so the senior management of the company decided that we wanted to get involved in that.  So we created a company called Space Media.  And what it was, was a dotcom that would focus on promoting space media, you know, media in space and opportunities, possibly, for space tourism, education programs and things, things like that.  So I had a short stint with, with that company prior to, to leaving.  I think I was there about a year or so.
Story_ID: 673941
Speaker 1: You get involved in developing The Harris Foundation [Houston, Texas] in '98 [1998], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what does Tthe Harris Foundation focus on?
Speaker 2: So The Harris Foundation focuses on education, health and wealth programs, and why those three?  Because I believe that in order for an individual or community to, to advance, that they need those three pillars.  We call 'em our pillars for success.  And so--and they're kind of based on, you know, what I've learned through, through my life and the experiences that I've had to, to get me where I am today.  And so we have a number of programs in the area.  Our largest programs is our Summer Science Camp [ExxonMobil Bernard Harris Summer Science Camp] that actually started before we founded the foundation in 1998.  That program is the largest summer science camp in the country.  It's done in partnership with the ExxonMobil Foundation.  And so about a thousand kids go through the program every summer.  We've been doing this, you know, since, you know, for many years now.  And then we have other programs that try to excite kids about math and science education--STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics], as they call it, call it now.  On the health side, we have a partnership with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation [Princeton, New Jersey], and support their community health leaders program [Culture of Health Leaders].  And this is where we give out awards to people that are doing novel things in health.  For example, creating an AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] clinic in a underserved community; or as the case of one of our health, community health leaders, he actually established a practice for, medical practice for the homeless.  And his office hours start at midnight, for example.  So that's a great program.  And then our, our last program, our wealth program is done in partnership with Capital One [Capital One Financial Corporation] where we are promoting financial literacy in our schools, so starting in middle school and high school, trying to make sure that, that young people and their parents know how to handle money.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so the foundation was founded in '98 [1998] and how much does the foundation give a year?
Speaker 2: So I would say about 2.5 million [dollars] is what we do in, in terms of grants around the nation.
Speaker 1: And how is it, how is the foundation financed?
Speaker 2: Through our partnerships.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there an endowment, I guess, for (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, we're working on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we will.  You know, my, my long-term plan is have this foundation live beyond me, and, of course, the only way you can do that is to, is to build an endowment, and we've already started working on that right now.
Story_ID: 673942
Speaker 1: Now you partnered with Dr. Jack Gill and Dr. Bob Ulrich [Robert D. Ulrich] to sponsor the creation of Vesalius Ventures [Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is in 2001.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so actually, we started the whole effort much earlier than that.  In 1999, after I had gotten my M.B.A. from University of Houston [University of Houston-Clear Lake, Houston, Texas], I made a transition.  I met Jack Gill at a conference and he was a true venture capitalist.  He was involved early on in Silicon Valley with a lot of companies that--other venture capital companies that started.  And so I remembered him telling me that story.  It's very similar to, you know, the story I was telling about the University of Houston [Houston, Texas] where you meet someone and they, they tell you about the fact of, you know, the challenges that they had to get to where they were.  In his case, he opened up the conversation by telling me that, you know, he was in Silicon Valley and that he was responsible for creating a hundred millionaires; and that he had added about 2 to 3 percent to the gross national product.  You know, tell me that didn't get your attention.  It did.  And so I asked him, I said, "Well, Jack, you know, I wanna be like you," (laughter), "how do I be like you?"  And so he was kind enough to let me come here.  I worked for him for a couple of years at Vanguard Ventures [Vanguard Ventures Partners, Houston, Texas], and then he kind of, you know, showed me the ropes in venture capital and then became the lead investor for the venture capital firm that I run now called Vesalius Ventures.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're--so this is your, your primary job, I guess, as a, you know, that earns income (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right, this is, this is my real job (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is your real job (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.  You know, I like to describe it, you know, I actually had two full time jobs, running the, the foundation [The Harris Foundation, Houston, Texas], (unclear) foundation and then also what I do with Vesalius.  And so that allows me, you know, on the Vesalius side to take advantage of the experience that I had at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] as a clinician to then, you know, invest in early stage deals, focused in telemedicine.
Story_ID: 673943
Speaker 1: Did you ever consider going back into medicine because, you know, you really didn't practice medicine long, I guess?  I mean, what--you were an MD, I guess on the missions (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, so, so it's funny you should ask that question 'cause a lot of people see all the things that I, that I've done and said that, "You didn't practice medicine, did you?"  And actually, I did.  So in--from the moment in which I got my license, I've always seen patients, up until about, probably six years ago.  So when I was doing my fellowship [at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California], I was, I was seeing patients in the clinic there in California.  When I moved to Houston [Texas] and was working at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], I got special permission to have outside employment, and so I got on staff at Baylor College of Medicine [Houston, Texas] and was at Baylor for twenty years, part time staff, the clinical staff where I saw patients in community health centers around the, around the city here; and also spent about five years working at The University of Texas Medical Branch in the Department of Internal Medicine, again, teaching medical students and residents.  In fact, I run into those, you know, some of my, some of my--I don't know what you call them, students, today.  So, and even when I started, when I was at Spacehab [Spacehab, Inc.; Astrotech Corporation, Austin, Texas] and even started the beginning of Vesalius [Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas], I was still seeing, seeing patients and on staff.
Story_ID: 673944
Speaker 1: In, well, in 2010--well, 2009, I'm sorry, you're elected vice president of the American Telemedicine Association.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is the--what is telemedicine and, you know, and why are you involved in it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was involved in telemedicine since being at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  In fact, NASA started telemedicine.  When we were sending human beings into space, we had to monitor them and that was, it was called remote medicine, and eventually found its way into the practice that we practice today.  The equipment that we flew onboard the, the shuttle and now the International Space Station, has to communicate its information back down to the ground.  That's telemedicine.  These days, we define it as the intersection of medical devices, telecommunications and IT [information technology].  And so our whole focus is in that sweet spot.  I was proud to be elected the first African American president of the American Telemedicine Association, and what we're about is, is trying to bring technology to how medicine is practiced and it turns out it's the most efficient way in which to practice.  It's a great leverage multiplier for physicians and, and, you know, practitioners.
Story_ID: 673945
Speaker 1: Telemedicine--now, are you involved in any of the international aspects of telemedicine?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People diagnose cases in Africa and the Caribbean and other places?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We certainly are.  The way that, that I structured Vesalius [Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas], and we actually have four groups.  We have our kind of traditional accelerator, is how I started this.  We (unclear) invested early stage telemedicine companies, so things like electronic medical records.  One of our first investments was a company called RMD, Reach My Doctor, and what it does, it connects the doctors, networks of doctors to their patients and to their health records, for example.  Another investment was a company called Health Hero [Health Hero, Inc.], where it is a, an appliance that sits in the home for home health.  And it basically allows us to use technology for, to take care of people with chronic disease at home, as an example.  So that's Vesalius Accelerator.  We have another group called Vesalius Capital Group which invests in just what we call opportunistic investments in health and some in clean energy, that type thing; group for that.  We have another group that's on the part of the umbrella, called Vesalius Health Advisors, which is a group of telemedicine experts from all over the country who have come together to provide advice to large payers, large hospital systems, sometimes the individual companies and moving their companies forward.  And then lastly, we have Vesalius International.  And this is where we're taking our experience, expertise and we're, we're looking at the international market.  In fact, we'll be opening up an office in, in China this year.  At the same time, we'll be opening an office in the Middle East in Dubai [United Arab Emirates] to look at opportunities, not only in the Middle East, in Africa.  And so we're--I'm busy, just a little busy (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'd say so.
Story_ID: 673946
Speaker 1: Now, you wrote 'Dream Walker' ['Dream Walker: A Journey of Achievement and Inspiration,' Bernard A. Harris Jr. and Mickey Herskowitz].  This is your memoir of your--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --years as an astronaut, right.  In 2010, well, I'm sure everybody that knows you, you know, or knew you before you wrote the book was telling you, you ought to write a book.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, that's how it started.  You know, as an astronaut, you get asked to speak in many different places; and, of course, after they hear your story or part of your story, they wanna--people come up and say, you know, do you have a book?  Have you written a book?  And that'd been go- that went on for fifteen years, at least.  And so finally, I got around to putting it all down on paper.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what was it like, you know, being on book tour and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the hardest thing about doing a book is writing it (laughter), you know.  It took us a couple of years to, to write it, and, you know, it--when you say that, okay, I'm gonna write a book, you know, you have all these hopes that you can sit down and within a month or so have it written.  But it never works out that way, especially, giving--given my time.  But afterwards, it was done, and I was pleased with, with the contents; and, yeah, I went on tour, and, and it's, it's done well.  But--and I enjoy it, I enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And people seem to enjoy it too.
Speaker 1: So how long did it take to actually write it?
Speaker 2: Oh, it took a couple of years.  You know, I would say that that a couple years of, of focus on it.  But some of the pieces I had written, you know, in years ahead of that.  Then it was a matter of putting that together and then say, okay.  Let's work on this, on this flow and make sure that it makes sense.  And I not only wanted to, you know, write a book about my life, but what I've learned along the way.  So it really is, in some respects, hopefully, will help people in achieving their goals and using my life as an example for that.
Story_ID: 673947
Speaker 1: One of the aspects of the book ['Dream Walker: A Journey of Achievement and Inspiration,' Bernard A. Harris Jr. and Mickey Herskowitz] that I didn't ask you about during this interview was the Navajo flag that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --took to space.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.  You grew up on a Navajo reservation (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or partly, and, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my mom [Gussie Lee Burgess] worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and took her three kids out there when I was about six, six or seven and was out there until I was fifteen [years old].  And so essentially, you know, that's where I grew up.  And I think some of the things that I think about, some of the--my values came from being on the Navajo reservation.  So I, I love the Navajo people.  And so on my first mission, I wanted to honor them.  So I called the president at the time.  As you know, they're a sovereign nation, and asked for, you know, two flags that I can take up into space.  And so they provided me with that, those flags, and I flew them both up in, into space.  And unbeknownst to me, when it got on the, the news that I had taken the Navajo flag into space, it causes big uproar.  And some of the medicine men there on the Navajo Nation.  And why?  Because they recounted the history of the people.  When they had this evil medicine man called the Gambler [ph.].  That's not his name.  That's his English name.  And he reaped havoc all across the nation.  And the only way they were able to get rid of him is that the good medicine men surrounded him, cursed him and sent him into space.  And as he was ascending into space, he swore that he would return from space to earth to, you know, for his revenge essentially.  So I didn't know all of this, of course.  So it turns out that the only way that he can come back from space is if there is something that is part of the land of the Navajo Nation that gets sent into space.  And guess what the flag is made of?  It has pollen on it that comes from, you know, the nation.  It has seeds on it.  There's some soil on it.  And so the, a number of the, the medicine men believe that that was his pathway back to the Navajo Nation.  So when I got off the, my flight and I got met by a reporter from the Navajo Times, and from some other newspapers that had picked it up.  And they were asking me all these questions, and, of course, I was clueless.  I had no idea.  And the reporter from the Navajo Times pulled me aside and told me that story.  And I went, "Oh, my god."  You could imagine how I felt.  I was like, "Oh."  And so I've never returned the flag.  In fact, I've talked to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] and they've agreed to take the flag.  And so it will never be returned to the Navajo Nation.
Speaker 1: This is quite a story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Unintended consequences.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 673948
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I--my hope is that we don't get lost in, in what's happening in America these days.  There're a lot of, I think, threats to our existence.  And if I start with, with ourselves, is, if you look at our education and you look at the type of education that we are getting, not only is there an issue around American kids in general, going into fields, and being educated in the fields that are relevant in the 21st century, if you look at us, you know, our graduation rates from high school are poor, you know.  It's around 52 percent, 54 percent, somewhere in that neighborhood, where the average is around 70 percent, and much higher if you just look at the white population in that.  And if we're not finishing high school, we're not going to college; and when you go to college, there are issues around whatever college you go to.  And you only have to check the graduation rates of your college, and you'll be shocked, particularly in some of our minority institutions.  And so that concerns me.  We need to be beefing up our education, and we need to be focused on that in order to have the good jobs.  We're having a demographic shift in this country that's not only being affected by our numbers, and our numbers, you know, may be going flat, but the increase in immigrants that are arriving here.  And it's not the Latino or Hispanic immigrants that I'm concerned about.  It is the others from India and from, from China and from Europe that are coming here because they're coming here with a fire in the belly and a fire that I don't see in the African American community where you wanna come in and you want to push technology.  You want to have ownership.  You want to be an entrepreneur and what will happen over time is that whatever gains that we have, they're gonna be muted by, by what's happening, just the whole demographics.  And we tend, as a, as a group, not to think like that, not to think internationally.  We have to kind of get out of the civil rights mentality and then--and we're not there yet.  And, we need to do that.  And what I mean by that is that we have to develop a, an attitude that we are going to take advantage of our God given talents that I know that we have.  We all do.  But, you know, I have to think--happen to think that African Americans have wonderful talents that are not being utilized.  We've done it in sports.  We've done it in music.  We now need to do it in science, and we now need to do it in business.  That's, that's important to me.  The last thing has to do with our community support.  And what I mean by that is the parents.  We need to step up; and if we're gonna make that change, it has to start with our youth being supported by our communities and our parents.  And somehow, we've got to tap into that.  So if you look at our programs, in The Harris Foundation [Houston, Texas], it's all about empowerment.  It's all about individual empowerment.  It's all about community empowerment.  And I--I (unclear) said this, a number of interviews that I've done, particularly, to newspapers where I said that, you know, when I was an astronaut, I had a, a extraterrestrial mission.  And that mission was to, you know, do whatever my boss said, go up, fly--the space station [International Space Station], do whatever they're gonna do in the space shuttle, do spacewalks and all that sort of thing.  I have a new mission now.  It's my terrestrial mission, and that is to empower communities as a whole, individuals as a whole, but specifically, our African American communities.
Story_ID: 673949
Speaker 1: Now, you have one daughter, is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's true.  I have one daughter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about your daughter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Brooke Alexandria [Brooke Harris] is now twenty-one years old.  And she goes to Duke University [Durham, North Carolina].  And she is, of course, the, the light of my life.  She's a wonderful young lady.  She has my passion about life, which, which is great.  And she has her mother's [Sandra Fay Lewis Harris] intelligence.  She's a smart young lady.
Story_ID: 673950
Speaker 1: Now when you think back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there anything major that you would change if you could, if you could?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  That's--what would I change?  I don't know. I--you know, I had a conversation with a good friend of mine.  And this conversation came about because another friend of ours has just been recently diagnosed with cancer.  And so that makes you really think, you know, if that would happen to me today, would there be something that I would do differently?  Would there be something that I'd miss?  And then how would I change my life going forward?  And, and I have to honestly say that I have had a blessed life, you know.  I think anybody would, would love to have just one of the professions that I've been involved in.  And I've been involved in what?  Now, that's my fourth one here [at Vesalius Ventures, Inc., Houston, Texas], and so if I was to leave here today, I would have no regrets in terms of my accomplishments and the things that I, that I have done.  Maybe at the age of fifty-seven, that I am right now, you know, going forward, one of the things I wanna do is spend a little bit more time in life in a sense of not accomplishing things, because that's kinda been my focus, but on enjoying life, not that I haven't enjoyed life.  But taking advantage of those friendships, those people that, that are dear to me; those folks that I, that I love, spending more, more time with them.  And probably the last thing is--and this is really, you've got me really reflecting here, I think that one of the goals that I had when I was a kid, sitting on that reservation, looking up at the heavens and wondering, you know, what it would be like to travel amongst the stars, was that I think in some ways I, I felt like it would bring me closer to God.  I've been a believer in God for a long time; and I think in this next phase in life, I wanna do things that will bring me closer to God.
Speaker 1: In a Christian sense or a universal sense, or how?
Speaker 2: Both, both, probably more in a universal sense in that even though I am a Christian, I had no deference in other religions in terms of the way in which they access God, the way which they develop a relationship with, with God because I think there is, there is a creator.  Some people say the universe.  We're all part of that, no matter what our backgrounds are, no matter what religions that we, that we practice; and if we just focus on that commonality, I think the world would be in a better place.
Story_ID: 673951
Speaker 1: Was going to outer space like life changing?  I guess it would--now, you know, you would guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But how was it for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was affirming for me.  When I think about that I think back to, to my second mission where, you know, we had just completed our task that we're doing for our spacewalk.  And so I'm on the end of this robotic arm lifted up about thirty-five feet above the payload bay, and I'm looking down at the, at the crew that's in the spaceship.  And they're looking at us in the window.  And they're waving at me, and I'm waving back at them, and behind that, of course, is the planet Earth, this big blue, you know, ball with these swirls of white clouds.  It was just incredible to, to see that view.  And then behind that, was this sea of stars called the Milky Way; and it was just incredible to, to have that experience because as I looked down at all of it and took it all in, I realized that there was order in all that I see--not only in me, but the world around me.  And so it reaffirmed for me this order in which I call God, (unclear) talking about universe, and that everything had its place.  The laws in which we describe, if you think about it in science, we're only describing them.  We didn't create them.  We named them.  They were already there.  We didn't create gravity.  We didn't create all the things that, that we now profess that have human names, names on it.  And so in my mind, that's all God.  And being in that position where I could see it in totality, just reaffirmed that for me.
Story_ID: 673952
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back again at everything you've done to this point in life, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy has to do with my terrestrial mission now, and that is, helping young kids and their families accomplish their dreams, just as I have.  So it is empowering them, it's enabling them.  It is ensuring that they have a future.  It's ensuring that whatever dreams that they were born with and that they aspire to, to be, that they have the tools necessary to accomplish them.  And we, we do a lot--we see over, probably impact over ten thousand kids a year in our program [ExxonMobil Bernard Harris Summer Science Camp] and families.  And we also tract, you know, our exposure in the media, and we're in the millions on an annual basis as to that impact.  And that's the legacy that I hope.  If I was to, you know, leave you with a, a picture of that legacy, it would be a picture that I had last week when, when one of our crime prevention programs in elementary school, after I got through telling the kids about, you know, space and answering all their questions and things like that, and leaving them with this notion that they're infinite beings with infinite possibilities and really inspiring them.  And I said goodbye, and on the way out, this young Hispanic girl about eight years old, comes up to me and says, "Can I give you a hug?"  And so she--of course, she's about right here, so she's hugging me around, around the waist.  And, of course, that started it all.  So now, I've got twenty-five of them coming around me, hugging me, thanking me for being there.  That's the fuel that, the energy that I need to continue to do the things that I, that I do.
Story_ID: 673953
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Uh oh, I'm not sure if I wanna know what (laughter) this last question's going to be, but go ahead.  I think we've covered it all.
Speaker 1: All right, well, what we can cover, but the last question is similar to legacy.  In fact, when I started, I thought it was almost the same thing, but it's a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to re- be remembered?
Speaker 2: Hm, as a dreamer who, who was able to not only accomplish his dream, but be able to use those dreams to impact others.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: All right.
