Story_ID: 441195
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Larzette, L-A-R-Z-E-T-T-E, initial G, and that's for Golden, my maiden name, and the last name Hale, H-A-L-E, hyphen, Wilson [HistoryMaker Larzette Hale-Wilson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was married twice.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a story behind the name Larzette?
Speaker 2: My mother [Mary Henderson Golden] did not want to name me Laura so she took Laura and played around with it and came up with Larzette (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 8th, 1920, Idabel, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, A-D-A- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I-D-A-B-E--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I-D-A--
Speaker 2: I-D--
Speaker 1: --B-E-L, okay.
Speaker 2: --E-L, uh-huh, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.  I was a professor of accounting--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at Utah State [Utah State University, Logan, Utah] for eighteen years, thirteen of which I was head of the School of Accountancy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: March 17, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At my church, Episcopal Church in Logan.
Speaker 1: Logan, Utah, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: St. John's [St. John's Episcopal Church, Logan, Utah]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 441196
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they're like a warm-up, the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Strawberry shortcake.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Beige.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The Golden Rule is, I guess, my favorite.
Story_ID: 441197
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you a little bit about your an- parents and your ancestors, we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Mary [Mary Henderson Golden], M-A-R-Y, Henderson, H-E-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, and she married my father, Golden [Thomas Golden].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 27th, 1899.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Coal Hill, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay, C-O-L-E, or C-A--C-O-A-L, okay.
Speaker 2: C-O-A-L.
Speaker 1: Coal Hill, okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about your mother's people?
Speaker 2: Not much.  I know about an uncle of hers.  Her mother died early and the uncle took her, his name was Sanders [ph.] and as little children, we used to visit our grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right.  Do they have any stories passed down through the family about what life was like in Arkansas back in the 19th century or--
Speaker 2: Oh, I guess just difficult for blacks (laughter) mainly.
Speaker 1: Okay, any specific stories about why things were difficult?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, is there, did your mother get a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: She went to the eighth grade and at that time she would have gone to summer school, you know, and started on it but her father wouldn't let her go.  So she had an eighth grade education but continued to develop herself and was very insistent that we go to school.
Story_ID: 441198
Speaker 1: There's a story in between (laughter) on that.
Speaker 2: Well, what is it?
Speaker 1: I was reared in an orphanage in Oklahoma.  My father died in 1930 and--
Speaker 2: Well, give us his name, too?  You may as well give us his name right now.
Speaker 1: Tom Golden [Thomas Golden].
Speaker 2: Tom Golden.
Speaker 1: Tom Leonard Golden.
Speaker 2: Tom Leonard Golden.
Speaker 1: Golden.
Speaker 2: And what is his date of birth and place of--
Speaker 1: April 9th, 1899.
Speaker 2: Okay, and do you know where he was born?
Speaker 1: Arkansas.
Speaker 2: Okay, same place [Coal Hill, Arkansas]?
Speaker 1: I think it was a different place, I'm not quite sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, is, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 1: No, we- he was a farmer.  I remember living on the farm until I was eight when he died and we went to orphanage.
Speaker 2: Okay, so when your father died, what, well what happened to your mother [Mary Henderson Golden] when your father died?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, that was during the Depression [Great Depression] era and, of course, we were sharecroppers and the whites would not let us, let a woman do the farm.  She was worried about us as girls and her having to work and leave us alone so she permitted us to go to children's home--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but she stayed in contact with us all the time and the year before we graduated, she came to Taft [Oklahoma], to work at the mental hospital [Taft State Hospital for the Negro Insane, Taft, Oklahoma]--
Speaker 2: Okay, now--okay.
Speaker 1: --near- so she would be near us.
Speaker 2: All right, so, so did your parents move to Oklahoma before--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were born in Idabel [Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then when your father died, you were forced to move--
Speaker 1: Went to Taft.
Speaker 2: --to Taft, Oklahoma?
Speaker 1: Taft, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Is that, okay, all right, okay.  The orphanage was in Taft.  Now, this is an orphanage that had the name of, is, the Orphanage for the Blind [sic. Industrial Institute for the Deaf, Blind and Orphans of the Colored Race, Taft, Oklahoma] or the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, D, B and O: Deaf, Blind and Orphan.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right and in Taft.
Speaker 1: And we were there five years.
Speaker 2: Now what was that like?  Was that, were you treated well there or did you--
Speaker 1: Not all times.  It was a very lonely kind of thing but my sister and I went, just, just the two of us in the family and, of course, we were together all the time and that made it easier.
Speaker 2: What's your sister's name?
Speaker 1: Essie [Essie Golden Hill].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Golden Hill.
Speaker 2: So you were there for twelve years you said?  Two--
Speaker 1: Five.
Speaker 2: Five years, I'm sorry, five years, okay, so until you were thirteen years old, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: I went in 1930, then I was ten (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were ten, okay, so you were fifteen when--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Must have been eleven 'cause I graduated my high school at sixteen.
Story_ID: 441199
Speaker 1: I don't know how much you know about Oklahoma but there's one black administered college, Langston University [Colored Agricultural and Normal University; Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma].  The president of Langston told our graduating class, those who would want to work their way through school, would have an opportunity to come to Langston so my sister [Essie Golden Hill] and I went to Langston.
Speaker 2: Now that's something, what was the president's name then?
Speaker 1: Sanford. J.W. Sanford.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: His son--well, twenty years almost, I graduated from Langston in 1940 and married this boyfriend I had had from day one, when I got to college, all through four years, and twenty years almost to the date, he came back as to the first almost, to be president of Langston University.
Speaker 2: So, so, okay.  Let's recap that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: You graduated in what year from--
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940].
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940] and then 1960 you are, your first husband became the president?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And what was his name?
Speaker 1: William H. Hale.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, became the president, okay.  Now that's something.
Story_ID: 441200
Speaker 1: He [Hale-Wilson's first husband, William H. Hale] was president of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] and I was president of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], let's see, one, one year overlapped.
Speaker 2: Okay, he was A Phi president, gee whiz.  So, when did you become the president of AKA?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, '66 [1966] to '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: Okay, now I'm going to try to get into some questions that AKA wanted us to ask.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately I don't have the list that they made up.  They made up a long list of questions but I'll try to remember, you know, as we go along and what they were as I've had two of the presidents so far.  Can you describe, now what in, or who inspired you to run for president of AKA?
Speaker 1: Another past supreme, Edna Over Campbell [Edna Over Gray Campbell], she's deceased, but I was national treasurer before I ran and all during that time she told me to get ready, you, you're going to be, make a good supreme basileus, and I admired her so much and another past supreme, Margaret Davis Bowen, I think she was about the third or fifth one, you can look in the history, history book to find out but it was encouragement from past supremes and friends.
Speaker 2: So Na- Margaret Davis Bowen and--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --the first one was?
Speaker 1: Edna--
Speaker 2: Edna (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Over Campbell.
Speaker 2: Edna Over Campbell.
Story_ID: 441201
Speaker 1: Can you describe your, I guess, ascension to supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you start off as chapter presidents so Alpha Zeta was founded at Langston [Colored Agricultural and Normal University; Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] while I was in school and I became the basileus of that chapter, charter basileus, and of course after I graduated from college and started working, wherever I was, I usually, affiliated with the chapter in that particular area.  And then, I decided to spend my vacation at boule one year and wasn't running for anything but was elected from the floor as the, the treasurer, the supreme tamiouchos.
Speaker 1: Now what year was that?
Speaker 2: Let's see, '66 [1966], it must have been around '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958] and, while we're on that--
Speaker 2: Or '56 [1956] and I, and I had two terms of that.
Speaker 1: Okay now, when was the--let me go back a little bit and ask you, what, when, what year was the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] chapter founded on the campus of Langston University?
Speaker 2: Thirty-nine [1939].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, spring of '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: And you were part of the founding group?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I was.  There, there were five of us who were initiated at the same time and I became basileus of the chapter.
Speaker 1: Now is there a, is there a story about how the idea of, you know, came about that you wanted the chapter of AKA on, on the campus?
Speaker 2: Well, my major professor, who was head of the, the business department, was a member and, of course, she was very helpful to me as a student.  I was an A student all the way through and many of the good things that could come your way like scholarships and all, she was very instrumental in that.  At the same time, I had another dear friend who had been a dear friend of mine, a teacher at the orphanage [Industrial Institute for the Deaf, Blind and Orphans of the Colored Race, Taft, Oklahoma], she was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], she wanted me to go to, to Delta, but I was most closely associated then with my department head so I think that influenced me more than any, and there were wonderful women on campus who were member of the graduate chapter at that time.  They not only were beautiful but they were talented and they were very much instrumental in special help for students and assistance, encouraging them and all.  So we had good role models there to, to inspire us to want to be a member of the sorority and to be a member of the first chapter, you know, the first was really an honor.
Speaker 1: So, was it, would it be said, is it true that the grad chapter started, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --started the undergrad chapter?
Speaker 2: They had to sponsor us, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay.  So, so you started the chapter in 1939?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 441202
Speaker 1: Well continue the story about your ascension to the supreme basileus [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].
Speaker 2: After I was on the board so many years as tamiouchos, I, with encouragement of the special past supremes, I guess begin to get an idea, maybe I could help.  My area was accounting and as tamiouchos, I could see that we needed a lot of help (laughter) with our financial organization within the national office.  So I was quite inspired to, to think about the fact that maybe I could be supreme basileus.  I ran first and was beaten by seven votes and then I had a very dear friend who was also a soror, Gandy [ph.], at Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], who was in economics and she encouraged me to run again, to don't give up, and I did and won the second time.
Speaker 1: Now, what year is this now?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What year was it?
Speaker 2: That was '66 [1966], uh-huh.  I think I ran in '64 [1964] but I ran again in '66 [1966]--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and, and was successful then.
Story_ID: 441203
Speaker 1: Why do you think you were successful [as Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc. supreme basileus]?
Speaker 2: I had special expertise, I was a CPA [certified public accountant], I think that gave the sorors trust that we were handling the money right, because that's so important.  I think that was the encouragement to think that I could make a difference and I did help us refine our accounting system, set up an investment fund so that we would have some savings to look forward to and I understand that that fund helped when we built the new building in Chicago [Illinois].  Two things, well, three things I did.  I had a program for high school students, writing contest about black heritage and those who, papers who won, we had nine region, we'd have one from each region to win, toured the United States, very historical black places that--places where blacks had made real contributions.  The other was, each, from each of the nine regions, this, the, the soro- the undergraduate soror who made the highest average, was given a free trip.  After boule, we always went abroad and they would have that free trip and during the years, since then, I've had so many sorors say, "I won the trip to travel," (laughter) because that gave 'em a chance to travel abroad which they wouldn't have, some of them would not have otherwise.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how--
Speaker 2: And the third thing I did was to develop the heritage brochure [Negro Heritage Brochure] which was a little book, a booklet, that told the story of blacks who had achieved in various areas like black lawyers, black doctors, black nurses and that, it's just the size you could carry in your pocketbook but it, it was distributed to high schools over, over the country which I thought helped blacks be known by their own group.
Speaker 1: I remember that series.  We had a--
Speaker 2: Oh, do you.
Speaker 1: --set of them at Wright State University [Dayton, Ohio], we used to use them for, like the Upward Bound program that we'd call Wright Start in those days.  I remember that series.  It had an illustration--
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: --on the cover, had black women in dentistry and law and different professions, yeah, I remember that.
Speaker 2: I think it helped encourage the undergrads too to see how people had achieved in various areas.
Story_ID: 441204
Speaker 1: How would you describe your leadership style?
Speaker 2: Cooperative.  I've never had the need to be the center of, or the top dog (laughter).  I get more cooperation and help by being loving and so I'm not the boast type, I think I'm describing myself right (laughter), but at Utah State [Utah State University, Logan, Utah], when I became head of the School of Accountancy, all of my faculty were white Mormon men and that kind of style worked very well.  I've had the respect of those and now that we're retired, one of the retired faculty members, a very dear friend, he and his wife take me to my doctor's appointments and things that I have to go and he tells the story that Brigham Young [Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah] fired him and he came to us.  He was fired because he hadn't gotten his doctorate.  So I gave him release time.  I said, "Go down to Alabama, work with your people."  He had gotten to the dissertation stage, and he did and that year his paper was the best among all the dissertations.  He got an honor for that.  Now he tells me, he and his wife, remind me of that, you know, every time they take me somewhere, I wasn't trying to be magnanimous, I was just trying to be helpful and that's the kind of life I live and that's the kind of management I've did, firm when I need to be but looking how to help people help me manage whatever it is I'm managing.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there--how do you or what technique do you use to get people to help you manage things?
Speaker 2: By accepting their ideas, giving them an opportunity to express ideas about something.  If we had a special project, I would share what it was about, if you want to participate, what do you think we ought to do, rather than sort of handing down now, do we going to do this and you, your part is this, that and the other.  When you give people an opportunity to be part of something, it, it makes them feel a part of it and they're more cooperative, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is it, is it, do you have a philosophy of leadership?
Speaker 2: I had the philosophy of, do unto others as you'd have them do to you, and I think that is pervasive through everything I, I do. Which says, you should have tremendous respect for those who you're leading and if you do, if people feel they're a part of something that their ideas count, then you do it as a cooperating group rather than having stragglers.  I think, that doesn't explain it too well but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: I try never to forget from whence I came and that has kept me, I've been a lot of places.  When I retired at USU [Utah State University], I had a special instructorship at BYU [Brigham Young University] and everybody was surprised that they hired this black woman but I had more professional friends down there than anywhere else 'cause they are, were all over and they're very active in the profession.  And then, the University of Utah [Salt Lake City, Utah] asked me to come and teach for a semester.
Story_ID: 441205
Speaker 1: Tell us about, have you ever, is- was there ever a, a difficult time when you were supreme basileus of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?  I mean, were things--
Speaker 2: There's always difficulty with undergrads hazing and that was our main thing.  We had just gotten the, the young lady [HistoryMaker Julia Purnell] who preceded me had just gotten Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps] and that was a challenge to run that because we kept it through the next, four or five of us, who came on, that was a challenge, but it was an opportunity to do a lot of good for young people.
Speaker 1: Okay, what were some of the problems with hazing?  What were they?  Were they going too far or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  They're beating with paddles and having 'em stay up at night and bring me this at three o'clock in the morning and, you know, extreme kind of things and it was difficult, and still is, to have the, the young sorors understand, if you are going to treat your soror like this and then when the ceremony's over, we're going to be loving sisters, human beings just don't act like that.  And then to be young blacks who want more respect and you disrespect a fellow member by having them doing these demeaning things, I know there's one thing I was supposed to do.  There was, if I'd walked from the women's dorm to the administration building and in the middle was a tree and I was to use a toothbrush and wash that tree down, that night.  Of course, all the students passing by could see what you were doing and maybe it was funny and all but that was a demeaning sort of thing and how you fit, your sister would, when she gets to pin, would suddenly forget that kind of thing but we still have those kinds of problems.  That's, that's the--occupies--we've had to discipline some by just expelling them because one's action can just smear the whole sorority.  Also, these mothers will sue you and we've had some of those suits because of things that the undergrads did.
Story_ID: 441015
Speaker 1: What do you think your greatest accomplishment has been as a leader, I mean, in AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think the, putting the, the sorority on a solid financial reporting basis, creating an endowment fund that helped later on.  I think, now this may sound egotistical but I don't mean it that way, but I think the, the, the other basileus would call me kind of easy going, more concerned at being kind and helpful and all of that but I think the kind of personality I projected has made, made it possible to surround myself with sorors and friends who realized the main thing I would ever want to do is to help them and that's the kind of life I live, I think partly because I have been, had the business administration department's, if you have a chance to help people, help students.  One of my students at Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] became the president of Bethune-Cookman College and I was just so proud of him and I learned to love white students as much as black students.  When I got to Utah State [Utah State University, Logan, Utah], I would fight for any student, period.  I think that helped me grow as an individual, widen my understanding of things but creating a good atmosphere in which to live and grow and help each other, I think that's about the best I could do.
Story_ID: 441016
Speaker 1: Do you think that becoming an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] has helped you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --solve these?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It, it, I think it was a good source of leadership training and certainly a good source of friends across the years and, and across the nation.  Learning how to treat people so that they're at ease in your company and creating joyous kind of things rather than, you know, fighting over a lot of talk, I think, then it helped you, you know, in your expression.  You have a chance to learn how to run a meeting, how to work with groups, how to do various kinds of things which were projects of the sorority.  So I think it's an opportunity, I tell the sorors when I usually greet them at the boule, every past supreme [supreme basileus] gets up and says something, this is an opportunity to learn how to love your neighbor and be kind and helpful and uplifting because you're supposed to be sorors for each other (laughter).  So.
Story_ID: 441017
Speaker 1: One of the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] questions that I remember that I don't have it in front of me now is, what do you envision as the perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: Where sorors respect each other, work together for common goals and support the projects.  The last supreme [supreme basileus] had a project of young writers, young people from various regions competed and they ended up with a book with their stories that these young people told.  There's so many ways to cooperate with each other to do good things.  It's--rather than being a really a social kind of organization, we really are do-good in our organization, you know.  You learn how to be mindful of others.
Story_ID: 441018
Speaker 1: Who were some of the sisters that you really depended on when you were supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: Sumlin [HistoryMaker Bernice Irene Sumlin] was number one.  She was chairman of my standards committee [National Standards Committee] and she and a soror from Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  I had a committee of about seven sorors and they were, they were supportive and if we had problems, I would send the committee to solve it, rather than try to solve all of them by myself and the young lady who became after me, Mattelia Grays [HistoryMaker Mattelia B. Grays] from Houston [Texas], sometimes the incoming, the present basileus and the incoming basileus don't get along too good.  Well, Mattelia and I have the record of being the best team and we've been friends ever since that.  So, these seven ladies, and then I tried to pick at least one or two sorors from each region that I could relate to and they would alert me if we were having difficulties in any place and you could put out the fire before it became too dangerous.
Story_ID: 441019
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you did as supreme basileus and, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I think I would set up a permanent editorial committee to continue the publication of those heritage brochures [Negro Heritage Brochure] and distribution of them because I think they might have been helpful so many places.  I think I would have invested more.  We had management fee from the operation of the--in Cleveland [Ohio], the--
Speaker 1: Was that the Job Corps [Cleveland Job Corps]?
Speaker 2: Job Corps (laughter).  Oh, if we had invested more of our management fee, we would have developed a more sound--but the present supreme basileus [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie], before she became, worked with investing the funds that we had.  I served on the finance committee and she did a masterful job of, of investing so that we now have the kind of funds that permit us to plan for the future.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, I would have done more in that direction if I, if I had known how to do more,
Speaker 1: Okay and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think investing.
Story_ID: 441020
Speaker 1: What today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well I think the brochures [Negro Heritage Brochure] and then the, I think I have a reputation of having been--helped the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] be strong financially.  From the undergrads, I think this trip abroad for nine, because of their scholarship, so I think they would say I was real supportive of scholarship on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two things I (laughter) did.
Story_ID: 441021
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the future leadership of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Oh I think they've made some mistakes which we can correct.  I think because we have a more sound financial background, you got to demonstrate openness about financial matters.  I don't know whether you have been privy to some of the problems that we're having now but they sort of hinge on proper management of finances and that should be number one in an organization, as open as you can be.  Other than that, I think the position itself shapes you to continue to do good things, looking forward to good activities like water fountain in Africa, water pump, so people can have their own water, a school where women can go to school that have not had that opportunity before, good sound projects and I think one of the most important things is for the supreme basileus to see that openness prevails, that there's not secret activities when the directorate meets that should be distributed what they did and all and if there are problems, the directorate should step up and help solve them and if you have women who, you have to be sort of straight, you know, you can't be, if you have faults, they're going to come out even if you don't have faults, (laughter) some of them are going to, not support you but it's important that you be as open as possible with the running of the business.
Story_ID: 441022
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I hope America has the strength to accept a black president.  I think that we have an opportunity, really, over and above, it would be good to have a first woman, but you know, women are accepted more but to have a black man to be so respected.  I think, if he [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] wins, don't kill him right off, don't kill him at all, but my heart bleeds because I think there are people who hate enough to not permit him to live but I hope America would be that understanding to wipe away--you're not going to wipe away all of the segregation and all but if he wins, let him be the president.  Oh, I would say the same thing about Mrs. Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], too, but I think America has an opportunity now to show that the words we preach about the freedom and democracy and all, we really mean it.
Story_ID: 441023
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite story as, from your tenure as supreme basileus [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: There's so many (laughter).  I think maybe watching some particular undergrads develop, who perhaps served on the directorate when they were undergrads and later be--became outstanding leaders in the community and there's one in Detroit [Michigan] who she became very active, lawyer, and I remember the times when we sat together on the, the directorate.  I guess success of undergrads as you watch 'em grow would, probably the best stories (laughter) I would have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any funny stories from--
Speaker 2: I'm not very funny, as my young daughter is, she taught me how to laugh (laughter).  Oh as, I always am, I guess, on the serious side, don't laugh much (laughter).  Well, I'm joyous but I guess I'm not too, funny person to have around.  I'm, I have a tendency to be more sober, I think, that's what my children say.
Speaker 1: Okay, more business-like, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or just quiet and joyous but, not that I don't like funny stories, I laugh.
Story_ID: 441024
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you want to say before I ask my, the last question that I have anyway?
Speaker 2: I think this is a marvelous project.  I was scanning the materials to see about the distribution or the openness of the materials to the public and how, how you tell your story.  I'm sure you've encouraged so many of us to look into our past and I should do that.  We have a nice little heritage office which--with a lot of material and all, run by the Mormon church.  For so long in my life, it was understood regardless to who you were, if you were black, it didn't much matter, and you tried to accommodate that kind of feeling.  I think, now, you can be more joyous about because blacks have more privileges and less difficult times than they had before, not that they don't still have them (laughter).
Story_ID: 441025
Speaker 1: Well my last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a kind, loving soror who was interested in and tried to help all sorors, young and old, as much as possible.  People who have been very kind to me, I've tel- told the young people, pass it on, you know.  You have been so kind to us doctor, yeah, pass it on, you can help somebody else.  I guess that has come because I'm eighty-seven, be eighty-eight (laughter) in this summer, and that's about the most important thing in life.  What did your life stand for?  What did it matter?  Was it helpful to other people?  Did you do your best to live a good life?
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Surely.
