Story_ID: 481923
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Jackie Pope.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Full name is Anthony William Hall, Jr. [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.], that's A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, H-A-L-L, J-R.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 16th, 1944.  I was born in Houston, Harris County, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is August 9th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are presently located in the main city hall building in Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 481924
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as a warm up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a warm up, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is it?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is gumbo--seafood gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Hm, probably, and I would guess, I would guess that it is beige.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: I think my favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Hm, vacation destination.  Ah, if I had to choose one, I guess I would say Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One that I would admit that I have?  I don't know.  I really don't know.  I don't think I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think I do.
Story_ID: 481925
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history next.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side of the family first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mother's full name Quintanna, Q-U-I-N-T-A-N-N-A, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, Hall, H-A-L-L, last name now Alliniece, A-L-L-I-N-I-E-C-E [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story behind the name Quintanna?
Speaker 2: My mother died in January of this year, and that subject was discussed a lot.  She is not--she was ninety-one when she died.  She is not absolutely certain, but there is a town spelled with just one N, her name with two, in Matagorda County [Texas], which is, oh, seventy, eighty miles from here.  She thinks maybe that's where the name came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, that might have been inspirational.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ooh, ninety-one from 2007 would be--
Speaker 1: Was it 1916?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would be 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace your relatives on that side?
Speaker 2: That I actually knew, or really knew something about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, no--yeah, know something about.  You don't have to know 'em, but--
Speaker 2: Actually I have heard about her dad, and I knew her mother.  I knew my grandmother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --very well.  I did not know my grandfather, but I heard about him, and I had him described.
Speaker 1: So, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Farmers--they were farmers in Brazoria County [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Small farmers.
Speaker 1: What were they like?  I mean any, any particular stories (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my grandmother was the quintessential matriarch of the family.  She had eight children--not all same fathers.  Two of them were, were male, six were female.  I knew all of them, while I was growing up, fairly well.  She was later married to a man whose name was Bose, B-O-S-E, Austin [Bose Austin], and he was more, on that side of the family, my image of a grandfather.  He is the person with whom I spent the most time as a grandfather growing up.  I knew him, but he was not my biological grandfather.
Speaker 1: What were your grandparents' names on that side?
Speaker 2: The family name--the tree name or--
Speaker 1: No, their, their actual--
Speaker 2: Her name was Rebecca Austin [Rebecca Gee Austin].
Speaker 1: Rebecca Austin?
Speaker 2: His name was Bose, B-O-S-E, Austin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Family name was Gee, G-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her maiden name, in other words.
Speaker 1: Okay, her name was--okay, so your grandmother's maiden name was Gee.  Okay.  Now Gee, that's a--you know, I've heard of that in terms of direction of, of the way a mule goes.  They want him to go, "Gee," and "Haw," as right or left, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I don't know.  There's a lot of Gees down there in Brazoria County--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it's only about fifty miles from--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a lot of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Any rate.  So, are there any stories that come down from that side of the family about the end of slavery, or Juneteenth, or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm really aware of.  My grandmother's house was kind of the center of family reunions as I was growing up, and I say as I was growing up.  This is like through high school, through college.  My grandmother died when I was in high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], so that sort of faded because she was the reason and, and the legitimacy of everybody gathering in that one place because out in the Houston [Texas] house and the farm that--the small farm that they worked is in Brazoria County.  It's about an hour's drive from Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then there was an era where, where kids--and I was truly a kid if you weren't grown.  I mean, I was not even a teenager.  You were not invited to many adult conversations in those times (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know the syndrome, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 481926
Speaker 1: So, did your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] tell you any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Very, very, very much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very much later.  In her later years, I would get her to talk some about her childhood and her growing up.
Speaker 1: Now, your mother was a--became an educator, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: She went to--I know she went to Jack Yates High School [Yates Colored High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Texas Southern [Texas State University for Negroes; Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Texas Southern.
Speaker 2: Because in the country, as we call it down in Brazoria County [Texas]--at that time, there was not high school opportunity for blacks, and it was a custom in the family, one that existed in our house and through my growing up, that kids in the country would come to Houston [Texas] to go to high school, and they would go to grade school, as they called it, at home.  And then even after there was high school there, they would come to Houston because there was--Houston was viewed as having schools with greater opportunity and frankly, they were more competent in educating young folks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was she the first person in her family to go to college, or--
Speaker 2: She was the first person in my family to finish college certainly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That I know of.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: She went later on, and got her master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And she was a teacher in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Public school teacher.
Speaker 1: --public schools.  All right.
Story_ID: 481927
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Anthony, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Hall, H-A-L-L, Sr., S-R [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know his exact date and place of birth.  I probably can find that because I do have some records on, on him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he wasn't born in Houston [Texas], I guess?
Speaker 2: No, I think he was--he may have been born in Houston, but he wasn't born in a hospital.  I've got to think of where.  I think I probably can find out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dad died, though, in 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was he much older than your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece]?
Speaker 2: No, not at the time.  My dad just died early.  He was fifty-six when he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, they were about the same, you know, roughly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Same era.
Speaker 1: The same era, yeah.  Okay, now are there any--what knowledge do you have of your father's side of the family in terms of ancestral (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I actually knew, not well, but I knew my grandfather.  I mean, I met him probably a half dozen times because he didn't live in Houston, he lived in a little town called Bastrop, Texas which is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-A-S-T-R-O-P.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where he last lived because he was a small-town minister, and he moved around in that part of the state quite a bit.  I probably met him a total of six, eight times as I was growing up--on day visits, that kind of thing.  My dad and them would take me up.  My dad did not have but one sister, so it was not as large a side of the family, so there were not as many--she didn't have any children, and he only had one, so it wasn't as if I had a whole lot of cousins, or that kind of thing, on that side, as opposed to my mother's side of the family where there were lots of first cousins.  I think I one time had forty first cousins.
Speaker 1: So, are there any stories from your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not a lot about his growing up.  My dad actually was a carpenter by trade, but he also was a gospel singer with a quartet that actually was regularly--had a regular program on the radio here back in the '50s [1950s], I think.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of his group?
Speaker 2: The Spiritual Gospel Singers [Spiritual Gospel Singers of Houston].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was the lead singer, and I do remember the group.  I remember spending time with them as they would rehearse after work, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: What radio station were they on?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: As I remember, it was the radio station that was KYOK-1590 [KYOK Radio, Houston, Texas]; it obviously does not exist in that format now, but they were--it was one of two black program stations in Houston--
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As I was growing up.
Speaker 1: That's good history.  So, I take it your father--well, he grew up, I guess in church, with his father being a reverend.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure if that's what influenced it, he--'cause he wasn't a preacher, he was a singer.  His daytime work was building houses and that kind of thing.  That's what he did for a living.  He actually went in the [U.S. military] service, obviously at a time when the service was still segregated, and that kind of thing but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he serve in World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, did he go to high school here in the city?
Speaker 2: I don't know that my dad actually finished high school.  He was a very bright man, but I don't think he ever formally finished high school.
Story_ID: 481928
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece and Anthony W. Hall, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They tell me--I have a cousin that actually was treated more or less as an aunt through my growing up, who was an educator here in Houston [Texas]; actually, was a high school principal in Houston here, who married a--well, who knew--we had a friend who knew my dad while they were in the [U.S. military] service, as I understand it, and introduced my mother to my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--well, they get married right after--well, that was before the war [World War II, WWII], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: They, they got married; now, he--my dad never went overseas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --he stayed in the states the whole time.  They actually got married out in California because he was stationed out there.  She went out there to get married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, this is--okay, in the early '40s [1940s], okay.
Speaker 2: This is about 1942--'41 [1941], '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are you the only--you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the only child.
Speaker 1: You're the only child?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, that's right.  Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably inevitably my mother because I spent more time with her.  My moth- my mom and dad separated--divorced when I was like four, and--but remained conversant, and I guess you could even say were friends.  She obviously had the most parental influence, I guess, on me, but my dad was a different kind of personality.  My dad was an engaging fellow.  I actually used to go and work with him in the summers, and that kind of thing, so it wasn't estrangement at all, and neither between them.  I was fortunate in that regard, I'd say.  My mother remarried, and I liked to say I had two dads, my stepfather was fairly influential with me when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: What was your stepfather's name?
Speaker 2: Lartress--my stepfather's name was Lartress, L-A-R-T-R-E-S-S, Alliniece, A-L-L-I-N-I-E-C-E [Lartress Alliniece].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 481929
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I got a number of 'em (laughter).  I used to go--when my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] and father [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.] divorced, I was almost four, and I used to go--my dad actually lived with my grandmother, or vice versa, and I would go and spend some weekends with them, and my earliest memories that I get teased about by friends--particularly the one who is in this room, a lot, is I used to get sent in a taxi from my mother's house to my grandmother's house, and the image I have of sitting in this taxi when you're three years old by yourself, having this taxi driver drive you--to get out.  I hadn't thought much of it at the time, but it does seem a little strange today.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the view from that is different, isn't it?  You're looking up at the telephone poles, and everybody else is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right, that's right.  Ain't nobody in there with you--you and the taxi driver, yeah--
Story_ID: 481930
Speaker 1: So you grew up in Houston [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: I did, but had a good much of my--the influence of my growing up was actually in Brazoria County [Texas].  Brazoria County is the county that's almost adjacent--one county between us--between here and Houston, in an area of Brazoria County that's about seventy miles from here.  It's about an hour's drive.  I have--which my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] sometimes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're talking about west of Houston?
Speaker 2: No, it's actually south.
Speaker 1: South, okay.
Speaker 2: South of Houston.  The county seat is Angleton [Texas], which is about forty miles from here--forty-five miles from here.  There's a town called Brazoria [Texas] also, in Brazoria County, but every summer until I was promoted to the eleventh grade, I spent every summer there, because at that time, my mother had four of her sisters and one of her brothers who still lived in that area, in the general area, all of whom had farming kind of places in the area.  Just so happens that two of them, and two of the sisters who live today, lived just across the county line in Matagorda County [Texas], but it is in the same general community.  It's the same kind of community down there.  I would go and spend the summers there and I guess, I guess some of my most profound memories as a young kid are memories there.  That's when I learned how to hunt, I learned how to drive on a John Deere tractor down there, I picked cotton, I picked beans, I pulled corn--I mean--and they, it was viewed by me as an extraordinarily exciting time and thing to do because I lived in Houston nine months out of the year, and those experiences helped shape me a lot.
Speaker 1: So, you liked the change (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, loved it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you had a lot of relatives there?
Speaker 2: Yes, a lot of 'em.  As--I've got--as I said, my mother had four sisters and a brother who lived there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what community here in Houston did you all live in?
Speaker 2: I grew up in Sunnyside [Houston, Texas].  It's in the south part--actually South Union [Houston, Texas], which is between Third Ward [Houston, Texas] and Sunnyside.  It's directly south of downtown.
Speaker 1: Is that--what ward is that?  I know that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--well, you don't have a ward south of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Third Ward is adjacent to it, it's adjacent to Third Ward, recognizing that those designations came from a time when--sixty, seventy years ago, when Houston's governmental structure actually existed around those geographic boundaries--the government itself, the ward representatives.  So that there probably is not a living Houstonian who can tell you the absolute boundaries of what those wards were when they were last wards.  They are used now to identify general areas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so when you say Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas], people are talking about that area that's immediately adjacent to downtown, that you can see out of this window, but if you say, "Well, what are the absolute boundaries?"  It's kind of hard--people'll tell you, "Well, I don't know, it's that area right over there."
Speaker 1: So, it's like a neighborhood, but not a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's larger than a neighborhood but it represents kind of a geographic area.  I mean it's larger than a neighborhood, lots of neighborhoods, but when you say, Third Ward, if you're familiar with Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas], that is in the heart of what's called Third Ward.  But it's fairly broad, and some people would describe Third Ward as coming all the way to Main Street just south of downtown.  Others would say it's a little more narrow than that because now, as I said, it represents an area rather than a specific geography.
Story_ID: 481931
Speaker 1: You're the first person we've interviewed from Houston [Texas] that's really tried to explain that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it comes from--as I said, oh, seventy, eighty years ago, the government was actually represented by these wards and, and younger people probably can't tell you other than identifying Fifth [Fifth Ward], Third [Third Ward], Fourth [Fourth Ward], maybe Second [Second Ward]--some extent Sixth Ward [Houston, Texas] to some extent because, because it was so long ago, and the neighborhoods and, and streets even are different than they were then, that very few people would know, even if they knew then--I mean if they would, would know now what it represents.  So, what I'm suggesting to you is when you say Fifth Ward in Houston, people know--from Houston know the area you're talking about.  If you ask somebody to tell you what are the absolute boundaries, if there were ten people even who live there, would probably give you ten different descriptions of what's Fifth Ward.  Third Ward is even larger--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but generally speaking, if you're not from Houston, if you know where Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] is, it's considered in the heart of Third Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were two main streets that traversed the two principal Third and Fifth Ward areas.  Fourth Ward was the original kind of settlement of blacks, particularly those who were prosperous, and it--you can see out of this window, it's in an area of extraordinary transformation right now, but it is where the military riots occurred in early 1900s, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the--what, the 1917 Houston riot?
Speaker 2: Right.  And it is the area that is in some controversy, even as we speak today, because in an effort to replace the water and sewer lines, the region of the project was scheduled to take up the streets.  The streets are brick streets laid by slaves, and there was much protest about changing that at all, so now we're having to use different technology to go under the streets, and that kind of thing, to preserve that bit of history of African Americans in Houston.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so when you say Fourth Ward, can tell you it's the area just west of downtown, can tell you Gray Street runs down the middle of it, what are the actual boundaries?   Hey (laughter).  And particularly, what were they then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when it got designated Fourth Ward (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost nobody can tell you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's interesting, 'cause I think a lot of people think they know that, that--you know, you hear the term--you know, Fifth Ward has become like a--especially the hip hop community, the--
Speaker 2: It has a history.
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Barbara Jordan, Mickey Leland--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they think about it as a prototypical ghetto to--from the Geto Boys, the rap group, you know.
Speaker 2: Except that in Houston, we didn't have ghettos in the way that they occurred on the East Coast.
Speaker 1: Everybody has a house--
Speaker 2: --had a free-standing house, yeah, yeah.  The (laughter)--it is interesting that we are discussing this as a matter of history because Third Ward is perceived and Fifth Ward is perceived as African American communities--have been for fifty years.  Much of the geography that was before described as Third Ward, which is, I guess, why I was--this was such an acute question when you asked it, and it's very relevant today, is no longer called Third Ward because many of the residents now are Anglo, and so there is a lot of joking that now people who live north of Almeda [Road], which is a street that runs directly south of downtown--288 [State Highway 288] runs adjacent to it,.  They live north of that, they don't say that they live in Third Ward now, they live in the Museum District [Houston Museum District, Houston, Texas].  If they live a little closer to town in that same area, they live in Midtown [Houston, Texas].  That, when I was growing up, was Third Ward, and so you get, you get significantly higher prices now if you say you're buying a house in the Museum District because they have all these condos that they sell for $350-400,000 going up--have gone up as transformation--that was Third Ward.  I went to (laughter), ironically, on Almeda and Crawford [Street], it is still standing.  The building is (unclear).  That was my junior high school [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas].  I went to junior high school.  But now, if you buy a house there, you buy a house in Midtown, not Third Ward (laughter).  Interesting, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What you're saying resonates in a lot of different communities.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: My hometown is the same thing.  The west side is swung around, now it's the northwest side (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's the same, but the west side--
Speaker 2: Real estate prices go up a lot (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, west side--
Speaker 2: And I don't meant to suggest that they're segregated communities, there are blacks who live there, but the real estate promoters--developers and promoters have determined that there's more value in dollars in not calling it Third Ward (laughter).
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 481932
Speaker 1: So, you grew up in two different places, basically (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's adjacent.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I mean Houston [Texas] and Brazoria County [Texas].
Speaker 2: Well, I did in the summers.  It was where I went in the summers, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--now, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, this is ironic, I guess, in a way.  I live now, and have lived in the same house since 1973, so that would be what, thirty-four years, thirty-five years, but it is five minutes from where I grew up in my mother's [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] house, where my mother lives.  But they're two different communities in reality.  Where I live now is a community where the houses were originally built by Jewish people because they could not live in middle income Anglo communities back in those days, and that whole community transition from Jewish to black, and I knew many of the people who grew up there.  They used to talk to me, we were friends who grew up in those neighborhoods.  I grew up in three houses down from you--from where you live now.  The irony is that it is now reconverting to Anglo to some extent, the area I live.  My mother lives just south of there--did until January, her house is just south of there by about five minutes.  And when I was growing up, it was--I guess what you'd have to describe as African American suburban, which means that it was a suburban community, it had none of the improvements that suburban communities had, or that we view today--open ditch streets at that time doesn't exist that way today, had non-standard bus service out there.  You were going out of town almost as close as it really is now.  It's considered close because it's just inside of the 610 loop [Interstate 610], so it would be literally, by description, close in town now.  At that time was considered out of town, sort of, but adjacent by car, five minutes from Third Ward [Houston, Texas]--ten minutes from Third Ward.  As a consequence, my mother taught at this junior high school [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas] that I described a little bit earlier where I went, and because she taught there and there was no bus service--school bus service, or a reliable regular public bus service, the--I actually went to high school at a different place than my neighborhood went because there was built--at that time, high schools were still segregated in Houston, and there was built a school for blacks south of where I lived, but because I could get a ride with her--school every morning, and it was on the way, Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], where I went to school, which is a different Jack Yates than my mother went to school--different location--is on the way from there to the junior high school that I went.
Story_ID: 481933
Speaker 1: --You were just talking--we're rolling again--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but you were talking about the community around Booker T. Washington High School [Houston, Texas] 'cause--
Speaker 2: We were--it is one of the oldest black high schools in Houston [Texas].  Houston's school system desegregated in a rather interesting way.  We desegregated in one way very, very quickly in that when court cases were decided that integration needed to occur, that almost immediately, they integrated the faculties, that many people argue to the extraordinary detriment of some of the black schools because some of the more dedicated teachers were taken and put in white schools--traditionally white schools, or still white schools.  We almost never achieved student school desegregation in Houston--had some innovative approaches.  Magnet schools were a big issue were a big issue here and, and premiered here, I think.
Speaker 1: Let's not--pause on that for a minute.  That seems to be a phenomenon that occurred in my hometown--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where the school board instituted a 70/30 ratio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had one like that.
Speaker 1: --but it was for the faculty.
Speaker 2: Faculty.
Speaker 1: It was never implemented in the schools themselves, so every school had to have the majority white teachers--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and the minority black.
Speaker 2: There were those who argued that it destroyed an important component of the learning, learning experience in black communities here because those teachers typically, almost all of them, were involved in some kind of extracurricular activity in the school, and so they would stay after school, and part of the equalization process, if you will--part of the opportunity for exposure, whether it was in band or majorette, or athletic sports, or ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], or one of the vocational extracurricular activities--Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization], Future Homemakers [Future Homemakers of America; Family, Career and Community Leaders of America]--all of those kinds of activities were generally sponsored, chaperoned, and after school supervised by black teachers.  It was considered part of their expectation as a teacher.  And there are those who argue that significantly, those opportunities disappeared when they were taken from those schools and, frankly, that their replacement Anglo teachers, who were not gonna be caught over there after dark in those neighborhoods, and as a consequence, those extracurricular activities disappeared and thus much of the exposure opportunity for black kids left at the same time.  Many argue that it's--it was a critically important phenomenon because there are those who argue that we haven't recovered from that 'til this day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good argument, too; I think it's--because not just Houston, it's that I've heard the same story--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a lot of cities, you know.  That's a real--that's a part of the integration, integration stories are really--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --sad.  So, when you were in school, the city was still segregated.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was--I guess I didn't finish that story.  Student body was integrated a grade at a time, so start in the first grade (laughter), one grade a year.  Well, it didn't get to high school before I left, so when I finished high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School] in Houston, high schools were still segregated, so I went all the way through public schools in Houston in a segregated school system for my own experience.
Speaker 1: And you came out in '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --but high schools were still segregated in Houston.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] was a very well-known educator in town.  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Math teacher.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Were you--so did you like school?  Was school something that you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I liked school a lot.  And that's part of the point that I was making.  There were two primary institutions in my community when I was growing up that provided opportunity for young people, two primary ones.  There are a couple of others that I will mention because there's one outstanding example, and they were the schools, and so most of your life--most of your life activity, when I was growing up, centered around school, whether it was ROTC or whether it was woodshop and workshop and those kinds of learning activities.  Obviously, sports activities, sports related activities, music--because every high school had a choir and a band, and a very large one, and so your exposure to music was at school.
Story_ID: 481934
Speaker 1: The other corollary institution was church.  There was a time, frankly, when most--many black churches here, all of 'em had youth choirs, but many of them had bands; I played in one at the church (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, that--
Speaker 1: We actually went on trips.  In fact, the first time that I went to Ohio--went to Cleveland [Ohio] to a church convention, a national church convention, as part of the St. John [St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas]--it wasn't my home church, but I was in their church band 'cause my home church didn't have one.  And that was the case, many instances where you would go, if your church didn't have one, they would allow you--you would participate in one of the others, but you went on school buses to the national convention.
Speaker 2: What was your home church then?
Speaker 1: My home church was Greater Zion Baptist Church [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The church band that I played in was St. John on Gray [Street], where Reverend N.C. Crain was the pastor.  They had a church band, and I had relatives who went to that church, and so for about five or six years, I played in the church band and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So was it--okay.
Speaker 1: --and one of the reasons was that you got a chance to go outta town for a week every summer to wherever the National Baptist Convention was.  First time I went to Ohio I went to Cleveland.  We would stay in the basement of churches, in gyms at school 'cause we weren't staying in hotel rooms then, but for us we didn't know any different; it was a wonderful thing.  We actually went on school buses, but they were church buses--they were the church owned buses.  I went to Niagara Falls--we went over to Niagara Falls from Cleveland.  Just thought it was a amazing thing, one of my first--I'd like to say it was my first international trip (laughter), you know, to the border, but it was in the church band when I was probably twelve, fourteen years old.
Speaker 2: Now, what did you play?
Speaker 1: Played the trumpet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Still have it.  Can't play it, but I still have it (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't think I can play it, yeah.  Haven't tried in twenty years.
Speaker 2: That's--I hadn't heard the story of church bands before, but that's interesting, yeah.
Speaker 1: We actually had drill teams, I don't know if you ever heard of that.  I mean in correlation with the band, the church had a drill team, and you would actually march in church and demonstrate, and it was a way to provide youth activity at the church.  The band would come in and play at the national convention--not just one.  I mean there would be a number of bands because there were parades in the black communities where the host church was, and the church bands would play in the parades and the drill teams would march in the parades, and there would be kids from all over the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] is still, I think, the largest black organization in the world.
Speaker 1: And there a number of those conventions, not just one, you know, but number of the national church organizations have these conventions, and it was an effective way for youth involvement.
Speaker 2: Now, were you involved with the YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I was--I told you there were several others.  The YMCA is an institution in Houston [Texas], the black Y here in Houston, and I think one of the reasons--strange reason--it was one of the--only one of several public swimming facilities, and it was an indoor swimming facility, which made an extraordinary attraction.  I suppose in my era, probably a third of the blacks that learned to swim learned to swim at the YMCA because they had the swimming pool.  And it's located actually between the Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] that I went to, which is where it's located today, in Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas]--and still is.
Speaker 2: Is it--does it have a special name, or is it--
Speaker 1: South Central [South Central YMCA; Houston Texans YMCA, Houston, Texas] branch, it's called--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of the YMCA.  And I later served on the board of that, I guess, for fifteen years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, were you involved in Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America], or anything like that?
Speaker 1: Not really.  I was a Boy Scout.  My son [Anthony W. Hall III] was more involved--went all the way through Eagle Scout.  I was only tangentially involved in Boy Scouts at the time that I was growing up.  Every church did not have Boy Scout organizations with the regularity that exists today.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now, was sports a big part of growing up?
Speaker 1: Not for me.  I was not talented.  I actually wanted to be a football player, but I went out there in middle school.  At that time, what's called middle school now, we had junior high school; middle school is fifth grade--or sixth grade through the eighth--sixth, seventh, and eighth.  When I was in school, elementary school was one through six, and junior highs were seventh, eighth, and ninth; high school was only the tenth, eleventh and twelfth.  Kind of makes a difference in some--but it makes a difference in the tenor and texture of the school 'cause you got year older kids, and age a year older makes a lot of difference at that age.  So, we actually had separate sports--competitive sports competition in school among all of the junior high schools, so you had your football teams and bands, and track teams, and all of the sports activity.  I went out for football when I was in the seventh grade, which is the first year you're in junior high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now what--
Story_ID: 481935
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school and junior high school?
Speaker 2: I--well, I went to--the first four grades of elementary school in Angleton [Texas], in Brazoria [Brazoria County, Texas]; my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] taught that, and it--the name of the school (laughter) was called Marshall High School [A.B. Marshall High School; Marshall Education Center, Angleton, Texas].  Now, that sounds strange.  As I said, with my first four grades I went to grades one, two, three, and four at that school.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it--it's called Marshall High.  Yeah, it was the only--yeah.
Speaker 2: --because it was all on one campus--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --that's why they called it that, so it wasn't like there was at that time a Marshall Elementary.  They just called the whole thing Marshall High School, but it was all on one campus--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --elementary, junior high, high school.  And when I came to the fifth grade, I came to Houston [Texas] and went to what is known as Sunnyside Elementary School [Houston, Texas] for grades five and six.
Speaker 1: Okay, so middle school was at Sunnyside Elementary School (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: So middle school was at--well, that's the latter part of elementary school   (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, that was my last two--yeah, my last two years.
Speaker 1: All right, Sunnyside Elementary School.
Speaker 2: And see, and I went to junior high, they didn't have any middle schools when I was going to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the junior high school was--
Speaker 2: Was William E. Miller [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas].  It doesn't exist anymore as a name.  The campus is there, but it's now called the Contemporary Learning Center [Houston, Texas], and they call it something else (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it's for troubled kids now.  But it was my junior high school.  It was called William E. Miller Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you were telling us how you were getting ready to go out for football (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I went out, my--went out for football and my--and, you know, you go out to test out, and coaches would look at everybody, and after about a week, coach called me over and he said, "Son, I was--." I had the unfortunate thing that, that I kind of spurted up both in height and the little bit a weight I had.  I was thin, thin, thin when I was smaller, and I was--but I hadn't grown.  I was short but I wasn't that fast, I couldn't catch the ball that good, and he told me--he put his arm around my shoulder and he said, "You need to wait.  Work on everything, come back next year." (Laughter) So, it was a fancy way of saying I didn't have any talent at all, you know, I mean that's what it was.  And I didn't have any size, so I didn't have anything that would contribute, and that kind of ended all of my deals.  So then, that's when I started really concentrating on band--that's when I got in the band, and then kind of switched over in high school; didn't do the band anymore, started doing ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and that became my principal extracurricular activity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you have any mentors in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, lots of 'em all the way through school.  And part of that was because--and I told you that all of my school experience was in segregated environment in Houston.  My mother was a schoolteacher, and my mother was--one--at that time, the teachers' professional organization was segregated also, and the black, African American--at the time, we said black, schoolteachers' group--professionals group, was called the Classroom Teachers Association.  Well, my mother was the president of that for a term or two, and so my mother was--kind of went along, so the teachers knew me and, you know, kind of knew who I was and so I got a good deal of unwanted attention even in those years (laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause everybody knows you're her son.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at least knew my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were in high school, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: My best subjects in school were always math and science.
Speaker 1: Did you envision yourself becoming a mathematician or a scientist, or a teacher?
Speaker 2: No, I really hadn't, hadn't staked out.  Of course, I went--I was selected to participate in a National Science Foundation program at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina].  Kind of strange because Bennett College was all girls, but the science program was co-ed in the summer, based on a grant that they had.  And you--and if you made good grades in those times, you were automatically kind of channeled to math and science.  I mean that's--you kind of--if you made the grades and, you know, that's what you was--and math and science was it, and you didn't resist a bunch, I didn't, and so I went to the science foundation and that kind of thing, and left high school with the declaration--I didn't say intent because I'm not sure it was my intent--with the declaration that I would pursue a career in science, and that I would go to med school, and I discovered about two years in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] I didn't wanna do that (laughter).  I didn't wanna go to med school, so I switched (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when--now did you run for class office or anything like that in school?
Speaker 2: I was--well the--yes, I did not for class officer.  Student government organization in high school--when I was there, was what they call the student council; it was kind of the student government organization, and I was president of the student council in my class at Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], and they had a deal--I guess it still exists, called the National Honor Society, and ours was--like everything else--was segregated then, but they had a--you know, every school, I guess every school of significant size anyway, had a National Honor Society, and I became president of the state National Honor Society, and I recall presiding at a convention in Texarkana, Texas of the state National Honor Society.  I forgot about that--the year that I--my senior year of high school.
Story_ID: 481936
Speaker 1: I would guess, of course, you knew you were going to college, and how did you choose (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never thought I wouldn't, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: I just kind of assumed (laughter) that I would go to college.  That was the expectation.
Speaker 1: So, how did you find--choose what college you were going to?
Speaker 2: Well, I was fortunate.  There are several foundations here, one of which I happen to serve on the board of now, but at that time it's fair to say that the biggest dollars--independent dollar scholarship you could get out of high school here at the time, was called the Worthing Foundation scholarship.  The high school that I told you that was built south of, of where I actually grew up--a very large high school here now, called E.E. Worthing [Evan E. Worthing High School, Houston, Texas].  Evan E. Worthing is what it stands for.  Mr. Worthing was Anglo, but had a huge inventory of black rental property and that kind of thing, and the irony of all ironies is that he created this foundation when he died for scholarships restricted to African American students if you can believe it--one of the most amazing things in history.  And at the time I graduated from high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], the amount of the award was $4,000.  Well, fifty years ago, that was a whole lot of money; it--when I started Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--and I'm gonna answer your question about how I picked it.  When I started Howard, it paid for everything.  That changed during the course of the time I was there, but when everything--I mean room, board, tuition, and books even.  And even--I remember the first year, first semester, I actually got fifty dollars back, or something like that, because it was more money than was required.  That radically changed in the time I was there.  The Jones foundation scholarship, which is now the premier scholarship, which is the scholarship program from Jesse Jones [Jesse H. Jones], and you see a lot of things in Houston [Texas] from that.  The biggest foundation in our part of the country is called Houston Endowment [Houston Endowment Inc., Houston, Texas].  It funds the Jesse Jones scholarships, but it is for--competed by all students in the Houston school district [Houston Independent School District].  Now not just Houston school district, but the greater Houston area--the school districts, suburban school districts participate.  At that time, it was only $2,000--$500 a year as opposed to $1,000 a year.  I was fortunate to get awards in scholarship.  Now, to answer your question directly, I chose--it gave me options to go to, you know, a good many schools.  I was accepted at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and at Howard.  I think those are--I frankly don't remember why those are the ones I applied to, but the University of Texas, at that time, had segregated dormitories, and that just turned me off.  The idea of all the blacks living in the same dormitory was not something that appealed to me, so that's why I ruled that out.  Now that changed, I think, a couple or three years later, but I remember at the time when--think I went up there and all in segregated dormitories.  In Morehouse, I was naive, and vigorous, and the idea that I would go there--I'd never been to a class with all boys, and it was--at the time, it didn't have the integration--I mean boy and girl integration that they have now, and it was--understand, there was little separation academically between the two campuses, but at that time that wasn't the case.  And the notion--I had a scholarship, incidentally, at both of these places.  They had offered me a scholarship (laughter) in addition to my awards in scholarship, but I didn't wanna go to a school with all boys (laughter), I just didn't like that.  I liked going to school with girls, so, so that's how I wound up at Howard.  Howard was, at that time--I guess it is--they viewed it as the number one African American school academically and all that--law school, med school, and all that kind of stuff.  And at the time Morehouse did not.  I mean it came later, and so it had a big reputation, and obviously it was at a time when all of higher education was not integrated, and so that's how I wound up going to Howard.
Story_ID: 481937
Speaker 1: Now, just before we leave high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], now, were there, did you have any famous classmates in high school, or any--who were your friends in high school and what--
Speaker 2: Had a number of 'em, and there were a good many people.  Much of my extracurricular activity, as I indicated, was around ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and, you know, some very significant folks.  A fellow who was deputy commander of the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers] was, I think, a year ahead of me in high school in ROTC.  A fellow later was a year behind me, now is the dean of the LBJ School of Public Affairs [Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, Austin, Texas], but had--was deputy secretary of the [U.S.] Department of Defense for personnel.
Speaker 1: Who were they?  What were their names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Edwin Dorn is his name.  The deputy commander of the Corps of Engineers was Milton Hunter.  He was a major general in the [U.S.] Army.  All of us kind of came through and developed at ROTC.  A good many of my classmates who--are people who were in high school with me at the time who became extraordinary contributors in lots of different areas.  Many of the administrators in the school systems around this area and other places, are people I went to school with.  First-generations of licensed professionals where we had numbers.  When I was growing up, there were maybe six--eight black lawyers in all of Houston [Texas] when I was in high school; no CPAs [certified public accountant].  Many of those folks who are now leaders in the legal profession, accounting professionals, were folks that I went to school with.
Story_ID: 481938
Speaker 1: What was your impression of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and who was there when you got--okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Extraordinary place.  It was--understand that I started Howard in 1962, it was in the height of the civil rights crescendo, if you will, and so lot of civil rights activity and that kind of thing going on.  Howard is--was then and is still an open campus in the middle of a city, so that has a lot to do with the flavor of the school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] there when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he started at that time, he started there during that time--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and much of the activity was then in Virginia, and North Carolina, as you remember, is where the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee [SNCC] actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sit-ins and such, you know?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and Howard was an open culture.  Time I grew up in Houston [Texas], there were, there was more conformity, didn't have a lot of the fringe activity and avant-garde activity that you find.  You find all of that then and now, I understand, and I had a son [Anthony W. Hall III] that came out of Howard in 1994.  It was that then, so it has always been, I think, a center for thinking for--center of progressive movements, that kind of thing, and that was certainly true when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who were some of the personalities on campus that made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the students, obviously.  Folks like Stokely who were involved in the movement; they were a little bit older than me--a year or two, three older than I was, and they provided focus for what they said we ought to be, ought to be doing and, you know, Howard is a place where if you are engaged, you are engaged because of all of these professional schools around--folks who are in law school and med school, and students, so if they didn't stand out as individuals, it was kind of that culture that you would know folks who were in their second and third year of law school, or in their third, fourth year of medical school, and you--and they're on the same campus as you are, so to speak.  I mean Howard, everything is in the city, but at that time, they were all kind of in one geographic space.
Speaker 1: So you had a lot of role models on the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and just, you know, a lot of exposure because I didn't have that at home at the time.  Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] was here, but it was new and young, and had a law school but it was young and fledgling.  Howard had a law school forever, I think, and all.
Speaker 1: I think--wasn't James Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] the president?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I was there.
Speaker 1: He's a law school man.
Speaker 2: His granddaughter was in my high school class [at Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], just to add a small thing, her name was Jo Louise Johnson.
Speaker 1: And did you know that then?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes.  (Pause) That's not right.  No, that's an error, that's not right.  It is--Nabrit's predecessor.  Johnson was her (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Mordecai Johnson.  Yeah, I was thinking about the Johnson when you said it, yes.  Mordecai Johnson's daughter.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was her, it was her; Johnson was her grand- yeah, it was her--it's her grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, his granddaughter was in your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my high school class in Houston, yeah.  So, that's not correct.  It wasn't Nabrit, it was Johnson, Mordecai Johnson.  The--but there are some people who were faculty members.
Story_ID: 481939
Speaker 1: I was also head of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], in addition to being head of ROTC at Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] when I went to Howard.  Those folk had a big, big impact on me, and there was a fellow who was dean of students at that time whom I know now, and work with, who I got to know and took some, some interest, I think, in me.  I guess the two people I ought to mention at my high school because they probably had the greatest of impact on me, and they were the two ROTC folks in high school.  One of 'em's name was Captain Brailsford, Alfred, Alfred Brailsford.
Speaker 2: How do you spell that last name?
Speaker 1: B-R-A-I-L-F-O-R-D [sic.].  He was the head of the ROTC program at Yates.  The assistant--his assistant is still living, and later became a principal of--an elementary school principal here.  His name is Cameron Wells [Cameron Wells, Jr.], and those two folks had a big, big impact on me as I was growing up in high school.  They were kind of my heroes and were the models of character and integrity and, and, and determination, frankly, for me--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because both of them were military officers at a time when, when there was not complete acceptance of folks like them as military officers.
Speaker 2: Now, did you have any heroes in the U.S. military when you were that age?
Speaker 1: Not really.  I had an uncle.  One of my mother's [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] two brothers was in the service as an enlisted man.  He was a sergeant, and got killed in the very, very early parts of the Vietnam War.  And, you know, if it was a hero, it made it close.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you know about people like Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.] and Benjamin O. Davis, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Only because I had read about it, yeah, only because I had read about them, obviously, and through ROTC you knew about 'em, but I, you know, had no connection to that.
Story_ID: 481940
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just asking you off-camera about some of the people who were on campus, and did you pay particular interest to the law school students and what they were doing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did because I knew some.  I knew some of the kids, there were some from Texas--from Houston [Texas], in law school at the time I was in undergrad school, and so I knew 'em.  You did--they were, they were inspiring to the extent that it rec- it had you recognize that you didn't have limitations when you saw students, and that, that has impressed me all of my life, that, that even casual exposure can change the outlook of young folks because when you see folks like you who are doing things that you didn't know about, it makes it a lot easier for you to see yourself in that place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's a good point.  So, what was your major in--
Speaker 2: Well, when I started, I told you, my major was chemistry--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I am probably one of the very, very few economic graduates from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with forty hours of chemistry because I decided I didn't wanna be a doctor, and I didn't know what I wanted to be, so I finally decided--my degree is in economics.  I have a bachelor's degree in economics and so I found that interesting and that the public thing, and the influence and impacting, and so I ended up--because I'd had this math-science background, ended up with a degree in economics, and at that time, you had to have a minor.  I mean you had to have, I don't know, I think thirty hours in one thing and fifteen in another--something like that.  There was some calculation you had to have because you had to have a minimum number of hours in a second subject area, so I wound up with a degree in economics and a minor in math because I had taken those math courses (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --so I graduated with a B.A. in economics from Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any stories from your, your Howard days that you wanna tell us about?
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of 'em, but I don't wanna talk about 'em (laughter).  I had a lot of good times at Howard (laughter), I had a very good time at Howard.
Speaker 1: So, did you join a fraternity?
Speaker 2: No, after college I did.  Not in college, after college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.  So it wasn't necessarily--it wasn't necessary to have--to join one to have a good time in college.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, and particularly now.  I think it's still that way today.  Howard is, I guess in some ways unique, as I said, because it's in the middle of the District [Washington, D.C.].  It's in the middle of town, and at that time was only blocks away from the entertainment venues and, and, and, and the night life--U Street night life.  Much of that's changed today, but at that time, you could go see [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis and all at the Caves, as we called it--the Bohemian Caverns [Washington, D.C.], for a ten dollar cover charge.  Sit there all night and have your one drink, and we used to do it.  The Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.] existed, and a venue at that time may have included Marvin Gaye and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The 'Motown Revue' [sic. 'Motortown Revue'], the whole--yeah--
Speaker 2: You could get three, four groups, known groups, performing and they would perform two, three shows a day on weekends.  Maybe one in the morning at ten, and one at two in the afternoon, another at, you know, six, eight at night.  And for Howard students, as I recollect, it maybe was a dollar to go see the show (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you know Roberta Flack?  Was she in school?
Speaker 2: She was not in--she was not somebody I knew, but she was of that era.
Story_ID: 481941
Speaker 1: Did you get involved in any of the civil rights activity on campus?
Speaker 2: I did once (laughter), and as you know, part of the genre at that time was willingness to get arrested, and Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] had at that time, mandatory class attendance requirements.  That seems arcane nowadays because I understand now you don't have go to class at all if you pass the tests at some places you test.  Howard had this deal where you had ex- you could miss, unexcused, as many days as the hour credit for the class was, so if it was a three-hour credit class, you could miss three days.  If it were a five-hour class, as was most chemistry classes, and that kind of thing, you could miss five during the whole semester.  And my folks called me (laughter), and told me that they didn't care what I was doing, but if I flunked out of school 'cause I'd missed class--and if you got arrested, sometimes you didn't get out, so, so (laughter) you had a problem, and that was not considered an excused absence by Howard that you got arrested.  And so I didn't--that did not happen to me but once, and so I didn't do that anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the demonstration that you took part in?
Speaker 2: It was a demonstration in downtown D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for something.  We got released the same day, they just wanted to get us off the streets, I think, and that's when I decided what wasn't what I was supposed to be doing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, we were trying to think off-camera of the man who was the dean of students then and--but he was somebody you thought was significant.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I will remember the name.
Speaker 1: Both of us can't--neither one of us can remember his name but he is a significant figure in the school.
Speaker 2: Right.  He's retired now for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any stories about him, or anything?
Speaker 2: No, only, only his caring, it was clear.  There were career educators and educating--educational administrators in those days whose, whose true commitment was the success of the students at these places, and students knew that, could feel that, knew that; that's what gave them first influence with us, and secondly, gave us confidence in their advice and guidance.
Story_ID: 481942
Speaker 1: As you were approaching graduation, were you considering law school when you were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  It was my full intent to be the first black general from Sunnyside, Texas [Sunnyside, Houston, Texas] in the [U.S.] Army; I was--it was--I got commissioned as a regular Army second lieutenant.  Out of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], as I recollect, in your third or fourth year of the ROTC program.  I think it's your fourth year, I don't remember now--third or fourth year--there are some students that they designate what's called distinguished military students--distinguished military graduates, or something like that, and the significance of it is you get offered a regular Army commission, like a West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] commission, and I accepted it.  I was offered a designation, so I graduated.  It changes your minimum commitment to the [U.S.] military, and it is viewed as a commitment to a lifetime military career, and at that time I was very, very--what we called gung-ho, I was--I chose infantry.  It wasn't forced, it's what I chose, and so I went in the military as a regular Army second lieutenant.  Promotions were very fast in that era because it was in the Vietnam War era, this was '67 [1967] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that's an interesting era to be excited about being in the Army, a lot of black people--I mean the average black person wasn't necessarily excited about going, but a lot of black people ended up in the military.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and let me tell you why I think.  Much of the resentment and the anti-war stuff started after that, started more in like '60s [1960s]--'5 [1965], '6 [1966], '7 [1967].  A lot of change took place in that era.  In '62 [1962] when I--or '67 [1967]--I'm sorry--came much of the demonstrations started in '69 [1969], '70 [1970], when they had the Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] events and all of that intervening.  And in '67 [1967], the war first had not been intensified to the extent it was, you know, Tet [Tet Offensive] was in '68 [1968] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I think, I think you're right.  In the '60s [1960s], it seemed to be a common--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the reason--
Speaker 1: --feeling that it was an opportunity--
Speaker 2: That's what it's about for blacks.  It was one of the few significant American institutions where blacks had actually risen and could rise on the basis of some reasonable merit and, you know, that you, that you, that you--and that, that's what it kind of represented for me; I mean, you know, you were--if you were good, you know, you, you, you got promoted and, and I got promoted--stayed a second lieutenant only one year--first lieutenant only one year.  Now, that was not that unusual in the military during that time, so I was a captain two years after I went in the military.  And then most folks of my era then, because it was in the middle of the Vietnam War, got promoted real fast like that.  The--I went to Viet- I went to Europe for a year and a-half--went to Berlin [Germany] for a year and a-half, and then went to Vietnam, and I got shot in Vietnam, and by that time I was married with a kid, and my wife [Carolyn Middleton Hall] and my mama [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] and my daughter [Ursula Hall], who had spent some time over there in Europe with us, all were just absolutely terrified of the prospect that I would go back to Vietnam for a second tour, because I stayed in the military.  I came back from Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Now, now, let me go back a little bit and just get a chronol- now, you came out of Howard in--what year was this?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay.  And then you joined--and--well, you went on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went straight into the Army.
Speaker 1: --straight into the Army.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 481943
Speaker 1: When were you shot in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: In--I went in--let me see, sixty- '68 [1968], '69 [1969]--I went in July of '69 [1969], and came back in July of '70 [1970], so it probably was like about June of '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that right, honey?  I went in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: And can you tell us what happened?  What--you know, how did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean how did I get shot?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: Some guy shot me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laugher) Yeah, were you in--on some special mission, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were--I was an infantry company commander in Vietnam.  I was an infantry captain commanding a company, and I was in I Corps, which is just south of the Da Nang [Vietnam] border, which is in the northern part of Vietnam--lot of boulders.  It's not flat terrain as exists down in the south where you see around Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam] in that area--mountainous, boulder kind of terrain.  And, because it was so close, Vietnam narrows geographically as you get up to Da Nang.  The border of Vietnam is fairly narrow, just south of what they call the DMZ [demilitarized zone], and because Laos was there and--oh, you had a lot of activity all the time.  We spent much of our time patrolling, and many of the, many of the, the combatants, the North Vietnam combatants, were regular army--NVA we called 'em, North Vietnamese Army [People's Army of Vietnam] personnel, and so we'd get helicoptered in.  You could not--difference of the south in these things, you see with these trucks.  In that part of the country, the only way you would get around was either to walk, or with a helicopter.  I mean there were no roads and all of that in these mountains and stuff, and so we would wind up on hilltops, some mountaintops you find to control the area.  And they would send us into these places where intelligence had suggested there would be the enemy, and they would actually, in these boulders--in these mountains--establish hospitals and underground tunnels and all, and we were sent to discover one and we did, and what you would do is you take CO and you'd blow it up--powdered CO, and you blow it up in there so they couldn't use it anymore and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  Well, they were obviously there.  There was a hospital and we were--had destroyed one of these hospitals.  We're coming out, and obviously they were sniping at us.  You got 140, 150 guys with you, and I had gotten a shoulder--a soldier shot, and you have to make a lot of decisions.  A tough decision is if it's bad enough that you have to stop and create a perimeter to try to get a helicopter in, which then provides a target for the helicopter 'cause people all around, or can you carry 'em out 'til you get a little safer--in a little safer situation?  And to do that, you almost got to make a personal assessment, you know, and so I had leaned over this fellow who had gotten shot in the leg and--were you in the [U.S.] military?  No matter how old you are, if you're the company command, they call you the old man--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so (laughter)--I was twenty-four, I think, and so--but they call you the old man.  So I had leaned over to ask this guy, "How bad you hurt?"  And when I did that, the guy shot me--one of the snipers shot me, and that's what happened.
Speaker 1: You got shot in the side?
Speaker 2: Got shot in the hip.
Speaker 1: The hip?  Okay, all right.  Okay, so they brought you back home, or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No, no, you stayed there.
Speaker 2: Came back because it missed bone; it went in and came out without hitting a bone, and so I stayed in the hospital for a week, ten days, and then stayed on convalescent leave over there for two or three weeks.  I only had like two, three months left on my year tour when that happened so, so--I don't know.  I can get you the date, it's on the Purple Heart and all that, I mean the actual date of it, I just don't remember, frankly.  And came back--stayed over there for a year and came back, and that's when I--at that time, young captains were looking at what they call a year's turnaround policy, you go to Vietnam for a year, you come back here for a year, and you go back for another year.  And typically, the rotation was that you--whichever you, you did on your first tour, meaning whether you served with an American unit or served as an advisor they called 'em--as advisor to a Vietnamese unit, you've switched that on the tours, and the prospect of me going back serving as an advisor to a Vietnam unit at the time was not attractive, and so that's when I resigned.  On a regular Army commission, different to a reserve commission, you don't have an exit date, an expiration date, you have to resign to get out of the service, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 481944
Speaker 1: Did you have a plan for what you wanted to do next (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  When I got out--my wife's [Carolyn Middleton Hall] father was very active in the labor movement in this area--in the state, and had participated in the election of a county commissioner in county government here.  A county commissioner had never--at that time, had never hired an African American in an administrative capacity--I don't mean secretarial, and so I became an administrative assistant to a county commissioner in Harris County [Texas], and that job was offered to me.  I got out of the service in like January the 6th or 7th, or something; it had been offered to me like in November.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you worked for Harris County commissioner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jamie Bray [Jamie H. Bray].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, Jamie Bray was--
Speaker 2: That's his name.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  Okay, all right.  So--all right.  So--now, when you were--about that same time, I think the--from the note I have here, the first black elect- was elected to the Houston City Council, you know, I think, in the history, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I was in the--among the second two.
Speaker 1: No, not that you were, but I said somebody was elected in '71 [1971] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, during the--yes, exactly, yes.  Yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --when you were working for the county commission, yeah, all right.  So did this--and then you went to the Democratic National Convention, I think, in '72 [1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: I went to a lot of 'em, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you got involved in party politics (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when I came back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And had you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact, I was only back a year before I decided to run for the legislature, and got elected.  Almost two years to the day I got out of the [U.S.] Army, I was sworn in to the Texas Legislature--
Story_ID: 481945
Speaker 1: Now, did your thoughts change any about the war [Vietnam War] and that sort of thing, when you came back, and the, did that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's an interesting question, and I need to explain that, you know, there was not Internet back then.  Media exposure in a war zone back then was almost entirely the consequence of written communication you got from home, and stars and stripes forever.  I mean you didn't get, you know, CN- no CNN and all of that kind of business, and frankly, because I went to Vietnam in '69 [1969], just after the Tet Offensive, and I was explaining earlier, this anti-war movement hadn't crescendoed at all, there was a huge transformation between the time I left and the time I came back, and that year, '69 [1969], '70 [1970], is when much of the crescendo actually peaked, and the anti-war movement.  So, I was not, and most of the soldiers over there, were not aware of much of the turmoil that was taking place.  I don't mean that there was a blackout, but I mean you just--you didn't get the daily dose of that, and there's no TV out in the middle of bushes--I mean no radio and TV and all that business.  And so when I got back, frankly, I had to be, you know, acclimated to the nature of the political debate, and I've got to tell you candidly, that I, until this day, remain disappointed that the war was conducted in the way it was.  As a military officer, I can tell you that, that the conduct of the war in terms of our trying to, to thread the needle between being in the war and not being in the war caused a good many of our soldiers to lose their lives unnecessarily.  War is war is war, and when you're in a war, lives are at stake; you need to be in it to win, or you need to have people to help.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: And as a military officer, I mean I still maintain that view.  We had no-fire rules, and all of that kind of business, that frankly inhibited our capacity to win.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--so, how did you feel when the war was over, when they actually called--when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] actually called the troops back in '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: I felt that a good many of the soldiers who had served under my command had not been honored, by the way the war ended.
Speaker 1: So you think it would have been better for them to have fought to victory, or something, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think--it's not quite that simple; I don't mean fought to victory, I mean there could have been victory achieved earlier because, you recall, there was great concern about the Chinese, you know, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, which had--it's kind of like the adage of fighting with one of your arms tied behind your back, you know.  That's why I say there's got to be, in my view, a resolution that when you go to war, you go to war with enough to win, and you go to war with a single determination to win, or you don't go at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean war is not a play thing, people get killed in war, it's not a casual activity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the whole hog deal.
Speaker 1: And the reason why I'm asking so much about it is because the '72 convention [1972 Democratic National Convention, Miami, Florida]--I know the Democratic convention was very much anti-war.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: George McGovern was the nominee and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And in my views, as I see it a little bit, a little bit, a little bit different because they don't relate to the philosophy necessarily, whether we should or shouldn't have been in the war.  I was a military officer, I've been in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] all my life, and so my view was not so much philosophically, and that was a political question that I wasn't engaged in at the time that we went.  I guess what I'm saying to you is that my views at that time were shaped by the notion that if we were there 'cause I was a military officer, then we ought to be there to win.  I later developed notions about whether we should have been there, and what ought to be the rules for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were thinking like a military strategist, basically, yeah.
Speaker 2: Precisely, that's what I was, that's what I was, yeah.  I mean that--because that was my life.
Story_ID: 481946
Speaker 1: What was the political climate like at that--well, Houston [Texas] elects its first--or Robinson [Judson W. Robinson, Jr.] is elected to city council--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --first one in, I think, since Reconstruction, or something?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, the climate--the political climate here was changing for the better, I suppose, I guess, right--for black people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, but it was all over the country, I think, to some extent, because the real reason, I suppose, if we wound up with a larger city council.  When he was elected, we had eight city council members and the mayor, so we had nine people on the Houston City Council.  Three of them were ostensibly supposed to be at-large, and five from districts, but everybody ran citywide, it was a farce.  In other words, you represented a district, but all eight of 'em ran citywide.  Well, a series of lawsuits across the country, based on what's called single-member district representation.  It happened in the legislature [Texas Legislature] and on city council, that's how I wound up going to the legislature.  Well, the same thing happened in city council, which resulted in--this is now after six years in the legislature--resulted in our expanding the council to fifteen members--five at-large, nine from districts, and the mayor.  And I ran for one of the newly-created districts, and for the first time, those people were elected from just those districts.  So the area that is Third Ward [Houston, Texas] is the area that I ran for, from where TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] is, and all of that, which included the district that I had represented in the legislature because city council districts are larger than state legislative districts by about three times.  And I served two terms as a district councilman, and then ran citywide and served three terms as a citywide elected city councilman, but this followed three terms in the legislature.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, what was it like being in the--what was the legislature like when you were elected?
Speaker 2: Was a wonderful experience; I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, that's your first--
Speaker 2: --twenty-eight, twenty-seven, twenty-eight years old when I went to the legislature (laughter), so, you know, I was young, I was, I was idealistic, I was full of energy, and, and, and it was a refreshing era, 1972.  We were sworn in in '73 [1973].  Mickey Leland and Craig Washington later went to--all of us went to the legislature at the same time--five of us.  Before that, there had only been three blacks in the entirety of the legislature since Reconstruction--two in the house--Curtis Graves, as you may know, worked for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] for a time in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] after that, Barbara Jordan had been in the senate [Texas Senate].  There was another representative guy who is a bishop in the United Methodist church from Dallas [Texas], Zan Holmes [Zan Wesley Holmes, Jr.] is his name, who had--was a state representative from Dallas.  So, the three of them--two in the house, one from Houston, one from Dallas.  When we went there, there were nine of us (laughter), and there were stories written that the whole thing had changed, and there were gonna be riots.  It was kind of weird, and it was from another era, but there were nine of us in the House [Texas House of Representatives] at one time.
Speaker 1: How many are there now?
Speaker 2: My guess is that the Black Caucus [Texas Legislative Black Caucus] has, what--fourteen?  Yeah, fourteen, fifteen.  There are 150 members in the House--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --from across Texas, and I'd say probably fifteen of 'em.  I can get the number for you--probably fifteen of 'em are from--are black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess I'm--well, I hate to say I'm asking from a position of ignorance but I've heard of Barbara Jordan and Mickey Leland, you know, but I don't know who all else--about some of the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Craig Washington later went to [U.S.] Congress and followed Mickey Leland in that seat.  In fact, ran--and he, he's a good friend.  He is a--he was one of that group, went on to Congress.  I don't know how I would make you, from a national perspective, know any of the others 'cause I'm not sure they had a national platform, but Beaumont [Texas] has a representative now.  It didn't then, but later on a representative from Beaumont.  There's a representative from Fort Worth [Texas]; they didn't have him, so they been expanded geographically, and there are more of them from Houston and Dallas than there were originally.
Speaker 1: Was it a big transition, going from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A huge transition, but it was heightened by--
Speaker 1: Yeah, going from military thinking to being a politician.  A politician has to compromise everybody to work with--
Speaker 2: Well, not, not really because, because I think that the analysis is largely the same, and it's a question of defining objectives and figuring out what you got to do to, to achieve 'em.  I did not find that difficult at all.  Now, I can tell you that, that it made you, maybe, less tolerant of some of the stuff that happens in politics and it may not be good (laughter), but that's the reality of it.
Story_ID: 481947
Speaker 1: When did you go to law school?  Now, you went to Thurgood Marshall [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to law school after--I started law school at the very same time that I started city council [Houston City Council].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that would have been 1979.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay, all right.  So, did you, did you go to law school because you thought it would--well, since you--you're into politics already, you think it was a good idea to become a lawyer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it wasn't that, it was--I never wanted to be a captive of an office.  I had seen people, not necessarily black people, but people where their being was the office they held.  I had seen people who maybe had to compromise because of their need for survival, for making a living, and I observed that as long as you could crawl out of bed, if you were confident, and if you were reasonably good, that you could practice law, represent people who would pay you, and you were pretty much independent in doing that.  And so I decided, well, I needed to have a profession that allowed me not to be captive of an office, that was independent of my office, if you will, and that wouldn't allow anybody to have undue influence on me, as simple as that can be.  And, and that's the major drive.  I love the law; the fact that I wasn't a lawyer in the legislature [Texas Legislature] heightened my appreciation for it, and so those three things, I guess, are the reasons that I went to law school.
Story_ID: 481948
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were talking about the op- I guess the talented blacks going into politics in the past, and the other professions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I was merely commenting that it's my view that things have so radically changed in terms of opportunity.  It's a sign of progress in one sense that our conversation about the kind of people who are now engaged in public office--involved in public office who maybe don't fit the traditional model with a whole lot of preparation and legal training and--because we used to get more of those kinds of folks in public office and I argue that there's a reason for it.  It was--in the '60s [1960s], the '70s [1970s], the '80s [1980s], it was one of the few areas--it and the [U.S.] military--where talented blacks could go and could receive some reasonable measure of fairness in using their talents and advancing, so you wound up with, with some of our best out of graduate schools, and that kind of thing, in public life.  Now, there so many opportunities for young talented black people to do things that I didn't know about even when I was growing up, that they are taking opportunity for.  It would be very difficult--my son [Anthony W. Hall III] graduated from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], has an M.B.A. from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  It would be very, very difficult, I think, to get him involved in politics and public affairs directly because he has opportunities to do things in public finance and all that I didn't even know about when I was growing up, and he is just representative, I think, of a whole--and that's progress.  Frankly, that's what we fought for--those kind of opportunities; I mean we have blacks who work in foreign affairs, and all kinds of things that just kind of were not even on the radar screen when I was growing up.  The downside to that is we need the best talent in the public arena also because it is still the institution that can literally change American society and can change the avenues of opportunity who can help all of us realize our own human potential.  It is the institution that can assure, if it has the will, equal educational opportunity, quality education, so that all of us have a chance to use our talents and to advance.  So, the upside is we've got all these new things, and you can see it almost daily; I mean we've got now heads of major corporations that we hear about--American Express [American Express Company], Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.]--that are literally led by black people.  Didn't any such thing exist when I was growing up, and frankly it didn't exist in our country until the last couple of decades.  The downside to that is so many of 'em now are in the pipelines to do those things, and we still need that talent in the public arena--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --to force this change and to keep that progress underway.
Speaker 1: And I forgot to mention this.  In '73 [1973], you received an award from the union, the Cotton Hook of the Year award (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They call that the Cotton Hook of the Year award, yeah.  It was an award made annually by the International Longshoremen's Association to a public official that they thought had provided good leadership, good leadership, and they called it the Cotton Hook of the Year when they actually gave you a cotton hook, which is an implement that longshoremen used to grab cargo, typically cotton and hay, out of the hulls of ships (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right, okay.  Well, that's significant to get an award from a union (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a politician, and so--yeah.
Story_ID: 481949
Speaker 1: Well, what was city hall--council like?  I mean the city council [Houston City Council]?
Speaker 2: It was a different era.  It was fun.  As I indicated to you earlier, it was the, the transition period when we went from council of eight council members and the mayor to fourteen; we had never had more than one and wound up with three on council, and at a later time when I ran at-large, we wound up with four blacks out of fourteen, the highest percentage of blacks we've ever had on council.  We don't have four now, unfortunately; there only three now but there were, there were four of us.  It was an exciting time in Houston [Texas].  We had progressive mayors, the city literally changed in that era.  We had a first woman mayor, Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire], who brought Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] to Houston as a police chief at a time when, I think it's fair to say, we were probably rated in terms of police-community relations, as the worst police department in the nation.  We had a--didn't have a black who was over the rank of sergeant.  Lee Brown literally transformed all of that during the time he was here.  It was an exciting time to be a Houstonian.  And let me say, even before her, there was a mayor, Fred Hofheinz, who started this kind of progressive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: Fred Hofheinz.
Speaker 1: Hofheinz?  F-H-H--
Speaker 2: H-O-F-H-E-I-N-Z--
Speaker 1: Okay, Hofheinz, all right.
Speaker 2: --whose dad [Roy M. Hofheinz] had been mayor of Houston at an earlier time.  His dad created the Astrodome [Houston Astrodome; NRG Astrodome, Houston, Texas], the Eighth Wonder of the World, who was also county judge here at one point, but who was progressive, who brought blacks in city government at the higher levels for the first time in numbers, and then Kathy Whitmire, as I said, came in and, and named blacks in an unprecedented way and, and, and before her and following Hofheinz was a fellow, Jim McConn, who continued that progress.  And I guess I mention that to make the point that Houston has had a string of very progressive mayors who have seen diversity in the Houston community, and diversity in its government as a key strength of this community, and have emphasized that, and that continues until this day.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know I've heard people talk about Houston in the '40s [1940s], and how--what a racist place this was, but then again, you have the example, as you've just described, of all these progressive mayors (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, much farther than the '40s [1940s]; it was indeed probably the racist, place in the '40s [1940s], yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not that all kind of formal--
Speaker 2: This change started in the early '70s [1970s], about the time I went to the legislature [Texas Legislature] is when this change started.  Houston was not viewed as a progressive place before that, but since about the '70s [1970s], and continually since then, we have had this string of progressive leadership that has--and it is a public kind of acknowledgement and pronouncement of our strength.  Diversity is advertised here as a great plus, and with that is an effort to try to live those words by assuring that there are blacks in every major public institution at the most senior levels.  There was a time in Houston, fairly recently, when superintendent of schools was black, the head of the hospital district was black, the mayor was black, our police chief was black.  It--you just go on and on.  I mean it--there was a conscious effort to assure that this diversity was lived as much as it was talked about as a reality, and that started in the early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the early (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before that--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --our reputation was as you described, and it was probably earned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know in the--as the '70s [1970s]--as we got into the '70s [1970s], people that I went to school with were coming to Houston and Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a place of opportunity.
Speaker 1: --was the Sun Belt cities--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and they, you know, really, you know, looking for opportunity.
Speaker 2: We began to be diverse--in persistence being a progressive leadership, and it's continued until this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Don't mean to suggest we didn't have problems, but the tone of this community is one of tolerance and celebration of diversity.
Story_ID: 481950
Speaker 1: What were the, I guess, the main issues in the city when you were, when you were on city council [Houston City Council]?
Speaker 2: It transformed.  The principal issue--public issue in the city at the time that I was elected was still police-community relations because we had about three very celebrated cases of, of police misconduct and, and, and probably America's worst relationship with the black or minority community--both Hispanic and black community in the police department and, and, and Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire] changed much of that with a single stroke in bringing Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] here.  It was--that was a revolutionary move in Houston [Texas].  The issue of representation was the mantra at the highest levels, which is what produced the result that I just described, so there was a constant push on the part of the community to assure that this government, city government particularly, represented in its leadership the community that it purported to represent.  That was a constant issue.  What remains as an important issue, and has remained since that day and is still probably a seminal issue in Houston, is full integration of community and economic success of this community and all parts of it, and there is still great concern about the lack of full economic participation by blacks and Hispanics in the Houston economic success; those are evident in so many ways--affordable housing and housing opportunities, quality education; I call all of those economic issues.  Quality education for kids is still seminal issues for us.  Public safety, people would argue, is an issue, but it's not now a racial issue in Houston necessarily.  Many would say public safety issue generally.  That's a radical change from the way it was when I started.  You don't hear people talking necessarily now.  Occasionally there is a police incident that causes people to question whether there was racial fairness in the incident, but it's not the community, if you will, against the police department, the way it used to be, and part of that's Lee Brown's introduction to what's called community-based policing issues all over the country now.  And so there--this notion that it's us against the police has disappeared in Houston largely.  Largely the issue now, when people talk about public safety, is crime period, and much of that request comes from the black community, you know what I'm saying (laughter)?  So, it's a different debate than what it used to be.  The public issues, I think, in way of priority, quality education, housing, and economic opportunity to entrepreneurship, and participation in the success of the community are probably the broad issues of the day.
Story_ID: 481951
Speaker 1: Tell us about becoming the chairman of the Metropolitan Transit Authority [Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County].  This is 1990, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was leaving city council [Houston City Council], and, and Kathy Whitmire [Kathryn J. Whitmire] asked me if I would--we were in the middle of--as we continue 'til this day to be debating--the middle of very intense debate about development of the rail system in Houston [Texas].  We have a very unique challenge, in that Houston is almost seven hundred square miles geographically, and has a lower population density than traditional East Coast cities and some West Coast cities, and has made public transportation a continuing challenge for us, but we recognize in 2007 that we, based on the growth projections for the next twenty years, which we will double, that we cannot build highways large enough to accommodate that kind of growth.  There would be nothing but highways that we've got to find alternative means to move people around, to move goods around in this community.  We have long had a monumental community battle about the institution of rail, and there is a whole debating story in history behind that.  I am a big advocate for rail.  We ought to have it, we've got to have it if we are to prosper, and if we are to, to help our citizens not spend two, three hours a day in their cars, on the freeways trying to get [to] work, home, and that kind of thing.  And that debate sort of crescendoed in 1990.  She asked me if I would share the authority because we had a big battle between local developers primarily, and their supporters in [U.S.] Congress.  Unfortunately, Tom DeLay was on the transportation committee.  He was a senior person, and he prohibited us from getting federal assistance for rail in Houston, as a member of the local delegation, while at the same time approving it for other communities.  Seems sort of weird today, but that's what happened.  Fortunately, we have had the voters, for now the third time, approved rail and we, I hope, are on our way to beginning to have the first expansion of the first seven mile system that Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] built, and I might say was built entirely with local money, and Lee Brown, while mayor, had the first seven miles, so the rail system that you see in the center of downtown that runs out to the Astrodome [NRG Astrodome, Houston, Texas]--a little bit better than seven miles, we have now approved a significant expansion of that now out and through the communities that is supposed to be accomplished over the next fifteen years or so, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But those were the issues; those issues really continue to be debated until this day.
Story_ID: 481952
Speaker 1: --You mentioned Tom DeLay.  Has (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tom DeLay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I'm--Tom DeLay is infamous sort of now.  Is--was it tough dealing with George Bush [President George Walker Bush] who was governor at one point, and Tom DeLay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there's different issues, I mean--
Speaker 1: --a Republican revolution that occurred in '94 [1994].  You had like a--Texas was--was Texas a rough place for Houston [Texas] to be in in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, the rail issue is an independent story in reality.  It--developers, then developers, have had an enormous influence on the political life and on the public policy of this community for a long, long time, and there are those who would argue that their economic interest was threatened by having rail and thus having the capacity for higher density population in the city, that, that a lot of money was to be made by going out buying lots of acreage twenty miles from downtown, and then having government and the taxpayers pay for the infrastructure to connect your railroads, and all that stuff so you can get back because those people who live out there eventually start protesting that, "Well, you need to spend the public money to get people here," when probably it would have been wiser, from a public investment standpoint, to fill in all the areas (laughter) in and around the city, and rail accommodates that density would increase.  DeLay sided with that philosophy, and this is extraordinary which is why I put it that way--actually prohibited us from getting federal money for rail; actually passed legislation in the form of riders in the appropriation.  Though it was in there for most every other large community in the nation, we were prohibited from getting federal assistance for rail.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, you mentioned George Bush.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Different issue, broader set of issues--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and frankly, George Bush was not, was not at the time that he was governor of Texas, either as partisan or as punctuated in many of his views as he was.  I would consider him a broader governor than he's been president.
Speaker 1: Hm, that's interesting, yeah.  So it was--he was easier to work with as governor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, if you remember, he got elected partially on his ability to work across partisan lines, to try to develop consensus and, you know, he was not considered by any very large group of persons to be particularly adverse to their interest.  That is not how he is viewed as president (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you think the state is more conservative now than it used to be, or--
Speaker 2: Of course it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually do think so, but I think it's entirely around this partisan alignment that I think is now diminishing.  I think this is breaking down, I think it's been vastly accelerated over the last four or five years.  Actual example of that, in the two largest communities in Texas, Dallas [Texas] and Houston, of all of the elected state judges, and all of our state judges are elected, there was not a Republican--a Democrat on the bench; the district attorney--because Dallas is generally viewed as more conservative than Houston.  District attorney was a very conservative Republican.  All of them--all of the Republicans of Dallas got defeated in the last election, and the district attorney in Dallas, Texas is a black man--that's extraordinary; that has not happened in Houston, but I think the wave is coming to Houston, too, and I think part of that is this breakdown of all of politics being viewed from a partisan perspective.
Story_ID: 481953
Speaker 1: I was asked to ask you about [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Turner.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he ran for mayor, I think, at one point, and I think he was a--
Speaker 2: Competed well, lost in a very close race to a fellow who--Bob Lanier, who wound up being a magnificent mayor, I think, in terms of--a magnificent mayor for diversity.  And I say that because Houston, Texas still is the largest political jurisdiction in America to have a public referendum on affirmative action, and supported it, and that was led by Bob Lanier--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --and I think probably only could have been led by a white fellow who was viewed as--from the community and successful businessman, and that kind of thing.  'Til this day, that is the case.  Everywhere else, unfortunately, to include the State of Michigan, where this has been put on the ballot, affirmative action has been defeated.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: And the Michigan thing was a surprise to most of us; we would have thought that that would not have occurred in Michigan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the voters--and there weren't enough people turning out, you know, really, in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Whatever the reason, the results (laughter) were what counted.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, exactly.
Story_ID: 481954
Speaker 1: In '98 [1998], you became the city attorney.
Speaker 2: That's when Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] was elected mayor and he asked me to be city attorney (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: We have a legal department with 110, 115 lawyers in it, and the city attorney is one of the key administrators--closest advisor to a mayor.
Speaker 1: It's like the corporation counsel in other cities, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: It was a good experience.  It was our first and only black mayor, the times were different, frankly, I think history will indicate that Lee Brown was judged differently than many mayors because he was a--was black and a black mayor, so he was viewed differently by many of the institutions in a community.  Many, many things got accomplished in his administration that I think eventually history will give him credit for.  The rail system was the first rail we had in Houston [Texas], was accomplished in his administration with local money.  We had two athletic stadiums built, we had complete--a complete rebuild of the streets downtown, we had economic development venues created on the east side of town.  I think Lee Brown will have quite a legacy that is not yet evident today.
Speaker 1: Was it a, was it a difficult struggle to--I mean his campaign?  And how did it--I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all three of 'em wound up being fairly difficult--unfortunate.  And, and, and, and let me say that, that in fairness, Lee Brown was police chief, police official, and so he was not--and I think he would agree.  He would say that regularly.  He was not the most accomplished politician--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and that caused the races to be more difficult than they otherwise would have been.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he, he had just come from police commissioner of New York City [New York, New York], I think, when he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he had been drug czar in between that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right, that's right, sure was.  Okay.  So was there a--so, you were part of their--
Speaker 2: I am a close friend of his, a very dear friend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there a--do you think there'll ever be another black mayor?  Well, I know, sure at some point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I think so.  Inevitably, there will be.  I think inevitably, it will be.  Understand that the biggest population segment in Houston is Hispanic, and I think papers--daily papers today indicate that based on the '86 [1986] update of the census, that for the first time, Hispanic numbers actually exceed the Anglo numbers in Houston, that by numerical count, the Hispanic population has more than twice the black population in Harris County [Texas]--not in the City of Houston, but in Harris County.  That's, that's a little bit, a little bit misleading in the sense that in the census, you count everybody--citizen, non-citizens--every living being; obviously, politically, vote count is the most impactful thing, and so many, many of those who are counted in the census are not American--not legally authorized to vote, so there's gonna be a time and a while before that catches up, the actual population numbers, with political impact.
Speaker 1: How are relationships between the black and the Hispanic?
Speaker 2: I think generally good.  I think I would describe them as good mainly because both sides have worked at it quite a bit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, what political issues do they share, I guess, in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, most of 'em come from the same backgrounds economically, the same goals for participation in the economic well-being of the community, and those things tend to unite--come from generally the lower performing schools, so all of those kind of issues tend to unite the two communities.  And frankly, still lack of representation.  I mean there's--numerically, there's still a lack of representation in many, many parts of the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As city attorney, did you have to fend off any special attacks against the administration?  I mean is there any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) By Hispanics?
Speaker 1: No, no, not by Hispanics, by anybody.  I'm just, I'm just wondering; I know--I knew Harold Washington in Chicago [Illinois], he was constantly under attack--
Speaker 2: It happened a lot, but that's part of what goes with the job; yeah, that happened a lot.  Yeah, the city attorney's office is kind of--and it's always been, obviously, a pivotal part of the operation of city government and, and because it has responsibility to draft, interpret, offer opinions on public policy questions and issues, it's always gonna be at the forefront of those debates and discussions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any particular legal issue come to mind that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, we had a lot of 'em while I was there, but they--you know, they're the typical governmental issues and lawsuits about, you know, sexual-oriented businesses (laughter), you know, billboards, and you name it; I mean all the kinds of public policy things that come, come about.  Those are issues that you face, you know.  Tax on the minority--on the MWBE, Minority Women Business Enterprise programs.
Story_ID: 481955
Speaker 1: Says here you were director of the Coastal Corporation [Houston, Texas] in 1999 to 2000 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, that's a private--that's a Fortune 500 business; I'm on the board of directors.
Speaker 1: That's a private--okay, just a--okay, okay, that's a directorship that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see now.  Okay, now you become the chief administrator--administrative officer for the City of Houston [Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Officer when Bill White came to office.
Speaker 1: --and that, that's what you do now, and that's basically a city manager--
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of.  He would call it--he called it deputy mayor--
Speaker 1: Okay, right, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --so that's kind of what I do.
Speaker 1: So that, that happened in 2004, and you're still in that office today.
Speaker 2: I am.
Speaker 1: Well, what is this like, and--
Speaker 2: It's been fun.  Bill White is an interesting fellow; he was a very, very successful private law practitioner who later went to the energy department [U.S. Department of Energy] as deputy secretary, Department of Energy in the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  Came back, was for a time, chairman of the Democratic Party in Texas, then went into--stopped practicing law all together, went into, essentially, corporate life as a CEO of a diversified company--first as--of an energy company and later diversified company dealing with energy.  Dealt with buildings--an extraordinarily bright guy, hardworking guy.  Have learned a lot working with him.  I think he thinks I make quite a contribution to his administration.  It's been fun--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --these last three and a half years.
Story_ID: 481956
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what haven't I asked you about this job that you can tell me and how do you see this as a fit for you?  I guess that's--
Speaker 2: Well, I think this job has been kind of natural.  I served as city attorney for six years and I have had--I served in the legislature [Texas Legislature], served on city council [Houston City Council], so I think I come more uniquely qualified than anybody that's ever had it before.  I happen to be the first black there that has this job but administration of a city government is something that almost everything I have done in the past has prepared me to do, so I find it exciting.  We're doing a lot of new and different things.  I have grown and learned in the job because I have been forced to deal with issues that I hadn't spent much time in before, particularly related to finance, and financial-related issues like pension and healthcare benefits and the intricacies of that, that I had never been particularly involved in before, I have had to become, quote, expert in.  So, it's been exciting.  It's been a good thing.
Speaker 1: Is there any particular project that, that you really would like to complete before your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  One of the principal initiatives of the White [Bill White] administration is the reclamation of inner--some inner city neighborhoods that have been for--now forty years, fifty years--more or less written off.  They were written off because the average tax delinquency of the houses in the community is about nine, ten years tax delinquent, many of them unoccupied, many of them need to be torn down; no, no economic activity in the neighborhoods, obviously, nobody moving in.  We have an initiative that we call Houston HOPE that it started out with six neighborhoods--inner city neighborhoods disbursed around the city that meet this criterion I just described.  It is our plan and hope, by the end of this administration, to have built five thousand assisted affordable housing units in those neighborhoods, to have completely rebuilt the infrastructure in those neighborhoods.  And by affordable, we don't mean poverty housing; we're talking about housing that in the main would be marketed for $130-140,000, but we are offering as much as $30,000 in down payment assistance, we're offering land assemblage concessions to the community development corporations to build those houses.  I believe when we finish, and I think we will succeed, that that will be the impetus, because we can see it happening already, to private housing development in those neighborhoods, so that we will be the best example in America of how you reclaim inner cities in an inner city community with inner city communities like Houston [Texas].  That is called Houston HOPE, and I believe that we will show the nation how to do that.
Story_ID: 481957
Speaker 1: What about your future plans now?  Your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I serve on several boards that--on a huge corporation board [for Houston Endowment, Inc.] that's been a wonderful experience for me, particularly, a fellow who comes from South Union [Houston, Texas], Sunnyside, Houston, Texas to serve on a foundation board that has assets now that approach $1.7 billion, so that your whole job on that board is just do it at that money, and to give away $70-75 million a year.  That has been a new experience.  I'm now in my fourth year of service as a director on their corporate board, a board that has seven to eight directors.  That has been a magnificent experience for me because you get a chance to see literally, all of the community working activity because everybody is asking you for money, and they come to you explaining to you what they do and how they do it, and how effective they are.  It's been a wonderful vantage point to see what's happening in this community.  That's been a good experience; but I've also served on two corporate boards--Fortune 500 corporate boards, and serve on one today that has given me experience to truly gain insight into Corporate America to get a chance to look at, at the corporate management in governance.  I chair the Governor's Committee for El Paso [sic. El Paso Natural Gas Company, LLC], which is a--the nation's largest pipeline company.  We do principally a natural gas development and transportation.  Those experiences are things that I'd like to build on for the rest of the time I have to work hard.
Story_ID: 481958
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I have the view that, that we have got to return, in so many ways, to where we came from.  The African American community historically has lifted itself up, has created its own institutions.  What we call HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] where institutions were conceived in the minds of many people who had never gone to college but who knew that they had a responsibility to try to ensure their own future through educating their kids; we can't keep those schools open today.  You know, I grew up at a time in a black community when we literally did not lock our doors.  That was the community I grew up in and those standards, those values were imposed by our own community, not by somebody external to our community.  We've got to reclaim our heritage by defining for ourselves what is right and wrong, and enforcing that in the communities where we live, not having somebody do it for us, but to do it ourselves.  I think we have got to return to a demand for quality education because it is my belief that that is still the key to our future, the key to success for the young people that are coming along today.  My hope is simply that we go back to who we were so we can make tomorrow brighter for all of us.
Story_ID: 481959
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean--and I say that because not that things can't be improved upon, obviously they can, but you make decisions based on what you know and who you are, and where you are at that time and, and I am satisfied on the decisions I made at the time I made 'em because they helped make me what I am today.  I mean even failures have caused me to grow and caused me to understand why you ought to choose one course over another, so I really mean it; not in an arrogant way--not that I would change anything, but kind of what I am is the product of even the failures that I've had in life, and so I'd say that I have been mightily blessed.  I have had an opportunity to be exposed to avenues and adventures in life that many people have not, and I understand that and appreciate that.  My hope is that, that, that the time that I give to community, and I have always done that, is truly a valuable contribution for what I have been given.
Speaker 1: Have you--are you considering running for a political office in the future, and a bigger office, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely not, no, no.  I've had my fun doing that, and doing that kind of thing.  My hope is to be further involved in Corporate American corporate life, and business and finance, and those kinds of things, and frankly, I don't see my future in government per se, at all.  I mean I probably won't be in government several years from now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You would--you see something maybe as an appointee, perhaps, but not as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I see myself more as being involved on boards of corporations and that kind of thing--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --part of entrepreneurial ventures, and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 481960
Speaker 1: Tell us about your involvement with the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 2: Now Sigma Pi Phi, the Boule is, is America's oldest Greek letter fraternity.  It is not the most well-known, and that has been deliberate, quite frankly, in parts of its history.  Created in 1904, it was created by professionals.  Unlike most Greek letter fraternities, you have to be a graduate of an accredited four year university to become a member of the Boule.  There is a process for very special exceptions, and there're probably a dozen people in a hundred years who have come into the Boule without that college degree.  Probably 70 percent of the Boule membership has advanced degrees.  Its purpose was to assemble predominantly African American men because there are non-African American members of the Boule, but certainly overwhelmingly, African Americans' purpose was to give them an opportunity first to know each other, as we say, to know the best of one another, and to inspire each other by knowing each other.  I have had opportunity to sit next to the pre- the chairman of--and CEO of American Express [American Express Company] when--before he was chairman 'cause he was a younger man, and that inspiration has caused, has caused me to see the world differently, to see myself differently.  The Boule has that purpose; its purpose is to do collectively what individual effort cannot do, and that is to use the great resource of mind and success from predominantly African Americans to change who we are, and to make contribution to the people in the communities where we live.  Now, what is interesting about the Boule, it is--it celebrated its centennial anniversary three years ago, and for its first fifty years, it was officially secret, if you will.  I don't mean super-secret, but it was not public, that has gradually changed, and about four or five years ago, that was completely reversed so that we are now officially public as an institution.  The Boule is still, oh, between 4500 and 5000 people.  It's still very difficult to become a member of it.  It is, it is reserved for those people who we think are accomplished in their endeavors and who have demonstrated some concern for the communities where they come from.  It is an organization that has, I think, provided opportunity for association of black men that there would have been no other opportunity for us to know each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what position do you, do you hold with the Boule today?
Speaker 2: I've held many.  I was--I went through the process to be the youngest elected member--president of the Boule, because for the--until, oh, thirty years ago or so, they were not elected, on the philosophy that everybody was equal, so they just picked a name out of a hat, but started electing 'em about thirty or forty years ago, and I was the only one who'd been elected that was not fifty when I got elected as president, or what was called grand sire archon; it's equivalent to being president.  Now, twenty-five years ago this year, we created a foundation that happily this year has a corpus in excess of $10 million, and its sole purpose is to fund those activities that we decide from the yield that--primarily scholarships and thinking and funding of, of research on issues that are important to us, and it has reached the $10 million mark.  I chair that foundation.  It is of--what the IRS [Internal Revenue Service] calls an affiliated organization.  It's called the Boule Foundation, but it is affiliated with and supported by the Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity that is the Boule.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  Anything else about the Boule before we go on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, except that I am con- I continue to be inspired by the people who are members of that organization--extraordinary human beings.  They inspire me because they look like me.
Story_ID: 481961
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: We haven't discussed your family very much, but--
Speaker 2: I am married now for--'65 [1965] would be forty--'65 [1965]--forty-two years to Carolyn Joyce Middleton Hall [Carolyn Middleton Hall].  She retired this year as a public school teacher in the Houston school district [Houston Independent School District].  We have two children.  Our oldest is a daughter [Ursula Hall] who is forty-two--'65 means forty-two.  She is a lawyer here in Houston [Texas], is an associate municipal judge, which means a part-time municipal judge in Houston.  She went to--graduated from Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts], undergrad school, and from South Texas College of Law [South Texas College of Law Houston, Houston, Texas] as a lawyer in Houston.  She is not married, has not been married.  I have a son [Anthony W. Hall III] who is seven years younger, so he is what, 34, 35, 34--she had a daughter the same age, identically the same age--thirty-four.  He graduated from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and--with a degree in business administration, and then, about five years ago, went into the M.B.A. program at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] at Tuck School [Tuck School of Business, Hanover, New Hampshire], and got an M.B.A., and he works in New York [New York] as an investment banker.  He's not married, so I don't, don't have grandchildren.  I still got my fingers crossed for both of 'em.  They're two wonderful, wonderful children, and got a wife who deserves much more credit than I do for making 'em what they are.
Story_ID: 481962
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point now, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I suppose--my hope is that my legacy is a commitment to service, not just public service, but service to community, and a standard of excellence that represents the history that our forefathers hoped for.
Speaker 1: Okay, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Simply put, that I best represent what they worked for us to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything that I haven't asked that we need to address before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: All right.  The last question is similar to, similar to legacy but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a guy who represented the best of what our forefathers hoped to produce.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you, sir, for spending the time with us (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.  Thank you very much--
Story_ID: 481963
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Anthony William Hall, Jr. [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.], A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, H-A-L-L, J-R.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September 16th, 1944 in Houston, Harris County, Texas.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Presently, I am an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right, and at one time you were the city administrator for the City of Houston [Texas] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was a lot of things at one time.  I was a military officer out of college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and then a member of the Texas Legislature in the house of representatives, and then as a member of the Houston City Council, and following that, for a time as chairman of the Metropolitan Transit Authority here in Harris County [Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County], and following that, was a city attorney in Houston for six years, and following that was chief administrative officer in the city for six years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, it means that I'm, I'm older (laughter), okay?
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  I think it is May 6, 2014.
Speaker 1: And sir, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently in my office, in the conference room in my office in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: And today, we're redoing the first half an hour, and some additional footage from an interview that we started--for an interview we started back in August of 2007.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: All right, the years have passed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 481964
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We've done this before; it's like deja vu.  Sir, what is your--do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I think if I had the choice--I like to eat, so I like a lot of food.  I guess my favorite dish would be gumbo, and many people in some parts of the country are not familiar with good gumbo, but we have good gumbo--seafood gumbo--down here.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: If I had to choose a color, I guess I would say it would have to be maybe tan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I prefer heat.  That seems strange, but the warmer climates--the prettiest part of the year in this part of the country, and I grew up here, is probably spring--a wonderful time, lot of flowers blooming, the air seems fresher.  That's probably if I had to choose one.  Interesting questions 'cause I never had to ponder that.  I mean I tolerate them all like everybody else.  Some people are more inclined to prefer the colder climates, the colder weather here.  The heat is part of living in Houston, Texas, but I tease people and say, "We've learned to air condition even the sidewalks here in Houston," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: A favorite one.  One of the great passions I have is flying airplanes, fly little airplanes.  A group of us, a group of us that I am very much involved with have traveled, I think, five different times, to the Caribbean, and that area is generally one of the, the best and prettiest places to me, and maybe inclined because there--in almost all of the Caribbean countries there are a lot of people who look like me.  Not only people who look like me, but a lot of people who look like me, and it is, it is a wonderful experience to see and go, and you're surrounded, obviously, by lots of water.  So, I would, I would have to pick the area if I had to, to just lock into what is one of the best places, and that's kind of unfair because they all pretty good, but Barbados is a beautiful place to fly your small airplane to, and spend some time with--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase--I, I think the mantras for me personally, and what I say to people that I am closest, to is, "Simply achieve," that it--that ought to be the driver for all of us being and doing the best we can be, and the biggest contributions we can make to family, and generally to society.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really believe that.  I mean that's what we've--we discuss from time to time.
Story_ID: 481965
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Quintanna Wilson Hall Alliniece [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] (laughter), and I need to spell that for you.  Q-U-I-N-T-A-N-N-A, W-I-L-S-O-N, H-A-L-L, and then A-L-L-I-N-I-E-C-E.  My mother and father divorced when I was about five or six years old, and later married Lartress Alliniece, L-A-R-T-R-E-S-S, A-L-L-I-N-I-E-C-E.  But I had a--at least as I visit with folks, a fairly unusual experience for divorcees--a relationship with my mother and my dad, and my stepfather who was just like, for much of my growing up, a father to me, was never, ever acrimonious and was always, in a real sense, part of the same family, and if I didn't do something I should be doing, I was talked to together with all three of them--kind of an usual situation for some who I get, obviously, an opportunity to listen to people's experience about--but that's how my mother wound up originally as Quintanna Wilson, and then later Quintanna Wilson Hall, and then completely Quintanna Wilson Hall Alliniece.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I didn't--I never had sisters and brothers, but did have two stepsisters who were older than me when I was earlier growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us something about your stepfather.  What was his background?  This is Lartress (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) L-A-R-T-R-E-S-S, Lartress Alliniece.  Absolutely wonderful man, was a little bit distressed by what was the times that he lived in because he was actually and officially classified at a big furniture company here--a very upscale furniture company that was called Suniland Furniture, I think, S-U-N-I-L-A-N-D, company.  And he was considered the person who produced displays.  At that time, there were window displays that you see and read about on TV when you look at movies and people look in the windows, and his specialty was carpet.  And he was actually charged with developing and presenting the window displays and that kind of thing, and was called upon by salespeople.  At that time, all of the salespeople were Anglo, and black people, people who look like me, could not have such jobs, so he was always officially classified as a porter, and obviously, privately, would indicate his frustration about that, and had the commiserate compensation for being a porter, but was doing the job of salespeople who were paid better and who were Anglo.  Ironically, as you hear much about in our history, was required to teach them about the products, and they would come to him and--, "What is this brand?"  "What is this weave?"  All of those kinds of questions.  But they were the people who were credited with making the sales and presenting the information, and getting the compensation for doing that.
Story_ID: 481966
Speaker 1: What was his [Hall's stepfather, Lartress Alliniece] ethnic background?
Speaker 2: He was African American, grew up in Bay City [Texas], which is in Matagorda County [Texas], which is very close to here--within sixty, seventy miles from here, but gave me some lifelong lessons and guidance, was an extraordinarily disciplined person, was extremely frugal in his management of finances, and he developed some principles that have been very impactive in my own views, and I translated those to my two children [Ursula Hall and Anthony W. Hall III].  Things like, for instance, I was always taught by him that you shined your shoes every day that you were wearing 'em--every day.  He did it, and I--it's just part of me, it's what I do, and do your own, and that was, to some extent, imparted to me when I was in the [U.S.] military.  And I've always been involved in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] through high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and action in the military.  And another principle, that accumulation of things as a kid, gave you two choices on how you did that, and his biggest example--I had long, like a lot of kids in that era, long wanted a very, very nice and, at that time, by comparison, a fairly expensive bike, and this was before the era of multispeed gear adjustment bikes--adjusting bikes and--but it was fancy in chrome, and you would put streamers on the handlebars and all of that.  And he told me, he said, "You know," he said, "we're gonna get this very nice bike for you for Christmas."  And he said, "You got two choices," he said, "because you have said over time you'd like to have a couple of other things, and the way you ought to live is to take care of that bike, keep it as well as you can, maintain it well, and it's possible for that bike, next Christmas, to look just like it did the day that you got it.  And what that would allow you to do is then move on and get something else the next Christmas," he said, "and you will look back over a few years and you will have lots of stuff, all of which you wanted very badly.  But if you don't, you will have to get another bike next Christmas because you haven't taken care of the one you got, and you won't be any further ahead."  That was profoundly impactive on me in everything, so I keep everything, I maintain everything I got, as best I can, with the goal that will always be like it was when I first got it, and I can move on to get some other things.  And maybe it has impacted the variety of activities.  I have a number of passions.  I love flying, so I have had three airplanes, and I've had this one that I have now for twelve years, thirteen years, and it is in perfect working condition.  It was not new when I bought it, but it was obviously in very airworthy condition.  I developed a desire for boating, and so I bought a boat and I've owned it for twenty-two years--a live-in cabin kind of boat, and it is in the same condition.  I love hunting, and so I've got two guns particularly that I don't shoot now, but had refurbished from one of each of my grandfathers.  I have developed a great passion for scuba diving, and some other things, and I have been able to focus on those things so that I could try to get very, very good at those things.  And also, to do that efficiently, the consequence is that I could then move on because I still have all of those--to do some other things, not because I was wealthy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the principle, and I try to impart that to a lot of young people.
Speaker 1: So he was a valuable stepfather, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, very valuable.
Story_ID: 481967
Speaker 1: Was he [Hall's stepfather, Lartress Alliniece] of a Creole heritage?  I just thought the name seems like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  His, his family, I think, is produced from maybe even a couple of generations before them, that had maybe some Creole background, but there is not great certainty of what the core origins have been for why that name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But it's possible (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he was very dark-skinned (laughter) and never, ever considered--or I knew--anybody who didn't look like me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he--was there a possibility that it was a Haitian name?
Speaker 2: It could have been, it could have been because in those years, documentation was not specific, and at some times, mothers and fathers were not married even, so, you know, it's difficult to get that completely figured out.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suppose his ancestors could have been owned by a French guy, I mean someone with a French name, you know, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It could have been, it could have been, yes.  So, you know that history--that kind of history, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 481968
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece], now what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now you take me back.  My mother's date of birth would be like 1927, I think.
Speaker 1: I have a note here that it was 1916.  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: Sixteen [1916]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Twenty-six [1926], '36 [1936] and seven--it may have been '17 [1917].  I said '27 [1927]--1917.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that's probably more accurate--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --nineteen seventeen [1917] because she was twenty-four when I was born, so I had--have to add those together (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You were born in '44 [1944], so it's--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that's right, that would be right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And she only had one kid, so that kind of--that's the way I calculate that.
Speaker 1: So--and she was born in 1917 and--1917, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Brazoria County, Texas, which is adjacent to Harris County [Texas] where we lived.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Almost adjacent, yes.
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I know that because I have--I don't have sisters and brothers, but I have a first cousin--a lot of 'em (laughter), but one of my first cousins is an amateur genealogist, and so she has done some work on our family because we do have a very large family reunion every year, and have done that for fifty years, that's held down in the country in Brazoria County, or adjacent to Brazoria County, which is Matagorda County [Texas] that we discussed a little bit earlier because that's where her family lived, but it's only a mile across the county line in that whole area down there in Brazoria County.  My, I guess, root family name for my mother is Gee, G-E-E, and my grandfather--my great-grandfather was rooted in the Gee family, as we all were from my grandmother [Rebecca Gee Austin], but I didn't--I never knew him.  My--because he was not living when I was born.  The roots are sort of disparate, and after she was maybe eighty--my mother was maybe close to eighty--did not ever talk to me about her mother's growing up and how that family got developed, and how they were born because originally she had five sisters and two brothers, which is how I wound up with so many first cousins.  I got a lot of 'em (laughter).
Story_ID: 481969
Speaker 1: It was only then that she [Hall's mother, Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] explained to me, as a very grown man--I was probably fifty--that she wanted me to know as much about the story of my grandmother [Rebecca Gee Austin] and her growing up as she could, and these are not things that you can find written down anyplace.  And she explained that my grandfather really had two families and that it was--she was--it's bewildering to me about my mother, it was very clear, was very much embarrassed by that, and it was fairly painful for her to relate all of that to me, and I could not understand that, couldn't explain, you know, to her that I saw no shame in that for her in her development at all.  I mean it was a way of living, apparently, back a hundred years ago or more, and that most of these folks were essentially small farmers, and didn't have obviously automobiles at all, and so moving from one community--not a city, but in--there's one community to another, was on horseback.  They would get a horse and they would ride away, and so they were able to visit one family, not clear whether they knew it then--each other, but later discovered this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that would make it easy to maintain two families--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and that's what they did, and the provisions that they made, they were loading stuff up on a horse with bacon and provisions, and they would put it in a big sack and put it on their horse, with the explanation as best she could remember--was told--it was to help somebody.  And in those years, a hundred years ago, their--insurance and all of those kind of things were not available, public assistance was not as we know it today, and people subsisted by the community supporting folks' needs, and so maybe in that context that was plausible back then, to help somebody who was supposedly a friend they were helping.  It turns out that that was in fact maybe another family.  But, as I said, he was deceased before I was born, so I never knew much about him, so what I know most is my grandmother and my step-grandfather [Bose Austin], whose last name was Austin, and I did know him, and he helped teach me a little bit.  I was young, very young, because I would go there in the summers, and I would get a chance every now and then to just go with him when he was going to plow the field and plant crops, and that kind of thing--not always 'cause I was often, in their view, in the way, but occasionally I could go with him, and he treated me like a son.  When you're that age, you don't know that that's not my grandfather, I mean that's what he acted like and that's what I enjoyed.  And one of my mother's siblings is--was a--her sister, a daughter of his and my grandmother, and I would go there most summers until I was, oh, ten or eleven, and then I would go every summer to then one of my aunts' [Frances Williams]--another of my mother's sisters who, frankly, had the most influence in my growing up other than my mother and my--living with my mother always.
Story_ID: 481970
Speaker 1: Now, what is this aunt's name?
Speaker 2: What is?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the aunt's name that you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frances Williams, and she is the only surviving one of those siblings.  She lives today, and lives just across the Brazoria County [Texas], Matagorda, Matagorda County [Texas] line in a place called Cedar Lake [Texas], C-E-D-A-R, L-A-K-E-S [sic.].  And when I was about, oh, maybe ten, I would spend every summer in what we call in the country, with her and her husband.  His name was Isham Williams [Isham Williams, Sr.].  I grew up with them every summer, and loved it--wouldn't sit there.  By banishment, I couldn't wait until I got out of Houston [Texas] (laughter) and went down to the country all summer and wouldn't have to come back, because that's where I learned how to ride horses, learned how to drive first on a John Deere tractor that my uncle owned, because he, too was a farmer, and learned how to fish, hunt, all of those kinds of things, and helped a lot to develop me because they had a little different mantra.  My mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] was a public school teacher all of her life pretty much, until she retired, and my mother was fairly controlling as a young boy living in Houston and initially not married, but she and Lartress [Lartress Alliniece] married when I was maybe eight--seven or eight years old, but she was more controlling.  There was a different atmosphere in the country with my uncle, you had rules, and everybody had chores.  I would have to feed the cows and horses every day, that's an obligation.  You obviously had to work the fields.  I learned how to pick cotton and all of the things associated with that and, as I said, I learned how to ride--drive by learning to drive with the John Deere tractor.  But the way they operated, once you did your chores, your time was yours.  That's not the way it worked in the city (laughter).  They had street lights, but before it was dark you had to be in the house (laughter), and of course, I was in school, and homework was an absolute requirement, so I would have to spend--and it's amazing how much freedom I considered the different lifestyle in the country 'cause I didn't have homework in the country.  I do what I wanted to do after I did my chores, and you would go do 'em and you didn't consider it oppressive.  You did everything you were supposed to do, you knew what that was, and you got that done--go do what you wanted to do, so we would go hunting, fishing, and all that kind of stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're saying like, we, those are your cousins and--
Speaker 2: My cousins.  I lived with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were six of them that I lived with.
Story_ID: 481971
Speaker 1: Tell us now, what did your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece]--tell us about your mother's growing up, and what, what her ambitions were, and what she was able to do.
Speaker 2: My mother was one, as I said, one of eight children.  Six of them, including her, were girls, and two were brothers.  The oldest was a brother, and she was about the third or fourth.  All of my aunts and uncles I was close to when I grew up, it was the way the family operated.  The family was one big family more or less, and I knew all of 'em well.  In fact, had spent time with 'em, she did spend time with 'em, and my mother became the first one in her family to go and complete college at--is what now is Texas Southern University here in Houston [Texas], but was then--I should remember that history--was not originally named Texas Southern, it was--
Speaker 1: You know, this is--it had a Houston College for Negroes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Houston College for Negroes, I think, that, ironically, initially housed not on the Texas Southern University campus, that occurred later, but she graduated from Texas Southern and started teaching, and lived in Angleton, Texas which is in Brazoria County [Texas].  Though she went to college here in Houston, went back to teach at what was then Marshall High School [A.B. Marshall High School; Marshall Education Center], which was the black school in Angleton, and at that time, obviously, education was much segregated.  And it just so happened that my cousin, who is a Wright [Thomas J. Wright], W-R-I-G-H-T, was the principal of that school, and she taught mathematics at that school for probably five or six years, because I went to the first four grades (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I'm, I'm just confused a little bit.  Your mother taught math, or your cousin?
Speaker 2: My mother did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But was your cousin the principal (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My cousin was the principal at that school.
Speaker 1: At the time your mother was there?
Speaker 2: He hired my mother--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --but he was a cousin, that's my point--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --which may be--she said that may be how she got to start working at that very early age at that school.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have her master's degree then?
Speaker 2: No, not then.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: She had a--she was out of college--just out of college, and went to Marshall High School, and at that time at the segregated school, the--all of the grades didn't have kindergarten, I don't think, but the first through the tenth grade--I mean twelfth grade were all on the same campus.  Elementary school was on one part of the property, and then the junior high in those days was the middle, and then the high school, and it was the school for all of the surrounding area of Angleton down there then.  That's where people went to school--that's where she taught and, and I went to the first four grades there.  Following that my mother then was hired to teach math in the Houston Independent School District, and we came to Houston.
Story_ID: 481972
Speaker 1: My mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] was divorced from my dad [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.] during that--those years and--
Speaker 2: So you said--your mother and father divorced when you were about--you were in the first grade, I guess?  You were about six (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My mother and father divorced when I was probably three.
Speaker 2: Three, okay, all right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I think the years that we were discussing were--there was an intervening period of--oh, I don't know, five or six years before she married Lartress Alliniece.
Speaker 2: So, in your mother's family, there are other educators, you know, but cousins, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You mean now?
Speaker 2: I mean--no, back, back--
Speaker 1: My cousins or hers?
Speaker 2: Back in those days.
Speaker 1: No, she was the first in our family to graduate from college [Texas State University for Negroes; Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Well, the principal [Thomas J. Wright] was a cousin, right?  Of the high school [A.B. Marshall High School; Marshall Education Center, Angleton, Texas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but, but fairly distant but it--and it wasn't one of my grandmother's [Rebecca Gee Austin] children.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They--she was distant, but everybody down there was--even though very extended, was related.  The Wright family was not rooted in the Gee family root, but when somebody says they're your cousin down there, they know the blood connection, but it's not close.  These were not my first--she was not my first, second cousin, but--down the line--but they call it cousins.  And it's important for me to emphasize why that, as principal, that family relationship gave you advantage if you were, quote, part of--some kind of way related.  People thought of you differently, and I always believed--she never said that one of the reasons out of college she was able to go teach high school there, was because that was her cousin.  He had a daughter that I and she were in the same grade with during that time--those first four years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But yes, yes.  So that's why I can see why that's a little bit confusing, but he was not a--when I said, in her family, I really meant her siblings, my grandmother's children.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, now, did other--now, was your mother the--where did she fall in the order of--
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Where did your mother fall in the order in her family of her brothers and sisters (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think she was probably the third child--fourth--third or fourth child.  I remembered--I knew all of that (laughter), precisely.
Speaker 2: But by going to college, did she start a trend?  Did other members of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  As I said, she was the first.  She--clearly not the only one, even--she's the only one of her siblings that graduated from college, but a whole host of us, as first generation folks, went to college.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A host of us--there are a number of us who came in the next generation, from her siblings, who finished and completed college and very accomplished.
Story_ID: 481973
Speaker 1: You were basically raised by your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In effect--and my stepfather [Lartress Alliniece]--
Speaker 1: Your stepfather, right.
Speaker 2: --would spend time with my dad, but he--and he was--I would spend lots of time with him but lived with my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's go to him for a minute and get his name.  His full name and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Anthony, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Hall, H-A-L-L, Sr. [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Hm.  It's approximately 1912 or so; something like that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, about 1912 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And because he was about sixty--no, he would have been about the same, same time because he was about fifty-seven when he died, and I was twenty-four--I had to take that back, I was twenty-four, so if I subtract that, somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he from Brazoria County [Texas]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  He was, was born in Brenham, Texas, which is about ninety miles from here, northwest.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that--Brenham?
Speaker 2: B-R-E-N-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  And what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back do the Halls go (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know them nearly as well and--because my paternal grandmother only had two children--him and a daughter, and the two of them were close.  And I knew them, and I spent time with my grandmother in the summers and on the weekends and that kind of thing.  But generationally, I only met the maternal ex-husband who--they had long since been divorced.  I only met him twice in my life, and like for a day, I was taken to be introduced to him.
Speaker 1: That's your paternal grandfather, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, and so I didn't know him well at all, but did meet him on two different occasions.
Speaker 1: Now, what did they do for a living?  Were they farmers, too, or--
Speaker 2: No, he was essentially a circuit riding preacher (laughter), and so he moved around, living in different places, as I recall.  He was in Brenham originally, and then was in Bastrop, Texas, B-A-S-T-R-O-P, Bastrop, Texas for a while, and then spent a time in and around Killeen, Texas, which is where the [U.S.] military base is, but all of that because he was moving--essentially moving as a preacher from one little town to another.  And my intimate knowledge of much more than that is fairly nonexistent because, as I said, I've only physically met him twice in--at that time, for one day--deliberately taken to meet him so they would know that I knew who he was, and had met him and he knew me, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you fairly young when you met him?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Were you fairly young when you met him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very young.  I--well, I was probably no more than twelve or thirteen the second time I met him.  I met him the first time when I was maybe seven or eight, as I recollect, and then.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the second time I may have been twelve or thirteen, I think, when I met him, and soon thereafter, he was deceased.
Story_ID: 481974
Speaker 1: So, he was a circuit minister and a--now--well, tell us about your father's [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.] upbringing, as much as you know.  I mean how was he brought up and what did he aspire to be?
Speaker 2: My father was essentially raised by my grandmother--by his mother, and he developed the skills of carpentry.  He was a carpenter, but later entered the [U.S.] military--went in the military, and I think that fashioned him a little bit.  Not as a career military person, but I think spent three years, four years--got to be a sergeant in the military.
Speaker 1: Is this in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the Army (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And he spent--I think from last time, I remember, he spent his whole time stateside, right?  He didn't go--
Speaker 2: He didn't go in the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was during World War II [WWII] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was--yeah, well, yes, right about that time, because I was born in '44 [1944], right at the end of the war, and that's when he--during that period is when he met and married my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece].  He was in the military then, and was home and got introduced by another dear friend here in Houston [Texas] who introduced the two of them--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and that's when he married my mother, and when he came back, he started back to doing carpenter work and self-taught himself to design and build plans for houses, and I actually worked for him for a small period of time in the summers.  And that's another story because he would be commissioned to be in charge of building houses--not all for black folks.  One of the projects was in Braeswood [Braeswood Place], here in Houston, which is a fairly upscale Anglo area, and he was the contractor, if you will, but it was, it was basically owner contracted, and he was in charge.  Owner didn't know anything about actually building a house, and my dad had a crew, we called it crew.  Other people--and in those days, they didn't have cars to get there, and all of that business.  And the way the system worked, they would be at a certain corner, and every morning like about 6:30, you'd come by in the truck, and pick 'em up at maybe two, three different places, and you would take them to the job site.  And for a couple of summers, that was my job, to pick 'em up and bring 'em to the job site, and that was in a pretty much segregated era, and so for lunch, there were black-owned, operated restaurants, if you will, but they served what they used to call 'em in those days (laughter), a lot of hot plates.  In other words, they'd fix you hot food.  And so when I picked 'em up, I would then have to take their orders for lunch.  They would want whatever--pork chops--whatever was available, and I would write it down, and so, probably by 10:30, quarter to eleven, my job was to leave there, go pick up the food from the place, and bring it back, so when they stopped working at twelve for lunch, I provided lunch, and my dad paid me.  That was my job for a couple of summers.  I've done a lot of different work things when I was growing up, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's some busy summers, that sounds like (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I got paid, so (laughter) I was--it was not, not all bad at all.
Story_ID: 481975
Speaker 1: And those years were high school, college years, and in that same period, my dad [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.] became interested in law enforcement, and there were not initially full-time black police officers with any law enforcement agency, I don't think, that I can remember.  It was about that time that the first one or two in the entire law enforcement community were full-time police officers, and in those early years of his involvement, he--telling this story--they could not arrest an Anglo.  They were restricted to policing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, was he on the Houston police force [Houston Police Department] or--
Speaker 1: No, he was actually--I was going to explain that--actually went to work--explaining that process--went to work for the Harris County [Texas] sheriff's department [Harris County Sheriff's Office].  That's not true.  Let me retract that by saying he went to work for them because that's a--in my view--a misnomer.  I have to explain to you that they didn't have regular full-time black people working as law enforcement officers.  They had what they call a reserve force, and my dad became a lieutenant in the reserve force, and they require--and that still exists today in a lot of places here.  We still have reserve officers they're called, and they're people who have to get certified.  In most cases, like they didn't get paid.  It was kind of a volunteer effort to help police their own neighborhoods because that's what they were restricted to doing, and he became an officer and, as I said, a lieutenant, in the black component of the sheriff's department then, and their job primarily was to police in the black neighborhoods primarily on a Friday and Saturday night, which is when most of the law enforcement was needed, and they were dressed in the full uniforms of a regular sheriff's deputy, and obviously commissioned with a gun and all of that business, but their job was to police in the black neighborhoods.  And I can't be certain about this, but I think entirely for free--I don't think they got paid ever, for doing that.  But they had to work a shift, and had to be assigned, and all of that business, and that's the way they kept their commission to be a peace officer--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was to do that work--that volunteer work.
Speaker 2: All right, so they could police the black community--that was their charge--but they couldn't arrest white people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  Back in those days black officers couldn't police Anglos.
Speaker 2: And with no pay?  You're sure they got no pay?
Speaker 1: I don't think they ever got paid.  It was considered an honor to do that, and they wanted to police--sort of deal with issues in the black community, and that's what he did.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Interesting times back then.
Speaker 2: It is, and I--you know, I'm tempted to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All of this impacted me a lot.
Speaker 2: I just thought about what happened in New Orleans [Louisiana] back in the '90s [1990s] when they were paying police officers $11,000 a year--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and what they would do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, that was progress from what it had been.  But these guys were--and they were all--initially all men and I have met several during that era because I would spend time with my dad--that developed a few women who were reserve officers for obvious reasons.  They needed women to search folks, and all that kind of stuff.  But that--one of his best friends was, was later hired as one of the first black police officers by the Houston Police Department as a full-time officer; his name was A.V. Young, and he was a friend of my dad's, a very close friend of my dad's.  Later, one of the eight elected constables in Houston [Texas] was one of his friends, also.  His name was A.B. Chambers, and the constable's principal responsibility in our system is to serve civil papers; in other words, process papers.  And he was the first to be elected as such in Harris County--one of my dad's best friends, and he was a dear friend.  I knew him very well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And all of them were involved in that very early era, generally, in, quote, law enforcement, and they developed at that time a statewide organization where they had conventions once a year to try to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 1: I can't now.  I can flash back to find it.  I was actually taken to one of 'em by him--with the group--I mean to the group, just to see and meet those folks.
Speaker 2: This would have been what time period?
Speaker 1: Oh, man.  It would have been in the very early '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 481976
Speaker 1: When those black police officers started organizing, I know Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] African American Police League [Afro-American Patrolmen's League; African American Police League] is usually thought of as being the first formal organization, but I know that's not necessarily true 'cause every time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There are still organizations that exist now, but they are--most of those folks are full-time, long-tenured career officers who lead it, and have been doing it for a long time because there a number of police chiefs in big cities across the country who are black, and have been for a long time.  We've had two of 'em here in Houston [Texas], the first being Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown].
Speaker 1: I know they have, they have the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement [National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Something like that, yes--NOBLE, yes.  And there are several others, and there are some state organizations around that don't have the same name, but this was my first experience with them because my dad [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These were all volunteers--I'm sorry, but these are volunteers--just trying to make sure that--or mostly volunteers.
Speaker 2: A.V. Young, that I talked about earlier, with HFD [Houston Fire Department], was among the first two or three but not a lot of 'em (laughter), but two--during that time, two or three that were actually hired as full-time municipal--regular municipal police officers with the Houston Fire Department.  That occurred at a later period in the sheriff's department [Harris County Sheriff's Office] that my dad was 'cause they had these--Houston didn't have this auxiliary thing, but the sheriff's office had this, quote, auxiliary program.  That's what they called it.  And my recollection is there was never, ever any compensation for what they did.  In fact, I think, as bad as having to buy your own uniform, and gun, and equipment and that kind of thing, but you were treated like you were compensated, and if you didn't spend your--whatever the requisite requirement was--maybe two weekends out of the month, or something like that--if you didn't do that work--it was mostly at night for obvious reasons, because you were policing in the black communities, in night clubs, and all that kind of thing, then you were fully authorized to police in those areas as a reserve officer, is what they called it, but you didn't get paid.
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories that you know of from your father's experiences in those days about trans- that sounds like a dangerous job, but it sounds like--I mean you're thrown into the thick of night life on Friday and Saturday night.  I mean, there's got to be a few stories.
Speaker 2: There must be but, you know, I honestly don't know that.  I can think and give you some names of some folks who know a lot more about that than, than I do, and I'm sure there are stories.  If I thought about it a lot, I could give you names of folks who were more intimate.  I was never involved in that, other than taken to one of those convention meetings to listen to 'em.  After I got involved in politics, I spent quite a lot of time with the NOBLE group.  I would make speeches for them and stuff like that, but that was later.
Speaker 1: Now, where was the convention at that you went to?
Speaker 2: As I best recollect, I think the meeting that I attended was in San Antonio [Texas], I think (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And this would have been during the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was merely a guest of my dad.  My dad took me to the convention with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  He never explained why.  I guess it was just exposure.  I mean I look back on some of those things and, you know, these were thoughtful people, and--because I had no place there.  I was not involved in it but he just took me with him.
Story_ID: 481977
Speaker 1: Now you're the--you're an only child, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And did you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On both sides--my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] and my father [Anthony W. Hall, Sr.].  I mean I--they--each one of them only had one kid--biologically, one kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--and you were fortunate enough that even though your parents divorced, that if something went down where you had to be talked to, everybody would talk to you (laughter)--your mother, your father, and the stepfather [Lartress Alliniece] would talk to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody, yeah--would talk to me a lot (laughter), yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my aunts, same way, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, considering all of these people--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and their influences on you--I always ask this question--who do you think you take after the most--your mother, your father, or maybe your stepfather, or your aunt [Frances Williams]?
Speaker 2: You know, I think, I think it's--I think it's accurate to say that I have been influenced by all of them, to some extent, because I have learned a lot importantly, for young people; I say a lot when I talk to 'em that I was influenced a lot by all of them.  But I think it's fair to say that clearly, the biggest influence, because I spent of the time with her, was my mother.  My mother was a public school teacher, and my mother--maybe it's this thing I talked to you about achievement.  My mother's view always was that you always ought to make all A's and you ought to do the right thing all the time.  And there were a hundred things that impact that in the way you do things--all of that.  My mother didn't think that you ever ought to act irresponsibly.  I can't say that I never did that, but it always pained me when I did because I figured maybe she'd find out (laughter).
Story_ID: 481978
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: An early childhood memory (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Earliest, like the earliest.
Speaker 2: My earliest?
Speaker 1: Yeah, earliest.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's tough.  I have lots of childhood memories.  Those that stand out most is getting a whipping by my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] for the same thing within two hours (laughter).  I remember that.  And I figured I wasn't very smart but I got whippings for the same thing 'bout two hours apart.
Speaker 1: Did you do the same thing again, or what?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's kind of long story; it's a funny one.  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, go ahead--
Speaker 2: Young people, young people wouldn't--probably know what marbles are, but when I was seven--six, seven, eight--it would have been in one of my one, two, three, or fourth grade years when I was down in Angleton [Texas] working.  And during the week we lived in Angleton.  She actually had rent--you know, would work--teaching down there, and I would go to school down there.  And in those years, you actually got your mail from the post office--the little post office there--a mailbox, and you would get your mail out of the mailbox, and that's related to my marbles.  Well, all the little guys around, I would have been in either the first--probably the second, third, fourth grade.  Probably been--least the third or fourth grade because I was big enough.  She would send me--it was the equivalent of six or eight blocks--six blocks--to the post office to get the mail, and my buddies would be around the way I was walking, or maybe I went their way deliberately, and we would shoot marbles.  Well (laughter), it's a very elementary way of gambling, so to speak because you had lots of marbles, and the way you played marbles, if you won by shooting it out of the ring, you got it, so you'd wind up with more marbles than the next person.  And I did that, and it's much like--I'm not a gambler, but much like people say gambling addiction is, and if you lose a few of your marbles, you wanna keep doing it so you get your marbles back.  Well, it took me an hour to win some of my marbles back, and then I went on to the post office and back.  Well, I had been gone for like an hour and a-half, and I couldn't lie to my mother and you wonder, "Where had you been?"  'Cause it would have been a fifteen minute trip to go get the mail, and which is what she told me to do--go get the mail and come right back.  And it was still daylight, it was longer hours during the day during that period of time, and she had asked me to stop and get some milk, or something, at the store which was like next door to the post office.  And (laughter) I forgot it.  You know, my concentration was on my marbles and I got the--got--when I got back, I was late, and that's what was worrying me then; I knew I was late, and I forgot to bring the milk, and so she whipped me--cut my butt.  And she told me, "Now, you go back and you get that milk and you come right back."  Well, I had to pass these same guys, and they still had some of my marbles (laugher).  I wanted to get my marbles back, and so I stopped and I spent like another thirty minutes just to go down there and get the milk and bring it back.  I was late again.  I was--and so--my mother's very direct.  My mother's fairly strict in the way that she deals with you, and she deals with you matter of factly.  "What happened?"  And I had this great propensity to tell my mama a lie.  I said, "I just stopped by to talk to those guys."  "What did you do?"  (Laughter) "Well," I told her, "Well, I was talking to them and they had some of my marbles, mama, and I wanna get my marbles back" (laughter), and she cut my butt again.  That's why I say within two hours I got two whippings.  They whip you with a belt, you know--cut your butt--for the same thing in two hours.  And, and that was a memorable experience 'cause I figured, boy, you dumb, you really dumb (laughter), you know.  You're not real smart (laughter).
Speaker 1: But it made an impression on you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remem- oh, yes.  Cutting your butt does make an impression.  My mother had this philosophy, I says--I say all the time, that she believed that there was a direct connection between your butt and your brain, and that--she said--and she was very willing to make that connection a lot (laughter), so, you know, you don't wanna--you're kind of dumb to get a whipping for the same thing in a two hour period.
Story_ID: 481979
Speaker 1: I see--okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember that, that was in--I was young.  I can remember a lot of things like that.  I was bad, so to speak.  And when I say I was a bad boy in that context, I don't mean criminal activity, but my uncle that I talked about who helped raise me when I was in the country and doing all that, he whipped me three or four times during the course of four or five summers.
Speaker 1: Is this Isham Williams [Isham Williams, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And once I and my cousins--I was older by three or four years, and when you're younger, that makes a big difference when you're three years older than my male cousin--my oldest male cousin.  And the family down there had, among other things, had a big watermelon field, too, and the way they operated, you wanted a watermelon, you could get it.  I mean you get one, but they tell you, "Never waste anything," and all that business, you know.  We had tomatoes and all that, and so we wouldn't--would go and get 'em.  They weren't cooled or anything, and we were expert at how you pick a good one with the little curly thing up on the stem that browns and, you know, you know all of that when you're in the country and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's something I hadn't heard before.  So, that's how you pick a good one in the fields--
Speaker 2: It's how you start to thump it to feel it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: But if you seeing it's got a little curly stem on it, and when it once just starts to turn round, you know that it's ripe.  That's what you wanna know 'cause they're sweet.
Speaker 1: And then when you thump it, what are you listening for?
Speaker 2: Whether it's firm--overripe, it sounds hollow if it's overripe.  It sounds hollow like, 'cause you're leaving it there too long, and it's basically not good and it gets mushy inside.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--but we--you grow up, you know those things, and so you get a good one.  But we only liked what we call the heart.  The heart is that part of the watermelon that's inside the seeds, and so we would go out there, and if you wanted one, you just break the stem off and you pick it up and drop it, and when you do that, it splits open.  And we would pick the seed, the heart out of it, and if you wanted another one, you didn't get enough, you just go get you another one.  Well, I had my cousins with me and I was leading them, and everybody--you know, you wouldn't share one, you know; you want a watermelon, you go find one and get yours (laughter), but if you want another one you go--so we had a string of maybe fifteen watermelons, between the three of us, strung out across the field, and he was irate.  Not because we had a watermelon, because we had left all of that watermelon out there, laying out there in the field.  He cut my butt (laughter), yeah, 'cause I was leading the deal.  But I had a lot of those.  I had girl cousins who were my age.  There were three of us--three, three different children, who were born successively in three months--July, August and September, and I'm the September one.  I have a cousin who is still living, another cousin is deceased, each born a month, two months ahead of me, and I was always the ringleader.  And my grandfather Bose Austin, who was not my mother's [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] dad but raised me kind of like my maternal grandfather, had a wagon--a horse-driven wagon--and we were out there in the field by the barn, and I got them riding on it and I got some of my male cousins and stuff to take the wagon, and I got it stuck in some mud, and, and this is a term that you'd have to be very old in the country to know about.  We call it, getting it in a bog.  I got it stuck in the mud and we couldn't--'cause they didn't have the horses pulling, and had them riding and pulling it around, and got it stuck in that mud, and my grandfather (laughter) gave me a whipping.  I mean I had balled up to the axle almost in that mud (laughter), pulling that wagon, but couldn't get it out (laughter), and so we eventually had to go and tell 'em that, you know, I got the wagon all stuck down there in the mud.  Wasn't supposed to be fooling with it in the first place.  But I used to get a lot of whippings (laughter), I did.  And I remember that now.  And I look back on it--I deserved every one of 'em.  I didn't think so then, but I deserved every one of 'em.  I knew I was gonna get one if they found out (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when you say--when you were growing up, your personality was kind of bold?  You would try something, and see what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In leadership, yeah.  They would follow me--they'd do what I asked 'em to do.  "And this what we're gonna do."  "Let's go do this, man, it's fun."  "We're gonna ride this wagon."  Well, then I'd get two or three guys pulling the wagon.  The girls would get on there who were my age.
Speaker 1: And I take it you probably did a lot of things where you didn't get in trouble.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You would take the wagon but bring it back.
Speaker 2: Got away (laughter), got away with it.  Yeah, I did--a lot of that stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you knew when you got your butt whipped--be careful about doing that.  Don't do that, you will get in deep trouble.
Story_ID: 481980
Speaker 1: Well, you're telling the good stories, but we always ask this question like this.  Considering, you know, growing up in Engle- is it Engleton, or Engle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Angleton [Texas], A-N-G-L-E-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: --Angleton, Angleton, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: It's the county seat--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Brazoria County [Texas], which is adjacent to here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that near the Brazos River, or something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brazos River runs through there--Brazos--runs through there, yes.  There two rivers--one aunt actually lived on the other, called San Bernard.  There's a San Bernard River, it runs through that county, and then there's Brazos River, it's the longest one, biggest one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Now, they refer to it in western movies all the time--the Brazos--you know.  Any rate, now the--any rate, we always ask like--considering that area and Houston [Texas], and what were some of the--and growing up in the summertime, you know, on a farm, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, first thing, if you lived in Houston the rest of the year, the other part of the year, you were certain to have stomach upset for the first three or four days because everything down there was fresh; you didn't buy vegetables, fruits, anything like that, from the store when you're in the country; they grew everything--figs, thick preserves, and corn, and tomatoes, and okra, and purple hull peas, and all of those kinds of things that you ate a lot of, you got it right out there in the field.  And they would bring it to the farmer's market in Houston and sell that that they didn't eat.  And because it was so nutritious and so different than store bought fruit, for about three days you would have complete stomach upset (laughter).
Speaker 1: Hm, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a memory of the smells and sounds.  The other thing is--and this seems an interesting thing, but I was required, obviously in Houston, to wear shoes and tennis shoes, and those things, but in my early years in the country, we didn't wear shoes and--didn't wear shoes while you were walking around, unless you dressed up so to speak, as we called it.  And it would take me a week, ten days, to get my feet toughened up enough to be able to walk around with my cousins, and they would all laugh at me, obviously, because the dirt even in the field is hot, and so the dirt is hot and it's got hard dirt, and so your feet, when you wear shoes, tender.  You may look back and wonder when you look at some of even the movies--in African countries I--people go everywhere without shoes on.  Well, your feet toughen up after a week, ten days, so you can do it, and I could do everything they did.  I guess that was one of the great attractions because it, it--you know, you kind of proud when you can do what they do, eat what they eat, and walk around like they do (laughter), and so I'd be tipping around until I could get my feet back in shape to be able to walk around.  But that's what people did and how you did it.  Sights, sounds, smells--you'd smell fresh air, you know; you don't have automobile pollution and that kind of thing, even though my uncle [Isham Williams, Sr.] did have a car--one--and the idea of hunting and fishing and riding a horse 'cause he had a couple of those, and those are sweet memories.  In a real sense, it's, it was an awakening of another part of life and living.  I have a couple of horses here in Houston now, and I use 'em to expose kids because there's another whole world that has taught me a lot about what you do.  I talk to you about the responsibility that was required for you doing your, your chores, but it, it also taught me a lot about--a lot more about nature and what it offers, and I marveled at my uncle.
Story_ID: 481981
Speaker 1: Now this is a story I wanna tell 'cause it's important.  Farming was not an avocational activity, it was--success was a requirement for--cotton, as an example, is what produced revenue for you to be able to subsist with the things you had to buy someplace else, and we went to town--to Bay City [Texas]--was the town--every year.  I mean every week you'd go about noon, and you'd spend the whole day, that's where they would go to the grocery store to buy those things that they couldn't make, and you'd buy clothes or whatever else you needed--those that they didn't mend there.  But every year, this John trac- John Deere tractor I'm talking about, in the winter he would completely disassemble that tractor and overhaul it, and would do it in such a way that even if it was working, he would overhaul it.  And he never had any formal training to do that.  And for me, looking at all those parts that were out on a bench out there, and he would put 'em back together, would get whatever parts needed, so I asked him, I said, "Well, it was working fine when you got ready to overhaul it."  I asked him, I said, "You know, why are we gonna go through all that?"  When I would go down there to visit in the winter, like Christmastime, and he would have it all disassembled.  I said, "It was working fine when I left last summer, that thing was fine, what happened to it?"  And he said, "I had to learn it, I had to learn how to do that, and you need to because we can't do any productive work in the summer if that tractor breaks down.  It's not a nice thing, it's a requirement that it be operating properly and it works."  And he taught himself, I guess, or had some family member or friend teach him how to do it.  Of course, it was a lot more simple than would be computer chips and all that business today--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but he learned how to overhaul it and put it together, and I never, ever had an experience where it broke down and didn't work.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: That taught me an awful lot about self-sustaining capacity that we have; we just don't believe we can.  Because when I looked at all those parts on the table, I'd never get that thing put back together right.  But you can.  If you focus on it, you work at it, you can do it, and you can be amazingly self-sustaining.  And all of those were lessons.  Those were lessons of an early time, and I now look back through that lens and realize how impactive all of those things were on what I thought, how I thought about 'em, and what my responsibilities were.
Story_ID: 481982
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about school in a second, but I wanna ask you about--well, two things.  Growing up in Houston [Texas]--I mean going to--well, I should--
Speaker 2: Started in the fifth grade--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the Houston school district [Houston Independent School District].
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.  And you lived in Sunnyside [Houston, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: South Union [Houston, Texas], which is kind of between Third Ward [Houston, Texas] and Sunnyside.  And I didn't mention this earlier, but I have been challenged.  We had a little test among ourselves here (laughter) ten years ago.  Very few people who live today can tell you where those boundaries were between those wards.  I don't know.  I'm trying to figure it out.  You can go actually research, get some maps back in that time and trace out what the political boundaries were.  They don't mean that today, they describe general areas.  That's all that ward business means today.  Even when you say somebody's from Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], they know generally where they're talking about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now I thought that Houston--when people discuss Houston, they discuss the wards--you're Fifth Ward (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Third Ward, and Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas], and Second Ward [Houston, Texas]--
Speaker 1: There's a song that the Geto Boys made about the Fifth Ward and, you know, but they really don't have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that doesn't--they don't have a specific geographic area.  It's now used to describe a general area.  Well, between Sunnyside, which is a very definitive neighborhood, South Union was between those two.  That's where I grew up and where my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] and my stepfather [Lartress Alliniece] actually had a house built there, by a black homebuilder.  I mean actually in the homebuilding business, that's what he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you would be closer to the Third Ward, right?  In Sunnyside?
Speaker 2: It's adjacent.
Speaker 1: Adjacent to it, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Third Ward is dominated by Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Texas Southern, Yates [Yates Colored High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The predominant ones in black areas at that time were Third Ward and Fifth because Wheatley was the competing black school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Phillis Wheatley High School [Houston, Texas] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jack Yates, yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were big rivals back in the day in terms of football (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  In fact, they had the biggest--at one time, the biggest high school football game in the nation was held on Thanksgiving Day every year, same time--those two schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the Jack Yates--I mean the Third Ward crowd would have been more upscale than the Fifth Ward crowd, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People say that; they say that all the time (laughter) but, you know, the principal institutions were there, you know.  The black YMCA [South Central YMCA; Houston Texans YMCA, Houston, Texas] is adjacent to Texas Southern.  Texas Southern is there, obviously, a very large institution in Houston's community, and housing had more--generally more expensive houses in number, and so that gets said a lot.  It's kind of one of those things that takes people back, that it was considered that.  And I guess people still say that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Generally speaking, high-income level and stuff, and here it's because of TSU and those institutions and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: What would have been the closest, I guess--or was there like a major black commercial strip near you?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One in Fifth Ward, one in Third Ward.  Clearly, Lyons Avenue, L-Y-O-N-S, Lyons Avenue, was in the earlier days, a thriving commercial street and area, and for Houston it was Dowling Street for Third Ward.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And each one of them had a movie--a paid movie house, and night life, restaurants, and other associated businesses--you know, dry cleaners and all that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Each one of those streets.
Story_ID: 481983
Speaker 1: Was there a black newspaper when you came--when you were coming up that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the first one was, was the Houston Informer.  A much--an old man, a fellow whose name is George McElroy, who was very instrumental in developing the Informer and developing black journalists in the earlier times.  This was succeeded--well, not succeeded, but later was created the Forward Times [Houston Forward Times] newspaper.
Speaker 1: What Times was that?
Speaker 2: Forward Times.
Speaker 1: Forward Times, okay.
Speaker 2: Still exists today, but a very visionary black entrepreneur created the Forward Times, and now we have others that have come along much later than that.  The Houston Defender is a black paper here, and there is another one I have to name, but there are several there--and not intended to be, quote, straight newspapers, those ones I earlier described wanted to be newspapers.  They're more style magazine, and others that are more informational, and, and have different bents.  This was--these early ones were to be strictly newspapers, and the two of them had a good deal of impact on journalism and journalists of that era--encouraging people to do it, understanding that there was expression for your talent in doing that, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know any black lawyers yourself, growing up in those day?
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew some of the first black lawyers here in Houston [Texas].  I knew them personally, and they were the only ones I knew at their earlier time.  Recognize that there was a time when they couldn't have a full legal practice in my earliest years in Harris County [Texas].  The first black justice of the peace here--elected justice of the peace, was one of the first black lawyers practicing law.
Speaker 1: Who was that in Houston?
Speaker 2: And I should remember his name, and I will.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll have a flashback--I will.
Story_ID: 481984
Speaker 1: There are several of them who--a half dozen--who were active during that time, and one of those, at the earliest time, is what created the Thurgood Marshall School of Law [Houston, Texas]--Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] law school, and it's a celebrated legal case--the Heman Sweatt case [Sweatt v. Painter, 1950].
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, you were a child then, when that was going on right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but all of us are very familiar with, with that history.
Speaker 2: Well, what is that story?  What is that story?
Speaker 1: What is what?
Speaker 2: What is that story?  The Hemen Sweatt [Heman Marion Sweatt] story, yeah, the case.
Speaker 1: It is what is now the Thurgood Marshall School of Law.
Speaker 2: No, I said what is the story of Heman Sweatt and his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he wanted to go to law school in Texas.  It was much like all of the southern states.  You could not go to the Anglo law schools, and some of the states took different tracks to try to deal with the U.S. Constitution requirement for equal protection, and in Texas, when he applied to University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], obviously they didn't want that to happen, so they created another school that was supposed to be equal--obviously, it was not, so they created another school with him as the only student when it started (laughter), started here in Houston at Yates [Yates Colored High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they, they started the law school at Jack Yates High School?
Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't part of the high school, but that's where it was housed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so they used the facilities--
Speaker 1: --it was housed there.  That and the Houston Negro college [Houston College for Negroes] that later became part of Texas Southern.
Speaker 2: Was the college also housed at Jack Yates at--in the beginning?
Speaker 1: Think--I think one of the buildings was there, I think, for a time; classes was there--not a building on the campus, but classes.  This was an effort to avoid integration in reality in its broadest sense.  And other states did some other things.  I think Mississippi, as I remember the history of that, they actually paid black students--the state did--to go somewhere else out of state (laughter).  They paid 'em--paid their tuition, paid everything so they couldn't go to that school.  They were a little more harsh than Texas because then they wouldn't admit anybody.  They had a rule at one time, I understand, that if you didn't graduate from the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], you could not sit for the Mississippi bar.  So, even though you got educated somewhere else, you know, this was all part of the resistance to integration, and full participation.
Speaker 2: And if you qualified for law school, they would actually pay your way to go someplace else--
Speaker 1: To another state.
Speaker 2: --and that would ensure that you couldn't practice in the State of Mississippi, actually.
Speaker 1: You got it.  You figured that out (laughter), yeah, 'cause you couldn't take the bar there, you couldn't take the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's so many links to this.  So you cancel.  But they would--you could get a--
Speaker 1: --because the legal requirement at the time was that there had to be access to that education, and we had not yet gotten to the legal case that said you could not restrict the bar--practice of law in Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just by graduates of Mississippi school.
Speaker 2: So, if I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we never had that particular challenge in Texas.  There were always other kind of games that took place, but you didn't have that one.
Speaker 2: If I was a graduate of a black state school like Alcorn in Mississippi [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi], say, I would--and I qualified to go to law school, I couldn't--they would pay me to go to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] or Michigan State [Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], or someplace else (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --if I could get, get in there.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We have come from a far piece back.
Story_ID: 481985
Speaker 1: All right, you were telling us about Charles Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's kind of the iconic black lawyer, and if you--particularly if you are educated in a predominantly African American school.  I have to say that because none of 'em are entirely African American anymore.  Thurgood Marshall [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] is as integrated as any in the country because it educates an awful lot of Hispanics because of where we live, and a host of Anglos opt to go to Thurgood Marshall.  But Charles Houston is an iconic lawyer who has probably, even more than Thurgood Marshall with Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], is responsible for developing the legal basis for striking down all the barriers that we faced as part of being a member of society, productive or not.  And his persistent, innovative vision for how we could succeed is the legacy for black lawyers who look like us, and if you went to one of those schools, you are always told that part of your responsibility as a black lawyer is to make some contribution to the challenge for equal treatment and equal opportunity that allows you to be the best that you can possibly be, to be all that your talent can achieve.  And that is a wonderful legacy for all of us 'cause you can choose to do it in different ways.  It doesn't have to be necessarily in the litigation of a case.  That is obviously what he created over time, but he also created a strategy for achieving all of that, and led all of our people in a successful strategy to achieve that, but it's what led us into political involvement and change to create a level playing field without regard for what your color happens to be.
Speaker 1: Charles Hamilton Houston (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --who was the head of the Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: He was a--he is--you know, you talk about him and Thurgood Marshall--Thurgood Marshall for a singular best remembrance, and that is his fight, but these were not just good tacticians in the courtroom, they were extraordinary strategists for success, and that in itself is another important lesson as a lawyer.
Story_ID: 481986
Speaker 1: You attended Marshall in the beginning, right?
Speaker 2: Thurgood Marshall School of Law [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Well, no, no.  I'm going back to kid, grade school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, high school, yes.
Speaker 1: --leading to high school at Marshall High School [A.B. Marshall High School; Marshall Education Center] in Anglewood--
Speaker 2: --Angleton [Texas] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Angleton, Angleton, all right.
Speaker 2: It's only forty miles from here--forty-five miles from here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so when your mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] moved to Houston [Texas], you--what school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Well, it started out for two grades at what is still in existence as Sunnyside Elementary School [Houston, Texas] because it was close; that was a neighborhood school where I lived.  It was at a different physical location than it is right now; it moved from where it was originally during my tenure.  And then I went to Miller Junior High School [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas], and in that era, we didn't have middle schools; the structure is different than it was then.  We had first through the sixth grade, and then we had seventh, eighth, and ninth as junior high, and then high school, and that's changed now that we've got middle school and high school, so high school is only three years--I mean four years, but a little bit different deal.  But I went there, and then I went to Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, before we go any further, were there any special teachers at Marshall or at--what was the second one in the one here in Houston?
Speaker 2: Sunnyside Elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sunnyside, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In, in elementary school what were the--were there any special teachers that you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember Mrs. Alexander [ph.], who was a teacher back then, and at Sunnyside, Mrs. Young [Ethel M. Young] was the principal, and I guess I've always pursued or gravitated to leadership, and in (laughter) in elementary school, the highest governance position you could have was to be the fire marshal, and you always had a fire drill, maybe once a month.  I don't remember how regular it was, but everybody had--well, some students were designated with a post, which is where you--because you had a lot of temporary housing buildings at the high--at the elementary school--at Sunnyside Elementary, and I'd only been at the school my fifth and sixth year, but in the sixth grade I got to be fire marshal, put you in charge, and you tell other students what they need to do and where you had to be, and I think back to when I gravitated to do that, but it--that was the only student governance activity you had at Sunnyside, and the principal was the person who decided that, and that was Mrs. Young, who was the principal back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in--at William E. Miller Junior High, my mother taught math there, but it doesn't exist anymore as the building does, as another facility, but not as a junior high school as in its former years.  And I guess there were a number of students there--Mr. Peavy [ph.] and, and others who were very impactful to me.  I can think of some others, but I was mentored--my mother taught there, so I had a--I got some special attention from teachers (laughter), but when I finished junior high in the ninth grade, highest thing you could get then was what they call student of the year.  You got a trophy, an award, being student of the year when you graduated, and I was fortunate enough to win that deal, and that's when I finished in high--in junior high school.
Story_ID: 481987
Speaker 1: So you were a good student in school and, and what were you interested in in elementary school or going into high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, junior high school [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas] I probably had got--'cause you didn't really have, quote, focus and interest, in elementary school.  I didn't.  But in junior high school the sciences were always my best interest, I guess.  Math, my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] was a math teacher, and the sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is--now you were in high school, I guess, during the time of the--well, you--were you in high school by--during the time the Sputnik went up?
Speaker 2: That was in the early '60s [sic. 1957] here when that came, but that's not what sparked me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957], that's like '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: That's not what sparked me.  The--you were told that if you were doing well in school--they called it bright--that you ought to pursue the sciences.  And I had a lot of guidance--, "Oh, yeah, that's what you ought to do, that's what you ought to be, and you ought to be a doctor."  And when I got to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I just figured out I--you have not a complete view, you know--there were some, few black physicians and lawyers, and fewer CPAs [certified public accountant] at that time, and that kind of thing, but you were not fully aware of what those professions really involved--what they did, and I decided in my freshman year, though initially I was supposed to be in the sciences, maybe to go to medical school, and I wound up with my degree in something else in undergrad school, but I was gonna be in chemistry, but to be a physician--naively, I felt that being a physician was too confining and (unclear), because I had discovered with my involvement, engagement, and leadership--I was president of the student council at Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas] and that kind of thing, and so man, I wanna be involved in something else.  I don't wanna be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, was this like--
Speaker 2: --cooped up, and so I wound up with a degree in economics from Howard because I--
Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't wanna get to Howard yet--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but--and so as you enter Jack Yates, you're thinking about medicine, or--
Speaker 2: --yeah, medicine and the sciences.  We're working for--'cause we all were--made good grades.  That's what you were inclined to do, or encouraged to do.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know any black scientists at, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not as pure scientists, not as pure scientists.  You obviously read about Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew] and all the iconic, brilliant people who were black, but it wasn't for pursuit as a research scientist in that context.  When I say the sciences, it was more general in those years, you know.  It was biological sciences, the physical sciences, mathematics--kind of what now they call STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics], but that's what you were encouraged to do in those years if you made good grades.
Speaker 1: Did you have very much interaction with Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not a lot until I'd finished--you didn't--understand that we were more guided in that age than we are today, and you were told that that's what you ought to do, and there wasn't a lot of pushback to that, you know, you ought to be pursuing the sciences.
Speaker 1: Now, I was wondering, too, if your mother's friends--or had any friends at Texas Southern who were teaching science or teaching math, or any of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had a, I had a high school teacher.  Dr. Booker [ph.] was a science teacher who later went from Yates to TSU [Texas Southern University].  I mean I knew them, but he was an educator, he wasn't a--
Speaker 1: Researcher.
Speaker 2: --a pure research scientist.  I got to know some at a later time who were pure research professionals.
Story_ID: 481988
Speaker 1: You were just told, "You need--you ought to be a doctor," you're told that and that's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Now, were there many black doctors?  Did you know any black doctors in Houston [Texas] when you were growing up?
Speaker 1: Many is an exaggeration, there's not--wasn't many of them but not many today (laughter), you know, by comparison for percentages.  But the answer to that is yes, I knew--know is wrong, I knew who they were.  Understand in those years society was different, and importantly, those professionals actually lived in our neighborhoods, same neighborhoods that we grew up in, because we recognized later that there is a dichotomy between a middle class black lifestyle and a middle class Anglo lifestyle, and so in those years, for instance, teachers were considered middle class in the black community, preachers, and the very few lawyers, doctors, accountants--people like that.  Very, very, very few, if any, were business professionals because they did not hire us in senior management positions in business back in those years.
Speaker 2: But I suppose the black entrepreneurs would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We had black entrepreneurs, and they were middle class.  Morticians, grocers, pharmacists--we had those folks and they were middle class, and the great advantage the community had then is they all lived in the same community with us, so it was--now, those professionals have a greater tendency, as with everybody else I guess, to move to suburbia, and many of 'em are moving back now.  But they did that a lot, and--
Speaker 2: Were there any African Americans in city government, in those days, that you knew of?
Speaker 1: Yes, the first of those was a fellow named Judson Robinson [Judson W. Robinson, Jr.], and he was a city council [Houston City Council] member.  But this would have been in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's like--that's not when you were growing up actually, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 2: So it took that long--
Speaker 1: The first elected official we had with a high profile was Hattie Mae White, who I knew because she lived in the community, and I knew her kids, was elected to the school board here--to the Houston Independent School District board, and she was the first real local elected official that I knew, and knew about on a personal basis.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when I say personal, she was obviously much older than me.  I knew her kids, but I mean it's somebody that I could relate to, that I could see and, and feel and touch (laughter).
Story_ID: 481989
Speaker 1: Just to put it in perspective, in those--in the '60s [1960s], a lot of communities--Midwest, West, South, and even in the East, were struggling to get their first black city council member, or first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it wasn't unusual, and Houston [Texas] has been, been not far behind in most of those areas, but we had a different history, I think, as I have moved across the country and talked to folks--moved around across the country and talked to folks.  Houston's civil rights integration history is a little bit different.  I don't mean to suggest that we are ahead necessarily, necessarily, but there has been a different Anglo leadership in Houston led a lot by people like Jesse Jones [Jesse H. Jones] and their philosophies about that.  We didn't have integration race riots in Houston.  My wife [Carolyn Middleton Hall]--I have pictures at home--actually participated in the marches that were intended to integrate the downtown movie theaters, and maybe providence intervened, but Lyndon Johnson--President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] was about to run for president, and was one of the interveners in talking to the political and business leadership in Houston to say he didn't want race riots in his state.  And my wife and Bill Lawson [HistoryMaker Reverend Bill Lawson] and others were marching--who was an iconic preacher here in Houston.
Speaker 1: This is the same Bill Lawson who was in Nashville [Tennessee] as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From Memphis [Tennessee] originally.
Speaker 1: Okay, from Memphis, right.
Speaker 2: And they were marching (laughter), and surprisingly, the management people came out and said, "What y'all marching for?  Y'all don't have to sit in the balcony, y'all can come sit anywhere you want."  And that is, that is kind of how Jesse Jones and others have approached Houston.  Their view is--for a long time during that era of activist effort to integrate society's establishments--
Speaker 1: Now tell us about Jesse Jones 'cause--who is Jesse Jones?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me finish that story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --just very quickly, and I'm gonna tell you about him because he is an extraordinary American.  But their view, importantly, was that--a little bit different--that if it's not good for business, if it's not good for this institution, we need to change that.  If it hurts business, we need to change it.  And that kind of leadership caused us to, as a community, to be a little bit different than some other places--
Story_ID: 481990
Speaker 1: Jesse Jones [Jesse H. Jones] was not an extraordinarily formal--formally educated person but was, and is considered probably one of the brightest human beings in America.  He created what was--what is the only daily, major circulation daily newspaper here.  It used to be two, but the Houston Chronicle he owned, what is now--what was one of the largest banks in Houston [Texas], the Texas Commerce Bank he owned, but during that era had nineteen businesses.  He owned a lumber company, and all of that.  And in the meantime, amassed a very, very significant amount of wealth and became one of the most influential persons in almost every phase of human life and activity.  He, with President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt], was selected to become secretary of the treasury [sic. secretary of commerce], and following--as we exited the Great Depression, there was nationally created because we had been literally on the brink of catastrophe and bankruptcy as a country, created a thing called a reconstruction administration [Reconstruction Finance Corporation], and its charge was to save America financially, and he was simultaneously appointed secretary of treasury and head of the reconstruction administration--an extraordinary man, extraordinary man.  He is responsible for creating what we know today--you and I know of as kind of the standard thirty year home mortgage.  Didn't have that then.  If you wanted to buy a house back then and you wanted to borrow money, you either saved it up, if you wanted to borrow it, you went to a bank on a short term loan.  That's the way we buy automobiles today.  But he created this phenomenon of the thirty year mortgage so that there could be homeownerships, changed life.  What we went through four or five years ago he did then because he, with that dual role, controlled what our policy and activity would be, and he actually bought banks to keep them from failing, which we had a lot of conversation about recently, but that's not a new concept.  In Houston, as an example, during that era, there were not a whole bunch of social programs in America created by the government, so the biggest largess from the federal government for a local community in those days--what we call public works projects.  They spend money on ports and major highways, and all of that kind of business.  And the way they did it, if you recall, you got your position in the [U.S.] Congress by seniority, and so the concept in Texas was whomever they elected, you keep 'em in office a long time so that they will be head of the deal because the big issue was always how you wound up on the public works list, and thus benefitted your community.
Story_ID: 481991
Speaker 1: I'm telling this because it's important today to understand a little of the history.  Port of Houston [Houston, Texas] shouldn't be where it is.  By all right, that port ought to be in Galveston [Texas] (laughter), and it was, but ownership in Galveston originally was owned one-third by the public, and one-third each by two other very, very wealthy families down there, and so the ownership went to them.  Their view here was: we ought to create a public entity so that the benefit and the revenue can all be reinvested into this community, and their theory, Jesse Jones [Jesse H. Jones] led, was that if Houston [Texas] does well, we will all do very well.  So their emphasis, a little different concept than most communities had the opportunity to enjoy.  So he got the local community here to float a $5 million bond issue; back in the early days, that was an awful lot of money, to help build a Houston ship channel.  Obviously, it was a pipe dream back then for them to go create something like that, to get the federal government to put their money in it.  He got them to float this bond issue, and then went to [U.S.] Congress and said, "What I want you to do, to put us at the top of the list, and we're gonna put $5 million to get this started, if you will match that."  And now, almost every public program of largesse requires, quote unquote, matching amount, so that people just don't go to the government and say, "Give me this money.  We will partner with you if you put--if you're committed enough to it to put your money in it, we will put money in it to help you get that done."  That concept was started by Jesse Jones for the whole country, as an example.  This is an iconic man.  When he died, he and his wife [Mary Gibbs Jones] did not have natural children, and he left--created a foundation and left all of his assets--virtually all of his assets--they had one daughter that wasn't his biological daughter, it was his uncle's--deceased uncle's daughter--obviously was well provided for, but created the Houston Endowment [Houston Endowment Inc., Houston, Texas].  It is the largest foundation in our part of the country, presently valued at $1.8 billion, and it was without specific direction, and what I mean by that is the board that is an eight member board, actually provides for creating its mission and its distribution, and now averages about $75 million a year that it gives to the greater Houston area.  That's what its purpose is, and that was his purpose, to assist in making Houston a better place.  And so that philosophy that I described earlier permeates all of that thinking, so we make grants to three hundred different groups a year in various amounts, to help try to leverage what we think are things that make this a better place.  But that is entirely the largesse and legacy of Jesse Jones.
Story_ID: 481992
Speaker 1: So we're trying to tie a bow around the unfinished business of the last interview, but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so--well, tell us about Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], just, what--so you were interested in science at Jack Yates.  Did you play sports when you were growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  I was head of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]--junior ROTC in high school.  In a junior ROTC unit at Yates when I grew up, and I was--for--and junior high [William E. Miller Junior High School, Houston, Texas] was the, was a member of the band, I played trumpet in the band at junior high but never--I never had the talent, and they told me the size, to be a good athlete back then.  I wasn't particularly fast, I wasn't big (laughter), I wasn't particularly talented (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  You're about six feet tall.
Speaker 2: Well, I am now, but I sprouted up while I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, you have this period when you grow where you kind of sprout.  I wasn't particularly tall when I started 'cause you--if you're gonna be a good athlete, you start that in like junior high school.  We had junior high--organized junior high sports when I was growing up, and I did go out for football and I say, went out--you go out and try out for football, and the guy told me, said, "Anthony [HistoryMaker Anthony W. Hall, Jr.], you don't have the talent or the size or the speed to be a real good football player.  You need to try something else."  (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Anyway--but you were on student council, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in high school.
Speaker 1: Were you the president, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was an elected position with the students.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you got a sense of government and you said that that kind of got in your blood in high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It did.  My mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] created that, my mother was head of--when I was growing up, black teachers and white teachers were segregated groups--professional groups, and my mother, for a period, was the president of the black teachers in (unclear) and she was, for forty years, president of the mission society in the church and all that, so that's why I said my mother had a big influence, and you never were supposed to just sit on the sidelines if you were gonna participate in something.
Story_ID: 481993
Speaker 1: What about church?  Now, did you have a home church in Houston [Texas] that you attended?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: Greater Zion Baptist Church [Houston, Texas].  It exists today.  The pastor of that church was Moses Leonard Price, who was one of the big moderators for the Baptist denomination here, and later I was instrumental in having him appointed to the board of Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  He was a very, very impactful man with me--counseled me, guided me, and helped me a lot politically.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was--did the church, when you were growing up, provide like a platform for you to do any youth activities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of 'em did, but churches generally did more of that back then than some churches do today.  It was the way you learned how to public speak, and all of those kinds of developmental requirements for other things that you do later on, which were part of church activity.  And, at another church that I had family at--I got a church here, St. John's [St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] on Gray [Street], which exists today.  Though I belong to that church, I played in the band at this other one, and that's what led me in the band business because you got a chance to go on trips and you went to the national Baptist convention, wherever it was in the country, on the church bus--didn't cost you anything.  They provided it and we would play.  Church bands would march around through the sanctuaries and have presentations from all over the country, and that's one of the things that led me to be engaged in that, so I could go on the trips and play in the band.
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't realize there were church bands as such (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes sir, and there used to be a lot of 'em, and the pastors would provide for their church and they would obviously show off their bands, and we had a drill team--church drill team--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the convention.  And they would let us have a time in the sanctuary for the big meetings.
Speaker 1: Now, National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Not the white national Baptist convention.
Speaker 1: Right, the National Baptist, it's the black one, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is a segregated black one, yeah.
Speaker 1: NBC is the largest black organization in the world--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --and still is.  So--
Speaker 2: Largest black one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the largest black organization in the world; that's what I said, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, okay, yes, because the white one is Southern Baptist [Southern Baptist Convention]--clearly bigger than that (laughter), yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but the largest black one in the world--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --and not just religious, but the largest black organization in the world--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's probably true, yeah.
Speaker 1: --other than, I guess maybe--well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's probably true because, you know, it's very difficult to document congregational size and all that kind of stuff, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I heard years ago.  People were saying, "What's the biggest black organization?"  People were saying NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but nope, National Baptist Convention.
Speaker 2: But participation in that is not as formal, if you understand what I'm saying, and you see the definitional issue.  Because if you are a pastor and you say you got five hundred members and you--generally the pastor agrees to join that organization, you're a member.  When NAACP has got a roster with your name on it (laughter) whether or not you--they don't have that, you know, in that structure.  Am I making any sense?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: It's kind of like what creates--the question of what creates membership in a church, and those rules are not consistent in the black Baptist church: you're a member if you say you are.
Speaker 1: That's true, that's true.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, they're a little different there.  I'm not disagreeing with you at all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And an organization--
Speaker 2: Clearly, I think what you said is true, but definitionally, trying to establish any precise--you know, I mean I've heard all the numbers like you have--2 million, 3 million--all that kind of business but, you know, the reality is I've gotten to be older, you know.  The numbers are whatever they say it is (laughter), you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 481994
Speaker 1: So you would go to those conferences as a band member?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many people, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And another relative was one of the participants in the band.  There were two or three grown people who would direct and supervise that, and another who was a director--musical director--for the church [St. John Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] was a Mr. Richards [ph.]--for the church.  But we would perform at the church in some of the church activities, but we'd also go to the national convention [of National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Did, did any noted musicians come out of your band?
Speaker 2: Noted--not, not commercially, you know, successful musicians but, but it was developmental for a bunch of us.  First time I ever went to the national border, though I lived so close to Mexico, was I went to Niagara Falls; I actually went over on the Canadian side.  The first time I went out of the country because the convention was in Cleveland [Ohio], and the church decided that we ought to see Niagara Falls and took us over there, and that's an example of the kind of enrichment that took place.  I'd never been out of the country before; never been that far away before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went on--and the church bus, at that time, was a school bus, it wasn't air conditioned commercial buses like they have today (laughter).
Speaker 1: And that's a long trip on a school bus, yeah.
Speaker 2: We didn't mind, you know.  It was all fun, seeing places, seeing things that you hadn't seen, different places you hear about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a very enriching experience, and I surely would like to see more of that today because it wasn't economic based.  The--you didn't have to pay for it, the church paid for it.  Now, we didn't live in hotels, you paid, you paid--lived in, you know, gymnasiums for schools, and stuff like that but, you know, it was fine as far as you were concerned, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you--were you a member of the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or anything like that when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but I never did advance and progress up the ladder in the Boy Scouts, but because I think it's valuable, probably, my son [Anthony W. Hall III] is an Eagle Scout and went through it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I thought it was valuable.  We didn't have it in my church--that was not, at that time, one of the activities that was promoted as much as it is today in a lot of black churches.
Speaker 1: Well, back to Jack Yates [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas].  Who were some of the important teachers and/or mentors there at Jack Yates?
Speaker 2: Probably--there are many of 'em, but probably the most impactive person on my life through high school was a Captain Alfred Brailsford--Brailsford, who was--he and the other person.  He was the commandant of the, the head of the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] unit, and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: B-R-A-I-L-S-F-O-R-D.  And he is deceased, but the assistant was also a military person, later became a school principal.  His name is Cameron Wells [Cameron Wells, Jr.].  He lives today.  Those two people--Brailsford clearly was extraordinarily influential of me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was the head of the ROTC unit--the instructor head of the ROTC unit.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Led me into the [U.S.] military in effect--that's what led me there.
Story_ID: 481995
Speaker 1: You came out in '62 [1962], right?
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], yes, sir--high school [Jack Yates Senior High School; Jack Yates High School, Houston, Texas], yes sir (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-two [1962], right, right.  Now, when you were on the verge of graduation--I mean how did you choose your college?
Speaker 2: Well, that's not, that's not difficult.  I had been offered a scholarship--academic schol- academic tuition scholarship from University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]; I had applied for Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], for Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but when I graduated at that time, the Jones Scholarship--and we award four hundred plus, now $16,000 scholarships to high school graduates in the greater Houston [Texas] area.  But at that time, the Jones Scholarship amounts were $2,000 a year, and the Worthing Foundation scholarships were four [thousand], and so I got a Worthing scholarship and at--there's a high school in Sunnyside [Houston, Texas], E.E. Worthing, Evan E. Worthing High School.  It was created by Evan E. Worthing, but it had restricted to just black students--black high schools and black students, and it was twice as much at that time than was the Jones, and so I lobbied and everything else to get a Worthing scholarship because it was twice as much money, and when I first got to Howard it would pay for the whole thing.  That kind of--it didn't after my first year because costs went up faster than the--but $1,000 a year would pay all of your room board and tuition in 1963.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: It pays for a month of boarding now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, but it paid--they even gave me a little bit of money back.  Like I got about thirty or forty dollars back because I could put that on books because it paid for more than the total bill, living in a dormitory.  But the reason was simple.  At the University of Texas then, they put all the black students in 1963 in one dormitory, and that was offensive to me, the idea that I was gonna be in a segregated dormitory, and I was foolish.  It was before there's complete integration between Morehouse and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and the idea--I had obviously discovered girls--the idea that I was gonna be in an all-boys school and class--which is how you think about it when you're that age.  I say, "Nah, nah, I don't wanna do that."  They had offered me a tuition scholarship, and Howard didn't offer me a scholarship because, like I said, when I first got it, the Worthing paid for everything, and so that's how--and Howard was considered then, as I suppose it is today, the number one historically black college [HBCU] in America, and so I said, "Well, it's a good school, that's where I ought to go."  And they had--I'm told they had lots of girls, and pretty girls and all of that, and I said, "This ought to be a perfect educational environment--a good school, good engagement and involvement," and as you remember, that was the spark for a lot of the student protest activities during the civil rights out of Howard, you know.  Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and all those folks were kind of--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I actually got--in my first year--got locked up--peacefully locked up once (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you told us about that during the last--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it taught me a lesson because my mother [Quintanna Wilson Alliniece] then told me they were gonna bring me home 'cause back in those years they had class requirements--attendance requirements and I think you, you got one unexcused absence for every hour.  If it was a three-hour class, you get three.  If it's a five-hour class--hour credit class I mean, you got three absences, and they didn't give you--back then, they didn't give you credit for being locked up for protesting--you missed school--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --and we didn't have all that privacy business today, so my parents--they told them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is kind of covered in the old interview, but I just wanted to, while we have a few minutes, to ask you about what you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't get locked up anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.  You ceased the activities--those kind of activities--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and this was overnight when they--
Speaker 1: This is 1962?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '62 [1962], '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963] I think it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '63 [1963] was a really hot time with the civil rights activities in the country.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 481996
Speaker 1: Changing completely from that period of time to the last few years, we interviewed you in 2007.  What has transpired since 2007?  You were an administrator for the City of Houston [Texas]--
Speaker 2: Chief administrative officer for the city, yeah.
Speaker 1: Chief--yeah, yeah, and you were that until 2010, I believe--
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: --three more years.  So what are the--do you have any reflections on those days?
Speaker 2: Wonderful days.  I spent ten years on the Houston City Council at an earlier time.  This was during the late '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], and we elected our first black mayor in '98 [1998] with Lee Brown [HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown], who had earlier been the first black police chief in Houston, and he recruited me--persuaded me.  I was at a private law firm--doing well at a fairly large private law firm, and convinced me to be his city attorney, and at first I did not agree to do that, but he talked to my wife [Carolyn Middleton Hall] and told her I ought to do that.  He's a very, very dear friend and, and I wound up going to do that as a city attorney for the six years, and intended to go back into private practice with the, the view that I had to, you know, serve my time.  And then our immediate successor, Bill White, called me and persuaded me to--there was a bigger job than being just a city attorney that--we didn't have a chief administrative officer who had the role that he wanted me to have, and that was to be more like what he called the chief operating officer for the city because we don't--we have the strongest large city--all of the largest four cities have a strong mayor form of government more or less, and the strongest in the country is the Houston mayoral position because you preside over the city council, you appoint all the council committees, you appoint all of the department heads for the city.  The mayor does all of that (laughter) with the concurrence, the vote, like the [U.S.] Senate does for the president--for department heads--city attorney, all the other department heads.
Speaker 1: Now one of the things that--about the Houston city government that disturbed me when we interviewed Lee P. Brown is that he has to--he had to--and all other mayors--run every two years, right?
Speaker 2: You do, and now you're limited to three year terms--three two year terms.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: You can--six years is the term limit that was instituted twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: But, but they have so much power and--to be so vulnerable all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and there's been a lot of discussion about that.  It's also expensive.  But in terms of structural power, probably the strongest one in the nation and, and that's when I--so I agreed to stay with Bill White.  That has been a wonderful experience with Bill White.  He is probably among the brightest human beings I've ever met.  I obviously enjoyed that period with, with Lee Brown but they were--they are different, and their backgrounds are different.  Bill White was trained initially as a lawyer, but this is a man who works probably twelve, fourteen hours a day every day, and is smart, and if you find somebody like that, what they produce exceeds most of the rest of us--an extraordinary human being.  I'm--that experience working as--met with him virtually every day about something he would have me meeting with him.  Those experiences were very, very good, and so the years that you talk about--2007, 2010, were three of those six years that I spent with him learning a lot, shaping some of my views on business because he had come directly from business as a chief executive officer at a large company.  All of those have been just tremendous experiences and opportunities for me.  And during that period, I was fortunate enough to get involved on the board of very large corporations and, and get a chance to work and learn and see and do more than that, and that has been an extraordinary opportunity to learn more about things that you can't learn from other vantage points.  But I have been on three very large corporate boards, and presently Kinder Morgan, for about two years, is the third largest energy company in America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  These corporate boards actually pay you, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And they pay well, they often do, yes.
Story_ID: 481997
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  As city adminis- as chief city administrator--that, that's like city manager in a lot of cities, I guess, right?  Is that, is that true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's similar.
Speaker 1: Similar?  What was the biggest challenge in those days?  Was there a particular issue that popped up, or--
Speaker 2: Well, the, the chief operating officer is the person who's responsible for superintending kind of all of the day-to-day activities.  Department heads run what they do, if it's solid waste, if it's garbage collection, if it's health and something else, but as chief operating officer, the entirety of the enterprise has all got to run well, so you really get directed primarily at problems if there's a problem issue.  A huge one is the implementation of the goals and directives of the person who got elected mayor, and so you spend a lot of time making--try to make that happen; it's got to happen, it's got to get done--that's kind of what your job is.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, were there any--I mean was it the hardest part when you were there, I mean, trying to get, get that done?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of your job then is to fire people--people you like, people who are not performing well, you have to do that.  People get in trouble and you have to--I was put in charge of investigating all that.  Obviously, if somebody who was more senior got in trouble, and we had a lot of those and, you know and--not a lot, but we had some of those, and you have to deal with that.  Those are troublesome because you know all the people and you know 'em fairly well, and we've had people who lost their way, and you have to handle that. In reality in his administration, I was primarily responsible for dismissing some folks (laughter), and that kind of thing, and you go through that, and you have all of the neighborhood issues that surface themselves.  We had a huge problem with our crime lab that pulls on you as a member of society and part of this community, and so you wrestle with those.  They're still wrestling with it--getting that straightened out.  They've made some progress in dealing with that, but you got a lot of things that tug at you when you're doing that, and you just can't do 'em mechanically.
Speaker 1: Right.  And in terms of the rewards of the job, I mean the successes, I mean what do you look back on?
Speaker 2: What you look back on most is, I think, this is a better place in just a host of ways.  And I don't mean to be egotistical, but I've always taken this view because, though there had been two--three other people who look like me who had been the city attorney in Houston [Texas]--blacks--because you basically run a large law firm; you got 110, 120 lawyers that work for you in the city attorney's office, but we'd had that.  And to have somebody who was essentially, as Bill White describes it as the chief operating officer of the city, I always felt an urgent need to show the entirety of the community that you had the best competence, the best objectivity, so that everybody, given that platform, would--could show you that every segment of this community can help make the place where they live a much better place to live, and they can do it in a way that makes everybody proud, no matter what you look like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any specific things that you remember that--as your greatest accomplishments during, during the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wouldn't wanna pick anything out, and wouldn't wanna say they are mine, and I say it for this reason.  The reality is the successes of what happens in Houston in an administration goes to and is deserved by the person who is mayor, and I was not, and so I'm always conscious of the fact that mine is to help implement, mine is to make sure that, that the goals, the aspirations, the articulations of somebody who is mayor, that what they want to get done gets done, and gets done in the best way that makes this a good place--that we don't lose our purpose for why city government exists, what our purpose is, and that it ought to be an open and welcome place for everybody who lives here.  And if you happen to look like me, though we're not in the numerical majority in Houston, that that person can and has done this job as well, or better, than anybody else who's ever done it.  And I am happy to be here because he's there.
Story_ID: 481998
Speaker 1: We discussed the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] last time, and we discussed some of your other activities.  Is there anything we need to talk about that we haven't discussed yet to--
Speaker 2: No.  I guess the only thing I would add as a matter in time is that we have set several successive goals for the Boule Foundation, which is an affiliated organization with the fraternity, with the Boule and Sigma Pi Phi, that twenty-seven years ago we--our visionaries, some who were mentors to me, had this vision that we could do what blacks have never done before--a black organization has never done--even the largest ones, even the most affluent ones, and that is to create a corpus that provided a financial institution that could fund the priorities that we set, and so that's why the Boule Foundation was created, to do collectively what couldn't be done.  And it was deliberately set apart from fraternity itself--affiliated because of the twenty-seven members of the board of trustees, nine of them a part of the board, or members of the board by virtue of their positions in the fraternity, and we set--finally, our last one is $15 million, and we achieved that at the end of '13 [2013], and we will probably set a new one so that we can do what no other organization in our history has been able to do, and that's to have a separate sacrosanct asset whose sole purpose is to advance the causes, the views, the goals that we think are important to the fraternity and our communities.
Speaker 1: What are some of those causes?
Speaker 2: Obviously education, it's always been the primary one.  It was part of what was initially created.  We will be reformatting some of that, so that I hope it grows a lot because it has been, since its twenty-seven-year-old history, an award of twelve of them--$4,000 a year.  My goal is that that's quadrupled in the next year so that we will be giving that, and we do it through the National Achievements program [National Achievement Scholarship, National Merit Scholarship Program].
Speaker 1: These are monies to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Students, African American students, yes.
Speaker 1: Schools--students, okay.
Speaker 2: We have had several very, very large ones.  As an example we have--for instance, The HistoryMakers has been a small grant provided by the foundation, but we just completed last year, finally, a million dollars to the Haitian relief effort and, for obvious reasons, we thought that was necessary.  It's obviously larger than we have the capacity because we've gotten this goal, still giving away about $6 million since its inception but, you know, a quarter million people died that look like us, and so we have been the principal funder for the only real hospital in Port-au-Prince [Haiti].  We have built fifty-eight housing units when still in Haiti.  We have physically been there to look at it.  It's still in these tents--cardboard tent things (unclear), and we have an education program there that we have assisted another organization in completing because education is still a huge challenge there.  But we've also given three quarters of a million dollars to Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], separate three quarters to Ike [Hurricane Ike] and the travesties there, for the reasons that are obviously obvious--the crying need there.  And we are gonna be reluctant to do that.  It's just we don't have the size and mass to significantly impact, though that helps to significantly impact the kinds of programs that are underway, in progress, or attempted in those areas.
Speaker 1: Do you have a future project that you're looking to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not one of that size.  We're trying to grow this thing.  My personal goal is to get us to $50 million before I leave this place, and to leave it as an eternal legacy for those things that we think important.
