Story_ID: 30518
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Marc Regis Hannah, M-A-R-C, R-E-G-I-S, H-A-N-N-A-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 13, 1956 in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an engineer, yeah, primarily hardware engineer.  My--most of my experience has to do with designing computer systems and computer graphics hardware.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 10th, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Oakland, California.
Story_ID: 30519
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one of those is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Off the top of my head, I'd say no (laughter).  No, you know, I'm not too--you know, I'm not foodie, I'm not too particular about food.  And so, you know, I'll eat just about anything that's put in front of me.  I'm, I have a favorite dessert I suppose.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, more than one though; a really nice chocolate cake or bread pudding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color, color.  The first thing that pops into my head is blue.  I'm wearing a blue shirt, blue pants.  So I'll go with blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?  Living in California, I'd say the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I--there's not a single place that I go to repeatedly, I suppose.  Among the places I've been to, the one I'm most anxious to get back to is probably Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying?  I'd have to say no to that one (laughter).
Story_ID: 30520
Speaker 1: All right, well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Then we'll get them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Edith Christine Hannah.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, I couldn't tell you exactly.  Place of birth, Hot Springs, Arkansas, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she grew up in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell us about that side of the family?  How much do you know about them and how far do they--can you take them back?
Speaker 2: I don't know a great deal actually.  My mother's parents, as I say, my mother grew up in Columbus, Ohio, you know, when I was born and visited there.  They were living in Columbus.  And, you know, my grandmother's name was Pearl Edwards, grandfather, Eugene Edwards.  But not much in the way of, you know, their background.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They didn't talk about what their family was doing in Hot Springs or--
Speaker 2: Not, not really, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did you grandparents do for a living?
Speaker 2: They--it's terrible, but I don't even know that.  They were not working, you know, by the time that I can remember.  And so, unfortunately, I'm afraid I can't answer it, you know, can't answer the question.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they working-class people or did they have--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, certainly, yeah.  The, you know, I'm, you know, I just never thought about it before, you know.  It's, now that I try to think about it, it's sort of embarrassing, in fact, you know, how little I know about, you know, their backgrounds, their education.  My, you know, my mother went to college at Ohio State, and that's where they--she met my father [Hubert Hannah].
Speaker 1: Now, did she grow up in Columbus itself or the suburb or--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Columbus?
Speaker 2: --grew up in Columbus, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna take a guess, East side of Columbus or where?
Speaker 2: Let's see, let's see, let's see.  Hamlet Street, Broad Street, geographically, at the time I was visiting there, you know, I wasn't driving then and so I don't have a good picture of--I believe it's the East Side, slightly North, but I could be totally rotated in my orientation (laughter).  Yeah, it, you know--
Speaker 1: I know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the address was, I believe 1158 Hamlet Street, wherever that is [Italian Village neighborhood, Columbus, Ohio].  But, you know, I'd have to plug it into, you know, a map now to figure out where that is.
Story_ID: 30521
Speaker 1: Well, I'm from Dayton, Ohio, and I haven't been to Columbus as much as some people from Dayton cause we don't have any relatives there, but the East Side of Columbus is usually where--back in that time, where all the black folks--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --would live.  You know, they didn't have to live there, but, you know, for the most part they did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Columbus East High School [Columbus, Ohio] was like the big sports powerhouse, you know, over there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I don't know if she attended Columbus East [High School, Columbus, Ohio] or what?  Do you know where she went to school or anything or did she--
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  We, actually, you know, fairly recently, a couple years of ago, we went by there and visited, but I can't remember the name of it now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but she did go to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what was she pursuing, what degree?
Speaker 2: I'm not--she's a teacher, and so we never, she never said, this was--my degree is in such and such, you know.  But she was a teacher and so I'm assuming her degree was in education, but I don't know that for sure.
Speaker 1: Sure, okay.  All right, all right.  Okay, so did she talk about growing up in Columbus at all or what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not, not, not a whole lot.  I suppose, you know, growing up, I'm sure there were, as circumstances, you know, come up, there may be anecdotes about the way things were when she was growing up.  But, unfortunately, my memory for stuff like that is not, is not great.  She talks about things like, you know, some of the racism she might have experienced, you know, growing up in school there; talked about how, you know, her parents [Pearl and Eugene Edwards] sort of instilled this sense of, you know, confidence in her that, you know, basically, you know, it doesn't matter what other people think or other people say about you.  You know, so, you know, she would talk about things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she was the--from the timeframe, you were born in '56 [1956], I assume she was a Depression Era kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous) in the Great Depression.
Speaker 2: Probably born around '25 [1925].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she experienced the Great Depression and some of the hardships that people experienced in those days--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --even people with jobs, right?  Money was scarce.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  But I think she always, you know, felt like--I don't think she ever felt like she was going without.  I mean, you know, she's talked about, you know, even though we didn't have much, there was always, you know, never felt like they were going without the basics, and, you know, always willing to, you know, help neighbors and so forth like that.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a big family?  Did she come from a big family?
Speaker 2: No, it's just, just of two of them.  She had a brother, and just the two of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she the first one in her family in her family to go to school, do you know?
Speaker 2: Her brother was older and he went to college so probably, no--yeah, wouldn't have been the first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, you know, education was always, you know, always emphasized, I think, you know, in her family as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were your grandparents [Pearl and Eugene Edwards] college graduates?
Speaker 2: That's not likely.  I don't believe so.
Story_ID: 30522
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Hubert Harvey Hannel--Hannah, excuse me (chuckle).  H-U-B-E-R-T, H-A-R-V-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Hilltop, West Virginia.  And he was born July 7, in 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay, July 7, 1920.  Now, I have an interesting question.  And I'm the only one that came up with this in the office, but I know your name is Marc Hannah--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and there's a famous Congressman or Senator from Ohio named Marc Hannah.  Is there any connection at all?  Did they name you after him?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, no, no, I don't think I was named after anyone in particular, that I was told.
Speaker 1: Have you ever heard of Marc Hannah [Marcus Alonzo "Mark" Hanna, campaign manager for William McKinley in U.S. Presidential election of 1896], the Senator?
Speaker 2: Was it Ohio?  There's a "Dollar Mark" Hanna who was a sort of famous politician, roughly, turn of the century, kind of 1900s, I thought.  It's spelled M-A-R-K, I believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Mark Hannah that I was--yeah, M-A-R-K, yeah.
Speaker 2: So no connection (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered if--
Speaker 2: But, yeah, it turns out Marc Hannah is not an uncommon name.  I haven't directly run into any Marc Hannah's.  But certainly, in, you know, with today's Internet, you can type in, you know, the name Marc Hannah, and there're probably five or 10 Marc Hannah's in the Bay Area.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I believe the Mark Hanna who is the congressman--he's a white man, he was instrumental in defending the soldiers in Brownsville, Texas [Brownsville Affair, 1906] and he put his career on the line.  He really did, there's a heroic story behind the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Mark Hannah from Ohio.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I think that's actually a different Mark Hanna than the one I'm thinking of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But this Marc Hannah--this is 19--when they had the Brownsville incident.  I think it was 18--late 1890s.  These were soldiers who had been with Teddy Roosevelt in Cuba [Spanish American War, 1898], and, you know, the townspeople in Brownsville didn't like them walking into town and shot at them and it was a big--but it's a, you know, it may be interesting to find, you know, who he is--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --but that's my vague memory of Mark Hanna--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know, and what he did.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: And so he's heroic so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --nothing bad about him.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, yeah.  I think the one I'm thinking was a little bit more of a shady character.  I don't know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't know the shady one, but the heroic one was the one who was involved in the Brownsville incident.  They had Senate hearings or congressional hearings about it and he defended the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --black soldiers [train horn sounding].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So anyway, Hubert Harvey Hannah and, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  Who are the Hannah's and where do they come from. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):	Please wait until that train goes by.
Speaker 2: Okay. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Okay, so my father's side of the family--[train still passing], it's not quite final (laughter).  Actually, just ask the question again.
Story_ID: 30523
Speaker 1: All right, just tell me what you know about your father's [Hubert Hannah] side.  How far back can you trace the Hannah's or your father's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, I'm not up on it.  On my father's side of the family--so his name was Hannah.  So his--as I said, he was born in Hilltop, West Virginia [July 7, 1920].  So his father's name was Hannah.  His mother's name was Reynolds.  And I guess in this small town in West Virginia there was a Claytor family that had, I don't know, twelve or thirteen kids and a Reynolds family that had twelve or thirteen kids.  And then there were a lot of marriages between the family at some point in distant past.  And so my grandmother on my father's side was [train horn] a Reynolds.  And the, you know, at some point, I guess starting back in the, you know, roughly '69 [1969] or so, somewhere in the late sixties [1960s], we had a family reunion, sort of the Claytors and the Reynolds that sort of came out of that family.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  How do you spell the name of the other family, the Clay--
Speaker 2: Claytor, C-L-A-Y-T-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the Reynolds, R-E-Y-N-O-L-D-S.  And, so this was a long time ago, but sort of, that was sort of the origin of this family reunion many years ago, you know, some time in the last century, actually, the century before last.  And so there has, you know, been some effort that's gone into sort of starting from that point of origin of the Claytor family and Reynolds family, you know, tracing forward to the point where there's, you know, there's a big, thick book that has, you know, the tree of the family.  But, so that's sort of, you know, through my father and then through my mother [Edith Christine Hannah] and farther up that path.  But if you go through my grandfather and up that path, you know, and then I really--it stops at my grandfather.  I really don't have much knowledge of, you know, sort of my great-grandfather and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, is Hilltop, West Virginia near Ohio or is--
Speaker 2: It's, I mean Beckley [West Virginia] is the larger town that's near Hilltop.
Story_ID: 30524
Speaker 1: Okay, did he grow up in Beckley [West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No, no, he, I believe went to college in Beckley, undergrad [Beckley College].  He was, went to graduate school, got his master's at Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], and that's where he met my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he--but--oh, what college did he graduate from in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so what would it be called?  I don't know if it's called the, you know, University of West Virginia at Beckley [sic, Beckley College] or I don't know specifically the name of the school.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) West Virginia State was the black school in West Virginia--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --that a lot of people came out of.  The University of West Virginia is not in Beckley.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's another town.  I can't--oh, I know the town, but I can't think of it now.  But, yeah, there's a number of schools, but I, you know, a lot of black folks came out of West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] in those days.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so.
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember the name of the actual college, but it was in Beckley.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he got his graduate degree from Ohio State?
Speaker 2: And a graduate degree from Ohio State, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did he study at Ohio State?
Speaker 2: It was accounting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father talk about what it was like when he was growing up and does he have a narrative of what happened to him?
Speaker 2: Nah, no, not so much.  Not so much.
Speaker 1: Did he come from a large family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had, there were six, I believe in his family.  And so, let's see, in no particular order, Rocknell (ph.), David, Ed--I'm trying to remember whether it's Edwin or Edward, but I believe it's Edwin, Ernestine and--I'm forgetting somebody, Leon and my father, so yeah, six.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So now is--
Speaker 2: My father is the last surviving, you know, in the family, yeah.
Story_ID: 30525
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Never, no great stories (laughter) that I was told.  You know, they were, they were both, you know, in college there at the, at Ohio State [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]and so I don't--I'm sure I've been told, you know, little bits and pieces about--
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--
Speaker 2: --but I don't remember the story.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is in the '50's [1950s] of Ohio State. These are the days of, when Woody Hayes [Ohio State University football coach, 1951-1978] is just getting started and the Ohio State football team is still a big deal.  I mean it still is now.  It was a big deal then too.  And Jesse Owens [Olympic gold medalist, Ohio State University Student 1933-1941] was gone, was a graduate, a famous graduate, you know, left, and just trying to think of what could have been going on there that was special, but--so they met and got--did they get married shortly after they met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my father was in, you know, World War II and then came out of World War II and, I believe--
Speaker 1: Oh, so they went back in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know my oldest brother was born in '50' [1950], so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so it would have been, you know, late forties [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And then she was, she was an undergraduate so--
Speaker 1: Now, did they get married before the war or after the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: It was after the war, yeah.
Speaker 1: After, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was after he came back from the war and went there.
Speaker 1: Had they met before the war?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.  Okay, that makes sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: You know, as a graduate student, I don't think he was like involved in sports or anything there [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  The, and he played football, I guess, in college.  And my mother, my mother used to play sports.  I don't know if they had any women's teams at that (laughter) point, but, you know, maybe it was high school or so forth.  But, you know, she was fairly athletic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was able to go on and finish his Masters on a GI bill and get--
Speaker 2: Probably, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did he go to Europe during the war or the Pacific?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it was Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But again, I don't--you know, he never really talked much about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your parents got married, what, 19--somewhere between '44 [1945] and '50 [1950]?
Speaker 2: You know, that I should know, but (laughter) I should be able to have calculated that from what anniversaries they had (laughter).  Their, but, yeah, I never--if I had a year, I would--it would be easier to remember.  But it was, yeah, late forties [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, your brother was born in 1950, you said, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then do you have any other siblings besides your brother, this--
Speaker 2: Right, there're five in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Four boys, one girl.
Speaker 1: So where do you fall in order?
Speaker 2: I'm second youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.  Starting from the oldest, it's Hubert, Jr., then Dwayne, Judith, myself and Don is the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30526
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, when you think about your parents'  personalities and their talents, their dispositions, their interests, who--and even their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, all together--well, people say I look a lot like my father [Hubert Hannah].  I guess I would agree with that.  I don't know.  You know, I'm a mix.  So you're asking who am I most like, my mother [Edith Hannah] or my father?  You know, I--I suppose my disposition is probably more like my father, but, you know, I think I'm just, you know a little bit of mix of both.  And certainly I've spent a lot more time interacting with my mother.  You know, that was a time where the father went off to work and the mother took care of the kids.  And, you know, so, you know, most of the parental interaction was, you know, with my mother rather than my father.
Speaker 1: Well, what was your father's disposition like?
Speaker 2: I mean there're actually two aspects to that question.  One is sort, you know, I think fairly outgoing and, you know, likes to talk with people a lot.  So in that respect, I'm not so much (laughter) like my father because I'm, you know, fairly introverted.  You know, I'll talk if I feel there's a contribution to be made to the conversation.  But I guess it's the engineer in me.  You know, I just don't like talking for talking's sake, to hear myself speak.  And, you know, so he's fairly outgoing, you know, and you get him in a crowd of people, you know, chances are good he'll be one of the people that's speaking out more than others.  In the home environment, you know, not that it's different.  I just, I just feel like it's more subdued.  I think he was just sort of my focused on, in his own activities than, you know, interacting a lot with kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what about your mother [Edith Hannah]?
Speaker 2: In terms of the disposition?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was she interested in, and what does she like to do?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, she was, you know, she was a teacher, as I said.  You know, certainly when I was very young, when we were all very young, she wasn't teaching.  She was sort of full time, dedicated to raising us.  And then as we became somewhat older, she started teaching part time in elementary school.  So, you know, while we were in school, she could work and then, you know, come home from that.  We were on basically the same schedule, and, you know, and do all the homemaking stuff.  So I think, not quite as outgoing as my father.  You know, a very nice woman, very helpful, very involved in the church--actually, both my parents were very involved in the church [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 30527
Speaker 1: Now, what church was it?  Was it a specific church?
Speaker 2: Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois], you know, since that church was started.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, yeah.  So it's, gained fame because of, you know, Rev. [Jeremiah] Wright.
Speaker 1: Rev. Wright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was Rev. Wright the pastor then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, even before Rev. Wright, yeah.  But--
Speaker 1: Rev. Jeremiah Wright?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, yeah.  So, you know, it started a few years before that, and there was one or two other pastors before that [Rev. Willie J. Jamerson, Rev. Reuben A. Sheares].  But that was a fairly short interval of time.  And then Rev. Wright came in--
Speaker 1: He was the pastor a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean he just retired a few years ago, but he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: --was there a long time.
Speaker 2: And it was a very small church.  I seem to recall it was, like started and for a while, it was actually meeting in the school down the street.  And then, you know, they built this, you know, small church.  And it was, you know, meeting there, but not at all a very packed place.
Speaker 1: Not until--
Speaker 2: Until Jeremiah Wright came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it sort of took off from there.  We lived just down the block.  So, you know, we were on 94th Street [Chicago, Illinois], you know, in the middle of the block.  And at the end of the block, there was the church.  And so, you know, a very dynamic, energetic, you know, pastor, and the church, you know, from the time he came in, you know, grew fairly rapidly and sort of outgrew that building on the same lot.  They built the bigger expansion and the formal one for other activities.  And then they outgrew that one.  And then, you know, built a huge one, you know, a few blocks away, and that's where they are now.
Speaker 1: Right.  I remember watching it grow.  I used to go play basketball at Robichaux Park with school teachers and, you know, at one time.  And then every--you know, so it was growing all the time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, yeah, Trinity's a church that's basically dominated by young, black professionals and a lot of them are college professors, school teachers and, you know, it's a--as you well know.  I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  No, it's, yeah, very nice, does a lot in the community and support.  And they're very good at, you know, bringing young people in to keep things going.  But, yeah, so, you know, so my mother is, you know, she had a circle of friends, you know, they were involved in the church or in the neighborhood, but kind of a low-key personality; you know, very dedicated, you know, doing what's right for the kids and again, you know, a big focus on education.  And so there was always, you know, doing well in school was always emphasized, always an assumption that, you know, we were gonna go on to college and so forth.
Story_ID: 30528
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did the family move to--
Speaker 2: Chicago {Illinois]?
Speaker 1: --Chicago from Columbus [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Fairly early on.  I believe that my two oldest brothers [Hubert Hannah, Jr. and Dwayne Hannah] were born in Columbus.  And then they moved.  There're only, like as I said, yeah, my oldest brother was born in '50 [1950] and I was born in '56' [1956], so I'm six years younger.  We were roughly two years apart.  And then my youngest brother [Don Hannah], five years later.  But moved from Columbus to go to work at International Harvester [Company].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's where your father [Hubert Hannah] worked?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he, yeah, got a job--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there and packed up and, you know, moved to, moved to Chicago.
Story_ID: 30529
Speaker 1: International Harvester.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And your mother didn't teach until a little later?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you lived out in the nineties on 94th Street?
Speaker 2: Right, 94th and Wallace.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what do they call that area out there?  That's--
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: You know (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, well, there's Beverly [Chicago, Illinois] which is farther West--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's not Beverly.  It's-
Speaker 2: --and so I don't know (laughter).  I just called home.  I didn't-- I don't remember what (laughter) it was called.
Speaker 1: It does have a name, and I'm trying to think it.  I had a girlfriend who lived over there for a while, who grew up over there and went to Harlan [Harlan Community High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: There was a name for that neighborhood and I can't think of it [sic, Washington Heights].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know there's, you know, Chicago's [Illinois] a town, you know, a city of a bunch of neighborhoods.  So, yeah, there must be one, but I never was aware of it when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: I'm starting to understand something about you.  It's your--
Speaker 2: I can't remember anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, it's not that.  I think you're just very, you know, focused on what's right in, you know, you don't pay that much--a lot of attention to something that--.
Speaker 2: You know, I do feel like, you know, I build a model of the world, you know, I take in information.  You know, if I feel it's important, I alter the model, and then a lot of the raw data, I think I just, you know, forget.
Story_ID: 30530
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna ask you this question.  You know, I hope you can answer this one.  This is, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  (Laughter) Yes, no, but (laughter), what is that?  And that's a different question.  It's when I was twenty four (laughter), no.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: No, the, you know--and this is where I'm really terrible in just sort of remembering my own personal history, you know.  It's kind of funny cause, you know, I can, you know, movies that I may have seen a long time ago, I can remember lots of detail; my own life, maybe not so much (chuckle).  For some reason, let's see, the earliest thing I think I can remember is just--I think it might have been like a kindergarten class.  And it's just--I mean it's just an isolated thing of sort of, you know, napping on the floor or something in a kindergarten class.  You know, I guess I can remember sort of walking to school.  I don't remember any of my earlier teachers.  I--for the first, I guess kindergarten through second grade, I believe, I went to a school that was just sort of kitty corner, you know, half a block away.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: Kipling, Rudyard Kipling [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, Rudyard Kipling, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then after that, third grade, I believe we transferred to a different school that was farther away, but a better school, and that was Fort Dearborn [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was actually in an all-white neighborhood.  And so, I don't--I must have been one of a couple of black students.  But the other interesting thing is I wasn't aware of race at the time.
Speaker 1: So was Fort Dearborn sort of like a magnet school or something or I mean--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --a, it was, I mean did you have to test to get into that or as a student--
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: -- did you live in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I don't know the logistics and, you know, how I was able to transfer if, yeah, I don't know.  I don't know if there was some fake address, funny business or what (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: But did your parents perceive it as a better school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely.  Yeah, I mean that was the only reason for transferring there.  They were certainly more involved to, you know, to drive me there and to pick me up when I was younger.  And then, you know, in the last couple of years, I think, you know, I would take the bus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd walk five blocks, take a bus and then (unclear).  But--
Speaker 1: Was Fort Dearborn in Beverly [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe on the border.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't quite that far west, but it might have been considered part of Beverly [sic, Washington Heights, Chicago, Illinois].  But it was a, as when I transferred there, it was an all-white school.  But I wasn't actually aware of race.  And so it was only when it converted from an all-white school to an all-black school within (chuckle) like two years, I don't know.  It was, it was amazing, you know, the whole thing of white flight where it was all-white neighborhood, and I guess, you know, some minority families would move in.  And then there's a sudden exodus.  And, you know, I went through it.  And so it happened, but it's amazing to think that, you know, sort of the racial makeup of a school can change within, you know, probably three years.
Story_ID: 30531
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna back track a little bit.  And we always ask this question, and I'm gonna ask you this one too.  What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and smells?  Sights, sounds and smells.  The sights, you know, the things I remember are just, you know, the immediate neighborhood, which is, you know, they were basic middle-class neighborhoods, the neighbors.  I, you know, I was, tended to be a more indoor person than an outdoor person so I didn't, you know, spend a lot of time out on the field playing baseball or basketball or that kind of thing.  I spent way too much time watching TV when I was a kid.  School was sort of relatively easy for me and so I had lots of free time.  But I always tended to spend it indoors rather than outdoors.  You know, music was sort of, you know, Motown, kinds of music and the Temptations, Smokey Robinson and the Miracles and all that kind of stuff.  I used to memorize the words to all of the Temptations' songs and so (laughter).  You know, smells?  Don't really remember the smells, although I'm sure if I smelled something that was from my childhood (laughter), it would instantly remind me of something.  But it's hard just to sit here and say, oh, I, you know, I remember the smell the kitchen or the smell of the, whatever, down the street or whatever.  Not much in the way of smell memory there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about sound memories or quiet memories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, it was, you know, quiet, pretty quiet neighborhood, except New Year's Eve.  It sounded like a war zone (laughter).  Even my father [Hubert Harvey, Sr.], you know, had his World War II gun.  He used to go out in the backyard and shoot it off at midnight.  That was, you know, that was a celebratory thing.  But it, you stayed down away from windows at midnight in that neighborhood.  Other sounds, other sounds, other sounds?  Nothing comes to mind.
Speaker 1: Not too many.
Story_ID: 30532
Speaker 1: Did you all play the radio a lot around the house or did you--
Speaker 2: I don't, you know, I don't remember it being on all the time.  You know, we had a stereo system and a record player and, you know, like I said, a lot of the stuff that was played was kind of Motown, R and B kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: On the record player?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, the radio station as well.  I remember Herb Kent, HK the DJ (chuckle)--
Speaker 1: Right, on WVON.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, right.  And Soul Train, Don Cornelius and Soul Train (singing it).  You know,--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --started on local TV.  It started in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of TV shows did you like, you know, if you watched a lot of TV, what did you like to watch?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  You know, stuff--what were some of the shows?  'Star Trek', I was certainly a big 'Star Trek' fan, the 'Wild, Wild West'.  Let's see, yeah, I guess there were sort of action stuff or, you know, there's all kinds of police stuff and private detective stuff and that kind of stuff, I think is what I tended to watch, and if there was science fiction, then I would watch that.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you prefer science fiction to other genres or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, like 'Lost in Space' or, I'm trying to remember, 'Twilight Zone' I wasn't in to.  'Outer Limits' I thought was interesting.  And what other kinds of things?  Yeah, that's, you know, I still liked the science fiction stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to the movies much?  Did you--
Speaker 2: No, yeah, you know, we didn't go out to restaurants much.  We didn't really go out to movies much.  So it was just, yeah, I don't--I, yeah, I can't even remember where the movies were.  I just, you know, there was a Beverly Theater [Chicago, Illinois].  That was probably the closest theater, but I can't even remember ever going there.  So I think, you know, most of the entertainment viewing was done at home, and--yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a family of five, you know, is hard to spend money on that other kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know and Evergreen Plaza [Shopping Center, now known as The Plaza] wasn't too far away, and--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --they had a big, you know--at one point, they had like a movie Cineplex.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I'm sure sort of in later years I must have gone down there, you know, event.  Yeah, I know I have, but that was, you know, not, not--I don't remember it so much during earlier childhood.
Story_ID: 30533
Speaker 1: I wanted--Did you pay particular attention to the special effects?  I know all kids see them in the movies, but did you ever have any curiosity about how they were made and that sort of thing?  We were talking about "The 7th Voyage of Sinbad" [1958] in--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --in the elevator and, did you see that?
Speaker 2: You know, I--not so much.  You know, I don't ever remember, you know, like watching a movie like the "Voyage of Sinbad" and thinking, you know, oh, you know, I wonder how that was made.  I mean it could be because I knew how that was made (laughter) or, or had no interest in doing it or, or--I know my oldest brother [Hubert Hannah, Jr.] actually was sort of into filmmaking.  And he actually made some, you know, some little stop motion kinds of films, you know, with his little 8 millimeter [mm] camera.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, he had a little, you know, GI Joe or something, and he'd move it around and make a little film or have him driving around in a car and, you know, all stop motion.  I would be a character in some of his stop-motion stuff occasionally.  So you'd have to, you know, stop motionless.  He'd take a shot, and then you'd move a little (laughter) and he took the shot.  But there was other stuff going on that he would move around.  But, but--so I enjoyed that kind of stuff, but I can't say that that was sort of, you know, the spark of saying, like, you know, it's like I'd love to be able to do that.  The thing, the thing that actually got me interested in graphics was flight simulation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, not so much movie special effects, but flight simulators and, you know, wanting to be able to have something in my basement that--where I could fly a plane around.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where did you encounter a flight simulator?  Was it at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] or something or what?  Or was it some place else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was probably an awareness of flight simulation is probably in college.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's much later.
Speaker 2: I know I spent a lot of time at--you know, that was my favorite museum when I was growing up, the Museum of Science and Industry and used to go there a lot; sort of had the paths memorized and all that kind of stuff.  I don't remember in particular--and at that time, flight simulation was a really big, expensive thing.  You know, these flight simulators were million dollar machines and used to train the military and so forth.  And so it's probably not something I would have necessarily seen in the Museum of Science and Industry.  But like I said, in college, I had thoughts of wanting to be a, you know, learning how to fly and, you know, military fighter pilots and all that kind of stuff was fascinating, not that I wanted to be a fighter pilot.  But I just wanted the thrill of (laughter), some of that thrill, you know, in a safe environment.  And so, like the, you know, the wanting to design hardware that could do that kind of fancy 3-D [three dimensional] graphics, but at a lower price was kind of what got me into graphics.
Story_ID: 30534
Speaker 1: Okay, well, just in terms of grade school, did you like to read?
Speaker 2: I was not a big reader.  I guess to this day, I'm not a fiction reading.  You know, I read all technical stuff, but I'm not a big fiction reader.  And so, but I, you know, I guess, you know, I did well.  I actually skipped a grade in grammar school [Fort Dearborn Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I don't know that they even do that kind of stuff these days.  But in the middle of sixth grade, I was promoted up to the seventh grade and sort of finished out the year in the seventh grade.  So I think, you know, both in reading and math, my, sort of my testing levels were a few years beyond where I was.  But I don't, I never did a whole lot of reading that I can (laughter) remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you did well in school you're saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or mentors in school or in the community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's see.  There were several.  I mean the only teacher I can remember by name is the, was not (laughter), it was not a positive memory.  It was actually after I moved from the sixth grade to the seventh grade.  I guess there were two different seventh grade classes.  And there was one for the less advanced students and one for the more advanced students.  And I was put in for the less advanced, which, and it was like the teacher of that course was--whose name I shall not mention, it was like a waste of time, not a total waste of time, I'm sure.  But my memories are doing things like reading aloud in class, you know, for hours and stuff like that, that, you know, seemed pointless at the time.  And so I think I--certainly, I don't think I spent more than a half a year in that class and then they like moved me over to the normal, more advanced eighth grade class.  But in high school--
Story_ID: 30535
Speaker 1: Now, did you go--you went to Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first--
Speaker 1: So you tested, you had to test out for the advanced program at Kenwood, is that right?
Speaker 2: No, Kenwood was just a normal high school at that time.  I know there were some like address shenanigans that got me into Kenwood.  I guess the statute of limitations has passed by now (laughter).  Actually, by the time I finished there, they knew what was going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so they didn't have the magnet program but--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the time--well, what--
Speaker 2: So my first, my freshman year, I went to--I'd say my mother was looking for a good school for me to go to.  She didn't want me to go to Harlan [Community High School, Chicago, Illinois].  My older brothers and sister had gone to Harlan; thought about sending me to, I guess, Morgan Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and one other school she might have considered.  I guess, was not able to get into there.  I started--there was a school which I think went up to the ninth grade, perhaps.  And I started, actually, I think I went there for two weeks.  But, public school, but then she--I ended up going to University of Chicago Laboratory School [Chicago, Illinois], U High.  So, so my freshman year was U High at the University of Chicago.  And I think my mother [Edith Hannah] actually, you know, during that time did some part-time work at the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, you know, pretty prestigious stuff, you know, University of Chicago.  In fact, all the schools you mentioned pretty much have illustrious histories, even Harlan, you know, back in, I think it was maybe ten years before you, it was considered one of the top schools in the city.  And Morgan Park was still a strong school up to--and may still be.  I know when my son was in school, it was still considered a strong school.  And Kenwood would have been strong and then the magnet program which was--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --established later was established to hold that core together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kenwood just opened--you know, the year I was a freshman, that was Kenwood's first year [sic, 1969 was Kenwood Academy High School's first year in its new building].  I didn't go there, but I was in the first graduating class [Class of 1973], you know, finished four years there.  And, so I said, went to the, U High my first year.  And then, you know, my mother used a, you know, Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] address to get me into Kenwood.
Speaker 1: Now, why was that?  Why did--did University of Chicago Lab School cost money or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So it was cheaper to send you to Kenwood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was a new school.  It was like a, you know, racially mixed, you know.  And, you know, in a very good neighborhood.  So.
Speaker 1: But the quality is--in Chicago, it's known for a high quality.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so that--I mean that was always--you know, from the time, you know, in the third grade where I went out of my neighborhood, you know, that was--my mother was looking for a good school.  And so if it meant traveling a distance to go to a good school, then that's, you know, what was done.  And so, you know, as I said, you know, Fort Dearborn [Fort Dearborn Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] was, you know, a couple of miles away.  It doesn't seem like a long distance now, but certainly when I was growing up it seemed like a long distance.  And as I said, when it came time to go to the high school, she was looking for not the closest school, but, you know, the best school that I could get into.  And when it seemed like I wasn't getting--wasn't able to get into the one she wanted, you know, then I ended up going to the private school.  But I'm sure there was, you know, there was a cost especially with that.  And when she was able to get me into Kenwood there in Hyde Park, then did that.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said your older brothers went Harlan?
Speaker 2: Yes, my older brother, two brothers [Hubert Hannah, Jr. and Dwayne Hannah] and sister [Judith Hannah] went to Harlan, and then my younger brother [Don Hannah], again there was more, probably flexibility of sorts in his case.  Actually, he, well, he went to the Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois] for a number of years in elementary school and then went to Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois] for high school, you know, a very good school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Whitney Young's the top school in Illinois now (unclear).  Okay, so, Kenwood's right there in Hyde Park near the University of Chicago too and is influenced by that environment.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30536
Speaker 1: So how did you like Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Nah, it was good.  It was my only high school, so--well, it wasn't my only high school, actually (laughter).  But it's like, U-High [University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, Illinois] was, you know, predominantly white so, which wasn't that big a deal, but it's always a little bit more comfortable to have, you know, more, you know, people like you around.  And so, and Kenwood was, you know, sort of racially mixed and so lots of different variety and, you know, I think, you know, there was--I lived out of the area and so, you know, took the bus and so forth to get to the school.  And so there wasn't--well, plus, I'm naturally introverted too.  So, you know, there wasn't a lot of interaction and extra-curricular stuff and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now, that is a long bus ride, back to 94th Street.
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's see.  It's exactly how do I do it.  That's, you know, I guess I must have walked up to--it could have been the first year that I was driven, but, you know, after that I believe, you know, you walk up to--
Speaker 1: Lake Park [Avenue]?
Speaker 2: --probably 55th Street and then you take the bus over to the, you know, to the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway] where there's the [train horn] rapid transit that runs up the Dan Ryan, and that gets you to 95th [Street] and then you take the bus across from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that the way you would do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right [train horn].  I guess that is the fastest way.  I would have gone Lake Park [Avenue], Stony Island [Avenue] and 95th Street.  Maybe that's longer, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it's definitely not the way I went (laughter).
Story_ID: 30537
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did you have a--so you didn't do, you weren't involved in activities that much?
Speaker 2: No, so, yeah--
Speaker 1: Well, were you involved in activities at the church, at Trinity [United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No, you know, we would go on Sunday, but I, I'm not that, you know, I'm not that religious person.  Religion can be a good thing.  I'm not opposed to religion.  I generally believe, but you know, I'm not a regular church-going person.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did--since church is such a big thing in the household, what happened that kind of made you not question (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Nothing in particular.  It's just, I don't--maybe it's like piano, you know.  You know, I took piano for a couple of years and once I no longer had to (laughter), I stopped.  And so I guess, yeah, I don't know.  It's, you know, maybe church is a lot about faith, and, you know, I just have a, I guess I'm more grounded in science.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it--other scientists have similar.  They're not the only ones at issue with the church, but it does cause one to kind of--
Speaker 2: I mean I sort of step back from it and view it as a system.  And I think there are very positive things that come out of it and some not so positive things that can come out of it.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't really have a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I mean there was nothing, you know, like I said, you know, there was nothing that happened that turned me away from it.  It was just, didn't feel the need to go and so, you know, once I moved away from home, sort of, you know, no point.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you have friends in the neighborhood basically in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, there's small set of friends.  I used to play around with in the neighborhood, I suppose.  But I, since I went to school out of the neighborhood, you know, I'd say, you know, more of my friendships at that time were, you know, people from school and out of the neighborhood.  And then since I was out of the--since I was living away from where the school was, you know, there wasn't a whole lot of interaction with them outside of the school.  And, you know, I have this natural introverted-ness.  So.
Story_ID: 30538
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, were you engaged in any scientific activities at home or did you--was there any scientific--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know.  My oldest brother [Hubert Hannah, Jr.] used to play around with electronics and I think that's probably what sparked some of my interests in electronics.  The other thing that sort of led me down the engineering path was just the courses in high school [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  There was a computer course my senior year, I guess, in high school.  Math and Science were always my favorite courses.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  What does--I'm trying to, just put it in perspective.  In 19--you were in high school from what, '70 [1970]--
Speaker 2: What was that, '69 [1969] to '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Okay, '69 [1969] to '73 [1973].  What did the computer look like in the 1970s?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, all I saw of a computer was not the computer itself because computers were these big things in special air-conditioned rooms--
Speaker 1: How big?  What are we talking about?
Speaker 2: How big?  They--
Speaker 1: Could you put them on a desktop?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, I mean, you know, think of a kitchen refrigerator, a couple of those lined up side-by-side and, you know, that might have been the typical computer.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was trying--
Speaker 2: And if you wanted a tape drive on it, you know, that's another refrigerator sitting next to it.  And if you wanted a, you know, some disc storage, that's another refrigerator sitting next to it (chuckle).  And so, so these were, you know, big, big machines.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was one that was shared among a number of people.  And so, in the case of the course I had in high school, the computer wasn't at the school.  It was somewhere at the end of a phone line.  And what we had at the school was a keypunch machine so you could punch cards that would be the program, you know, you were basically gonna feed into the computer.  And so you could sit at a machine and punch a deck of cards, and then they had a machine that was a card reader and a terminal that, you know, could print out.  And so you could put in this deck of cards, you know, it would read the cards, send it up to the computer and it'd run the run the program, and it could, you know, type out whatever it was gonna type out on the sheet of paper.  And then you could look and see what it did.  I guess maybe you could do some interactive stuff as well, [train horn] but it was--there were two of these terminals, teletype machine kind of hard reader things--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in a room in the high school.
Story_ID: 30539
Speaker 1: Just kind of for--what language did you use to program these computers?
Speaker 2: Yes, so the first language I learned was COBOL.  It stands for Common Business Oriented Language, which is a business oriented language.  You know, for whatever reason, they taught us that one first.  And then I remember, like the first assignment might have been just something as simple as sort reading in a couple of numbers, adding them together and printing out the result which you would think is, you know, would take just a few lines of code.  But there's a whole lot of set up and stuff in COBOL, and so you might have to write sixty lines to do that simple thing.  But, but anyway, it's--so not what it was designed for, but that sort of turned me off on COBOL.  And then I think after that, learned a little bit of Fortran as well which is the more scientific computing language.  But in the class, I don't remember doing anything all that complicated.  I'm just--see now, I'm trying to be careful about, not mix up what I did in high school [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] with what I did in my first computer course in college [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois].  And I'm not even sure I can separate those two.  I think, you know, I might have in high school done a program in Fortran--yeah, I believe so.  It was like the Towers of Hanoi to solve that where you, yeah, you have whatever it is, four or five rings [sic, four rings] on three pegs, and you need to move all the rings.  There's--each is a smaller size, and so they're stacked up from big to little.  And you have to move all the rings from one peg to another peg without putting a bigger ring, a bigger disk on a smaller disk.  Anyway, you know, it's fairly simple algorithm and I think, you know, that was probably the most complicated thing that I did, you know, as a program in high school.  But that was just enough to sort of get me interested in computers and sort of what computers could do.  And so when, as I said, you know, science and math were my favorite subjects.  You know, so I was interested in the sciences, in particular.  And so when it came time to decide what major, what, you know, what I wanted to major in, in college, I was I think bouncing back and forth between physics and electrical engineering.  And the interest in electrical engineering is probably, you know, probably from the computer thing and partly from my brother's interest in electronics and sort of, you know, tinkering with home electronics kinds of things.
Story_ID: 30540
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so, anyway, you know, I ended up going into electrical engineering because I got a scholarship in electrical engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were a senior in high school, what were your ambitions?  What was it you wanted to do for living?  Were you thinking about that at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes, and, so as I said, you know, science or engineering.  So scientist or an engineer.  And I hadn't really gone much farther than that.  Bachelor's and master's, so it was, you know, basically, I was gonna go to college for five or six years and then get a job afterwards.  And it was gonna be, you know, as a scientist or engineer.  And, but because I, you know, ended up getting the scholarship in electrical engineering, you know, that's what sort of made me come down hard on the (laughter) engineering side as opposed to the science side.
Speaker 1: So, tell me now, how did you wind up getting a scholarship from A-T and T--
Speaker 2: Bell Laboratories?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Bell Laboratories.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, you know, when it came time to apply to college, I wanted to stay relatively close, within the state.  So I applied to IIT, Illinois Institute of Technology [Chicago, Illinois] was one school, Northwestern [University] which is also, you know, in the Chicago area in Evanston, Illinois and then Champaign-Urbana, University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois].  And so, all the schools that I thought, you know, had good engineering programs, well, science and engineering 'cause I guess when I was originally applying, I hadn't firmly decided.  And one, what happened was the financial aid director at IIT called me up and told me about this scholarship that Bell Laboratories offered for--it's BLESP, Bell Labs Engineering Scholarship Program to, you know, get more minorities and women in engineering and science--actually, engineering, I think, at that point; and asked if I would be interested in it.  I said, of course.  Came, went down and interviewed, went down to the IIT campus, interviewed with someone there; I think followed that up with recommendations from teachers and so forth, and was, you know, fortunate enough to actually, you know, receive that scholarship.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, did it pay for everything?
Speaker 2: That was a, yeah, full ride, paid for everything scholarship.  And so, at that point, there--you know, and it was in electrical engineering.  I think maybe you could have been mechanical engineering, but I was not interested in mechanical engineering.  So, but as far as the choice between, you know, being an electrical engineer and being a physicist, you know, if you have a full scholarship, you know, at a good school in electrical engineering, and no other particular strong bias in one way or the other, electrical engineer is it.  And certainly, I think I was, you know, that was a good choice for me, knowing more about the field of physics, I think physics would not have been the great field for me.  And so, so yeah, so I ended up going into electrical engineering and going to IIT.  Actually, I don't even think I--I might not have even completed the application process in the other schools 'cause once I, you know, got that full scholarship, that was where I was going.
Speaker 1: And just for everybody, to make sure that people are clear, IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] is not to be confused with ITT [Information Telephone and Telegraph Technical Institute] which is a different technology school.
Speaker 2: ITT is a company and also not to be confused with the Indian Institute of Technology in India (laughter) which I think their logo even looks a lot like IIT, Illinois logo.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Illinois Institute of Technology is in Chicago on the Near South Side of Chicago.
Speaker 2: On the Near South Side, right.
Speaker 1: It's a fairly large campus.
Speaker 2: Well, perhaps for, you know, for an inner-city campus.  It runs about from 31st Street to 35th Street, and then from sort of the Dan Ryan Expressway to State Street [sic, Michigan Avenue].  So that's a couple of blocks and then another couple of blocks.  So, yeah, it's probably half a mile by half a mile.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to make sure the people knew the difference.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, how'd you like IIT?
Speaker 2: It was good.  You know, I thought it was--it was good for me.  I very early on got into a fraternity, Pi Kappa Phi, and--
Speaker 1: What Phi?  What is it?
Speaker 2: Pi Kappa Phi.
Speaker 1: Pi Kappa Phi, okay.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, we had a pledge class, a freshman pledge class that was, I think out of thirteen pledges, maybe six, six or seven might have been in electrical engineering.  And so there were sort of an instant group of friends, an instant, you know, sort of study group and activities and so forth.  So, you know, that worked out really well for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, the school was very good.  The, I guess, you know, through high school, you know, I was an A, B student.  I don't remember what my high school GPA was.  But I-- [train horn blowing] [pause] (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, I really didn't apply myself, I don't think, all that well.  I think, you know, I did all my homework before I left the school and watched a bunch of TV when I got home so (laughter), you know.  If I got a B in a course, it wasn't that big a deal.  And so I suppose I went into college with that attitude, you know, believing I would have to work harder but, you know, I think the first semester, I--you know, A or B probably didn't matter that much.  You know, A is always better than B, but I happened to get all A's, I think, the first semester, except I got a B in a drafting course.  And for whatever reason, that like flipped the switch in my head where, like a B was no longer adequate.  And so from that point on, the goal was always to get an A in every course.  And so I did fine.  I think I ended up with like a 3.956 or something GPA.
Speaker 2: And that's pretty good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got that one B in a drafting course (laughter) my first semester.  And then, I think later there was a, it was like a psychology course or something where the guy was so boring I couldn't stay awake in the class.  I think I ended up getting a B in that one.  But--
Story_ID: 30541
Speaker 1: So did anything that you learned at IIT like fire your imagination for the future, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--yes, more so than I--well, I shouldn't say more so.  But I was also working--the other great thing about this scholarship program was that it came with a summer job at Bell Laboratories.  And so I worked summers at Naperville, Bell Laboratories in Naperville.  And so there I actually, you know, got to do a bit of engineering.   You know, the first year right out of high school I didn't know enough to do a whole lot of real useful stuff, but, you know, in later years, you know, I did more and more interesting stuff.  And you could sort of see the work environment of the engineers and the kinds of stuff that they would do.  This was an area that worked on digital phone switches sort of computers that switch phone systems.  And, you know, that connect phone calls and all that kind of stuff.  So it definitely, you know, confirmed a career path.  So I think all it took was about one summer of working there, and, you know, and one year of sort of studying your basic engineering courses to say, okay, this is--you know, I'm comfortable on this path, you know.  Go ahead and get my engineering degree.  I'll--the members, so the engineering staff there for the most part all had master's degrees, and so I'd needed a master's anyway.  But the career path at that point was, you know, finish the bachelor's in engineering.  They had this program called OYOC, "One Year off Campus" [sic, One Year on Campus] where you would take a job there, work there in the summer, and then they would send you for one year off to get a master's degree somewhere.  And then you'd come back and be a full-time employee.  So that was, so that was the path I was on.  And I was very comfortable, you know, in that path.  You know, the, you know, I enjoyed school, you know, I enjoyed the fraternity.  The classes for the most part weren't all that difficult, and so I was, I don't know, sort of on cruise control, you know, marching through, marching through college.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, when it came time to graduate, were you thinking about graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so let's see, yeah, so I was--at some point, at the appropriate time, I was thinking about graduate school [train horn in background], and, you know, as I said, planned to work at Bell Laboratories [AT&T Bell Laboratories] and so actually interviewed--when exactly did this happen?  I suppose, you know, during my senior year, actually interviewed in several departments there for full-time employment.  And at the same time the supervisor that I worked for over the summer told me about a Ph.D. fellowship program that Bell Laboratories offered, the Cooperative Research Fellowship Program and encouraged me to apply for that.  And I think initially I probably just ignored him, and he was persistent.  And so I went ahead and did apply, and I think just as much to get him off my back as any serious consideration about, you know, getting a Ph.D. because at the time I felt that Ph.D.'s were more theoretical, and I wanted to build stuff.  So I was not really seriously thinking of getting a Ph.D., but I did go ahead and apply to the program.  But in parallel with that, I was just going, continuing down the normal path of interviewing, you know, for a staff position there, you know, and, actually, went so far as accept--you know, picking one group that I wanted to work with, you know, told them that, you know, gave them my decision.  It's like, okay, this is gonna be my choice.  And at that time, I had applied for the Ph.D. fellowship, but hadn't--part of the process is to actually fly out to New Jersey where they had their research facility and interview out there.  So I told them, you know, I'd applied for this Ph.D. fellowship but I wasn't really that interested in it.  But anyway, you know, they called me out for the following interview in New Jersey [Murray Hill, N.J.].  So I flew out there and talked to, you know, a number of different departments.  You know, some were too theoretical for my taste, but there were a couple that I thought were very interesting.  One was doing speech synthesis and I thought that was particularly interesting.  And another group that was doing digital switching research.  And this group actually, they had, you know, software people doing operating system work, compiler work.  Like the guy I ended working with, he was doing, he put together this huge digital synthesizer.  And so that one in particularly sort of fascinated me, and just the kind of work that they were doing, but also the work environment, sort of the freedom to work on what interests you and the variety of the things that they were working on.  And so, you know, I came away from that process--you know, I went into the process basically convinced that I was just going through the motions and, you know, I was gonna work out in Naperville [Illinois].  But at, you know, at the end of that interview process, you know, I was convinced that actually this is the place that I'd like to work, this is the environment I wanna work in.  You need a Ph.D. to be on the staff here so I guess I need to get a Ph.D.  And so, just that exposure, you know, one or two days of exposure sort of changed my course from, you know, just taking a job, getting a master's and a career in the Chicago area to, at that point, it was gonna be, you know, get a Ph.D. and then have a career in New Jersey [AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, N.J.] doing research.
Story_ID: 30542
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was, 1978 is when you finished the master's degree?
Speaker 2: Seventy--yeah, so that was in '77' [1977] when I graduated.  And, you know, so I call up the guy and said--in Naperville [AT&T Bell Laboratories, Naperville, Illinois] and said, well, I mean there was some elapsed time between the time I interviewed and they actually told me that I got the scholarship.  But when I did that, I'd already applied to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California].  On this OYOC [One Year on Campus] program, they would send a lot of people to Stanford to get their master's.  I wanted to get out of, away from Chicago [Illinois] weather to some place nice and warm.  And so I applied to Stanford and Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and ended up, you know, getting accepted in Stanford and going to Stanford, which had a, you know, very straightforward, one-year master's program where it was just taking courses.  So, and then subsequent to that, you know, got--subsequent to being accepted at Stanford, I believe, into the master's program, got this Ph.D. fellowship program; called up the, you know, the guys at Naperville and said, well, change of course, you know, I'm gonna go get a Ph.D., and, you know, headed out to Stanford.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, how did Stanford compare to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] academically and socially?
Speaker 2: Academically, it was--well, I mean it convinced me how good a school IIT was.  I felt IIT prepared me very well for Stanford.  You know, I sort of, you know, expected things to be harder at Stanford, and it turned out they weren't; that, you know, I felt very prepared by the, you know, courses that I'd taken at IIT, for the coursework there at Stanford.  The big change was just the amount of money that the school has and the campus environment is just--you know, IIT was this school in the city on this, you know, half mile by half mile.  They were, you know, sort of fairly sterile buildings and this [Ludwig] Mies van der Rohe architecture was very boxy and not a whole lot of greenery, you know, State Street [Chicago, Illinois], a major street, running straight through the center of campus and so forth.  And, you know, as far as computing equipment, you know, there was a building down at the end of the campus that had, you know, these mainframes in a room, and you would sit and punch cards and submit it back over a counter.  And then you'd get the printout back.  So that was the level of technology that IIT was dealing with.  And you get to Stanford and there's, you know, computer terminals everywhere and they had their mainframes, but they also had tons of--and I was in graduate school and so you have access to computers that were donated for research purposes.  And there was just like computing everywhere you looked.  It was like big computers sitting idle almost 'cause, you know, they had so much, just, you know, a wealth of facilities.  The campus is gorgeous.  You know, the weather is great.  You know, it's expansive.  There's all kinds of greenery and facilities and, I don't know.  It was just sort of, you know, very much like a country club environment.  So, very nice place.  And then, you know, of course, you know, they do lots of good work.  They're a very good school, and so there're, you know, lots of interesting courses as well.  But I found that IIT prepared me very well for the coursework there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you developed something called the Geometry Engine, right, in 1981?  Am I going too fast?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean the--so basically, the first two years [of graduate school at Stanford University, Palo Alto, California] were primarily, so, you know, so the year of courses, getting a master's degree.  The sort of--early in the second year, I took Ph.D. qualifying courses, got, you know, past that.  So for entry into the Ph.D. program, but the second year was basically just more courses.  There's basically two years of coursework that's required for the Ph.D.  And so for the first two years, I was just focused on completing the courses.  At the, so that was--at the end--and I was also working back at Bell Labs [AT&T Bell Laboratories] over the summer.  And at the end of the second year, I guess the start of--so the start of the third year, basically, I, you know, my coursework was finished, and I needed to, you know, find someone to work with.  I'm getting--wait a second.  I'm hesitating here because, on the exact sequence, because I remember, I think, spending summer, that summer on the campus.  I'm trying to reconcile that with the fact that I was working summers back in New Jersey.  (Laughter) So it would take me a while to reconcile that (laughter), but, so I'm not gonna try right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, just, well--who--
Speaker 2: But the idea was, you know, basically after two years, you know, I needed to choose basically what my research topic was gonna be.  I was interested in some software stuff.  I'd taken a mix of hardware and software courses and hadn't really come down hard on one way or the other and was interested in, you know, computers, computer architecture and there was a person there, Forest Baskett.  I started working with him on multi-processors, multi-micro processor architectures.
Story_ID: 30543
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me this.  Now, what state of development was the computer world in 1981?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, this, so this was actually in '79 [1979], same timeframe.  So what was the state of the world, the computing world.  I mean you had, you had personal computers, like the IBM PC.  So you could do basic stuff on a personal computer.
Speaker 1: They had the green screens and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, character terminals for the most part, I mean character displays, and so no fancy graphics or anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, the old ones didn't have any character displays, right, the old mainframes--
Speaker 2: No, I mean--
Speaker 1: --or did they?
Speaker 2: Yes, it depends on how far back you go.  It may have been there were no displays.  You had basically keyboards with printers, right, and so your interaction was either with, you know, a paper tape, with, you know, (laughter) a tape with holes punched in it to represent the program and data or these decks of cards, you know, with holes to represent the data that you would--that's how you would sort of feed bulk stuff into the computer.  And it would print stuff on a sheet of paper.  Or you may have a terminal where you're actually interacting with it, but, you know, basically, you're typing on a keyboard.  It's printing on a piece of paper and the computer responds by printing stuff on a sheet of paper.  So that was the interaction sort of back when I was in high school.  And then, not that there might not have been terminals, but--so the interaction when I was in college was more, was still primarily terminal-based, and so you have these character terminals that we're talking to on remote computer.  But it was much more interactive.  You don't punch a deck of cards, you know, stuff gets typed into the terminal, and you can display stuff in characters on the terminal.  And, but this was in the timeframe that they were just starting to do graphical user interfaces.  And a lot of that was initially developed at Xerox [Corporation], part, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center [PARC, Palo Alto, California], which is, you know, here in Palo Alto [California]--not here, but, you know, right next to Stanford [University] in Palo Alto.  And we had, and so they developed this machine called the Alto.  And it was like a personal work station with a graphical user interface.  So, and it was--so there were some of those there at Stanford, and as I began, you know, my graduate research work, I, you know, had the opportunity to use those to do some of the things that I was working on.  I've skipped around a bit, and so I can't remember the question you were asking (laughter).
Story_ID: 30544
Speaker 1: I was trying to focus in on you and Jim Clark and the development of the--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, okay.  Yeah, so the Geometry Engine.  Right, so let me skip to that, right.  So, after a few years, started working with Forest Baskett on multi-micro processor stuff, spent the summer doing some light thinking and research into that area.  I must not have been working at Bell Labs [AT&T Bell Laboratories] that summer 'cause I just remember, you know, playing tennis and doing stuff like that.  And at the end of the summer, then, you know, met up with Forest and said that I was getting kind of bored with this area of research.  I needed to work on something different; wasn't sure exactly what it was.  I wasn't even sure whether it was, you know, hardware, software 'cause I sort of had an interest in both areas, and just sort of in passing mentioned that I was interested in computer graphics.  One of the summer projects I did at Bell Laboratories had something to do with graphics as well.  And so I mentioned that I was interested in graphics, but nobody here is doing graphics.  And he told me that, well, there's a guy who just started this summer who is, you know, doing graphics stuff; and Jim Clark [James H. Clark], would you like to meet him?  Yes.  So, you know, we got up.  He walked me across the hall, you know, introduced me to Jim.  And so I sat down in his office and he outlined some of the stuff that he was thinking about and thought I could work on.  And, you know, one was the Geometry Engine, this parallel architecture for doing some of the computations involved in 3-D [three dimensional] graphics.  And another part of it was sort of taking this 3-D representation and rendering it into a screen, a two-dimensional [2-D] screen image.  So that was--so he was working on the Geometry Engine, and the sort of rasterization hardware was an area that he thought, you know, I could work on as a Ph.D. research area.  And so, even in that first meeting, he mentioned the possibility of starting a company based upon this work.  But, you know, at that time, you know, my career path was, you know, get a Ph.D., go back and work in research in Bell Laboratories.  So it sort of went in one ear and out the other.  I really didn't give it any serious thought.  But basically, you know, right after that meeting started working with him on, you know, graphics architecture.  And this was a time when there was this, what was called Meade-Conway approach ["Introduction to VLSI systems," 1980] to doing integrated circuit design which is basically sort of simplify the--you come up with a set of rules and simplify the process of designing and laying out the physical part of the integrated circuits.  And it's, and so that was part it and then part of it was this hierarchical design methodology as a set of tools.  But, yeah, the concept was to let system designers design integrated circuits.
Story_ID: 30545
Speaker 1: Jim Clark [James H. Clark] and the Geometry Engine
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--go ahead.
Speaker 2: What is this Geometry Engine?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right, so, so the Geometry Engine is a, it's a chip that does the mathematical operations that are involved in taking a three-dimensional [3-D] representation of objects and where objects are defined by coordinates in this three-dimensional space.  And so if you're trying to draw a cube, then there are three points in, you know, this "X", "Y", "Z" space that define the points in that, on the corners of that cube so--to take it as a simple object.  And then what you want to do, for example, with 3-D graphics is to be able to display some particular view of that cube.  And so you're--you need to map those coordinates from what is, you know, called the, you know, a world space to this, from this three-dimensional world space to this two-dimensional--it's called screen space.  So it's actually a projection of, you know, a particular view of that cube onto this two-dimensional [2-D] plane.  And there's just, you know, matrix math that's involved in doing that projection.  And also in, you know, you have this world space that sort of goes everywhere, and the screen is fixed in size and so you have to basically clip out things that are outside of the view of this sort of viewing pyramid that is projected onto the, onto this two-dimensional screen.  So that's, the Geometry Engine, you know, does that mathematics.  You know, at first it does matrix operations that sort of convert it into a, sort of a normalized space, and then you clip out parts that are outside of this viewing region, and then you sort of map that onto the screen coordinates.  And that was so it would come out with, be these, you know, two-dimensional screen coordinates.  So that was the function of the Geometry Engine and then sort of after you have the two-dimensional screen coordinates, then there was another process that would happen which would be to rasterize--for example, if you had a square that was, you know, and you just have four points that define the corners of the square, but you want that to be filled in with the color blue, on the screen there is a memory where each location in memory represents one point on the screen.  And so, so you wanna fill in all the little points that are inside the interior of that square.  That process is called rasterization and so they're set apart where it takes the end points of geometric shapes and sort of fills in all the points inside.  And so most of my Ph.D. research was associated with that rendering part of the problem, I mean the rasterization part of the problem.  And then Jim Clark worked on the Geometry Engine part.  And I was assisting him in sort of implementing that.  And so while we were working on this at Stanford [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California], you know, he had the architecture, the design of the hardware.  I brought up a set of, you know, tools that let you, you know, simulate and verify the layout and thereby sort of verify the application--the execution of the operations that the chip would go through.  And so, and the Geometry Engine at Stanford, I was mostly assisting with some of the process of implementing the architecture and then focused, as my Ph.D. research, in implementing the rasterization part of the problem.  You know, once Silicon Graphics [Silicon Graphics, Inc.] started--which I'm jumping ahead, but, you know, I took over sort of responsibility for the Geometry Engine as well and did further evolution of that architecture.
Story_ID: 30546
Speaker 1: Okay, now is this invention [the Geometry Engine] the first of its kind?  Was it the first time that anybody had come up with a 3-D [three dimensional] graphics?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I think what was unique about the Geometry Engine was it was an architecture that was specifically, it was not--it was specifically taking advantage of this ability to do custom chips.  Like I was saying earlier, this whole Meade-Conway design philosophy ["Introduction to VLSI systems," 1980] was you sort of make some, certain simplifying assumptions and rules.  And then you can let systems designers design new architectures that are implemented in these chips where you can pack a lot of logic, a lot of gates, a lot of transistors, you know, in a small low-cost chip.  And so giving systems designers the sort of, this total flexibility, you know, to start with a blank sheet of paper as opposed to starting with, you know, sort of higher-level functions that would get assembled into a particular architecture.  You basically have complete flexibility to design an architecture that is best suited to the problem.  Implement it in silicon, you get a chip that can be low cost, and you can put a bunch of these together and get much higher performance.  And this architecture was really taking advantage of the ability to do a low-cost, single chip and then replicate it a number of times to get higher performance, whereas I think other arch--systems that did the same kind of function prior to that, I think, were more focused on, you know, there's one basic computing engine that you try to make as fast as possible.  You know, this was make one part that's simple and cheap enough and then you replicate it a number of times to get the performance that you need.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, no, but the whole idea was to bring the cost of high-performance computing down to much lower levels.  I mean for me personally, I had this interest in flight simulators and I wanted to, you know, have this flight simulator thing which requires very high performance, you know, 3-D [three dimensional] graphics, down to a cost where I could afford to have one in, you know, as basically a game machine in my basement.  And so this was very much along the lines of what we were trying to do, although at this point it was still, you know, it wasn't a thousand dollar system or a hundred dollar system.  It was tens of thousands of dollars, but compared with hundred of thousands of dollars that it might have cost you to do this before.  You know, that was a--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that you could do--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) (simultaneous) break down.
Speaker 1: --but it would cost way more the way they do it.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 30547
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now, when you got your--you earned your Ph.D. in--
Speaker 2: In '85 [1985].  So--
Speaker 1: So this was pre-Ph.D?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: This is before you earned your Ph.D?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  So, you know, as I said, you know, started at Stanford in '77 [1977]; courses for two years so that took us to '79 [1979], started working with Jim Clark [James H. Clark]on, you know, graphics architecture and custom integrated circuits in, like September, I suppose of '79 [1979].  You know, we worked on this architecture within, you know, the Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] research environment, you know, through '81 [1981] I suppose and, you know, developed prototypes of these custom chips and designed a system to actually implement something that could show moving pictures on the screen.  And, you know, toward the end of that period, you know, Jim got more serious about starting a company, you know, based on this technology.  And, in fact, in--I guess it was November of seven--November of '81 [1981], I believe, we started Silicon Graphics [Inc.].
Speaker 1: Our resource says it's '82 [1982], but you may be right.
Speaker 2: No, and yeah, I mean there's--'82 [1982], people--yeah, that's the most common date is June of '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: So it's you and Jim Clark and five others--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --cofound Silicon Graphics--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with 33 million in venture capital and--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, it started off with much less than that.  So when I said, November of '81 [1981] that was when Silicon Graphics was actually incorporated.  And then there was time spent, I think Jim had a research contract with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] or some place that maybe, I can't remember whether it was 90,000 or 150,000 [dollars], but, you know, some amount of money that he was able to actually spend to rent an office and to hire a couple of people, you know, a secretary and another person to help write a business plan.  So there was this period from November of '81 [1981] until roughly June of '82 [1982] that was sort of preliminary things, sort of meeting off campus, you know, writing a business plan, which I was not involved in by the way.  I, you know, I was focused on the technology, so that business plan and trying to raise money and so forth, I wasn't involved in.  And, you know, we, but we had put together this prototype hardware that we could show and so forth.  And in June of, I think it was like June 25, of 1982 [train horn], you know, we got our first round of venture capital funding.  [train horn] I believe that $800,000 from Mayfield Fund.  And that, so that's, yeah, I think for most of the stuff you would look up, that--and even Silicon Graphics within the company celebrating, you know, the birthday of the company, they look at that date in June of '82 [1982] as the start of the company.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're going to school while this, while the company [Silicon Graphics, Inc.] was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so what happened was, right.  So I had not finished, I had basically finished my research.  I had not written it up and gone through, you know, the final process of thesis defense required to get the Ph.D.  But we were off, you know, I was, you know, working, you know, more than full time and basically, you know, most of my waking hours were focused on trying to, you know, once we started, to develop a commercial version of, you know, the technology that we had developed there.  And in particular, I was focused on the Geometry Engine and sort of redesigning that to make it much smaller.  You know, it worked, the one that--the prototype we developed at Stanford [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California].  It worked, but it was too large to be sort of commercially feasible and not as fast as it could be.  So my job was to make it smaller and faster.  And so I was focused on, you know, redoing the Geometry Engine to make it smaller and faster.  And that was, you know, I was working whatever, twelve, thirteen hour days, you know, six or seven days a week.  And so I basically put the Ph.D. work on hold for almost two years I guess, you know, '82 [1982], '83 [1983].  I guess, you know, some time probably early '83 [1983] is when I sort of went back and started working on that again and writing, writing up--started writing.  And then, actually, I ended up doing, in the process of developing the Geometry Engine there at Silicon Graphics [Inc.], you know, I had some architectural and, you know, evolution that became one of the chapters in my thesis.  And so I sort of went back and did a little bit more work on that and then, you know, wrote up all the stuff that I'd, you know, been working on.  And so the end of, it was the end of '84 [1984], I think, when I basically finished my dissertation.
Story_ID: 30548
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and had my thesis defense; got it approved and, you know, went to turn it in, and it was--I hadn't filled out the proper paperwork when, to take, to officially take a leave of absence when I left.  And so I had to wait until the next quarter so that I could get reinstated into the program, pay tuition and then turn in my dissertation.  So that's why, you know, it ended up being '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And give me a brief summary of your dissertation, you know, if you think it would be of interest.  I mean, you know, science people are gonna being watching this at some point.  So what was it?
Speaker 2: Well, it was called "Parallel Architectures for Computer Graphics Displays."  And most of it, as I said, was focused on the rasterization problem of, you know, how do you cheaply and quickly take a bunch of these two-dimensional [2-D] coordinates and then render that into a frame buffer which is what that's called, you know, the image on the screen.  There's a memory location associated with each point on the screen.  That memory is called a frame buffer.  And so it's rendering these two-dimensional coordinates into a frame buffer.  And it was basically a hierarchical, there was an array of processors at the lowest level, each responsible for, you know, part of the pixels on the screen.  Like if there was an 8 x 8 array, each processor would be responsible for every eighth pixel horizontally and every eighth pixel vertically.  And above that, there was a layer that was responsible for every--again, in this 8 x 8 example, there would be eight processors responsible for every eighth column, and then there is another level above that which was responsible for sort of splitting things up.  So that the whole thing is the columns, and then the column processors split the columns into rows.  So it's basically, this hierarchical division of labor to allow you to do, you know, all the stuff in parallel.  And so that was most of the dissertation was describing, you know, that architecture and the results, and then as I said, there was one chapter that talked about this pipeline architecture, the Geometry Engine was a pipeline of, you know, these identical processors each doing a piece of the problem and passing the results on and sort of my addition to that basic pipeline architecture was a way to, what I called interleave; so make a pipeline sort of behave like a more other forms of parallel architecture because a pipeline just has a nice characteristic where it can, sort of, if you're not worried about latency, you can sort of make it as long as you want.  And you don't have problems with loading, you know, bus loading and all that kind of thing.  I don't know, it may be more detailed--I mean that's sort of over-simplifying in one sense, but more detailed perhaps (laughter) than you want, but--
Speaker 1: No, I (unclear), more than I understand is probably good (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --on a level.
Story_ID: 30549
Speaker 1: Now, when you founded Silicon Graphics [Inc.], you all located the company in Mountain View, California?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, was this the first of what we call Silicon Valley businesses?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I mean Silicon Valley basically was going for a long time.  I think that's--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) already.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was, you know, I'm not a great history of Silicon Valley, but I think it was more in the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that a lot of that happened with, like Fairchild Semiconductor [founded in 1957] and, you know, several other companies in the electronics industry.  So the whole idea of technology start-ups, the venture capital sort of concept of, you know, people, you know, investing in these technology start-ups, and you know, all of that stuff had been going on for quite a while.
Story_ID: 30550
Speaker 1: Okay, it says here that you all initially marketed 3-D [three dimensional] graphics display terminals, is that--
Speaker 2: Right, so this was still at a time where I think a lot of computing, especially high-end computing was concentrated in big machines, you know, in these air-conditioned rooms because--especially air-conditioned rooms since they use a lot of power and generate a lot of heat.  And then the graphics was done as a terminal, but, so in this timeframe, you know, a lot of people were just using character terminals.  But if you were doing this 3-D development work, you had these special graphics terminals that were able to do 3-D rendering very quickly.  But most of the computing was done on a separate machine.  And then you would, you know, send basically the graphical data down to this, a graphics terminal to be rendered.  So that was the way things were done at that timeframe.  And, but it was just starting the evolution to sort of self-contained work stations for doing, you know, sort of higher performance computing.  Some of that stuff was done, as I said, at Palo Alto Research Center [PARC, Palo Alto, California] where they had developed this work station called the Alto [Xerox Alto, 1973] which had a nice bit mapped screen.  It's a screen using a frame buffer.  It was monochrome, but I mean the easiest way to think about it is like the early Apple machines.  Apple, you know, basically took a lot of the technology that was developed at Xerox PARC and sort of applied it to this, you know, to their, first the Apple Lisa, and then the Apple Macintosh, which are both, you know, monochrome displays, but everything was, you know, driven by sort of icon, pull-down menus and so forth and a mouse.  The mouse was another technology that was developed at Xerox PARC.  And so there was the beginning of this evolution from computers where all the computing was centralized and you had terminals to more personal computers and personal work stations and so forth, so combining graphics and computing in the same box.  So that was clearly, you know, where computing was headed.  And so a graphic terminal was the easiest thing to come quickly to market, but even before the terminal was introduced, we knew that work stations, self-contained work stations that combined computing and graphics was the way to go.  And so October of '83 [1983] I think was when we first introduced the terminal.  And that was followed up fairly quickly with graphics work stations and--[phone ringing] Whoops, sorry about that--May of '84 [1984] a work station which basically was the same hardware except that it also had a hard drive and an operating system, you know, a Unix operating system that it ran locally.  And then the, so the initial target, the initial target, primary target market was computer-aided design, so people designing mechanical things.  But--airplanes, cars and that kind of thing, mechanical parts, mechanical systems.  But very early on, one of the demo programs, demonstration programs that was written was a flight simulator.  And like a dog-fight thing, where you could, you know, fly around and shoot other people.  Actually, initially, it was just a flight simulator, single thing.  It was later networked to be dog fight, but, and, you know, it turned out that that became a fairly good-sized market for us.  And also special effects, film special effects.  One of the very first systems--it may have been "the" first system went to a company called Robert Abel and Associates who did film special effects.  And they, that became an area that sort of, Silicon Graphics became very well known for, and we dominated basically that field of 3-D special effects.  The computers for 3-D special effects.
Story_ID: 30551
Speaker 1: Now, it says here that from '95 [1995] to 2002 for eight consecutive years, all films nominated for an Academy Award for distinguished achievement in visual effects were created on Silicon Graphics computer systems.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hadn't heard that statistic before--
Speaker 1: It [Interviewer's research notes] says all the films that were nominated.
Speaker 2: --but it doesn't surprise me.  I mean we were, yeah, I mean we must have been at least 90 percent of the market.  And we definitely had the most powerful computers for that kind of thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And on the film side of it, the film special effects were still using stop motion until you all came along.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there're various, you know, there are stop motions kinds of effects.  There're other kinds of, you know, miniature effects, you know, where if you wanna blow something up, you can just blow it up in miniature (laughter).  You don't think--
Speaker 1: Right, I think we were talking about "Clash of the Titans" [1981]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where effects were done by Ray Harryhausen, same guy that did the effects for "King Kong".
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: His last big movie was in the '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --"Clash of the Titans" before you all came--
Speaker 2: --yeah, it was in '80 [1980].  Yeah, he had such a long career.  It must have been fifty years or something, the timeframe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he did "[The] 7th Voyage of Sinbad" [1958] and "Seven Fingers of Dr. Lau" [sic, "7 Faces of Dr. Lao", 1964], all those movies--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --using stop motion effects which were good.  They thrilled audiences.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean, and those were a lot of, you know, creature effects.  So, if you wanna, you know, some animal, some creature that is not human and you either have to dress somebody up in a suit which, you know, that wasn't very realistic or, you know, Harryhausen--I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Ray Harryhausen.
Speaker 2: Ray Harryhausen, you know, he was really good at, you know, doing, I suppose it was clay figures and animating them.  And so, you know, certainly nothing compared with today's special effects, but, you know, compared to a guy running around in a suit (laughter), it was, you know, much more interesting and much more realistic.  And--
Speaker 1: I think they made a version of "King Kong" in the '70s [1970s] [sic, 1976] using a gigantic head and a mechanical hand--
Speaker 2: Right, sort of animatronics kinds of things.
Speaker 1: And then a guy in a suit shot a different, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know, with the advent of, you know, CGI, computer generated imagery, that kind of special effects more and more became computer generated.  It was really only, you know, what the Silicon Graphics equipment.  I mean you really--two things.  You want the sort of, there's an inner activity that's required and performances required as you're creating the figures and the motions.  And so, you know, that's a very big part of it, is the ability to quickly define an object and tell the computer how you want it to move and then see how it moves and make adjustments to that.  So that's one big part of it, is this inner activity.  And another big part is just the raw performance required to--once you have the basic shapes and movements defined, to render that into something that looks realistic.  And so that's an offline thing that's done.  But you need incredible amounts of computing power to do that.  You know, they might spend, you know, minutes computing each frame and, of course, there's like, they're running at twenty-four frames a second, I guess, and, you know, there're a lot of seconds in an hour (laughter) or in a two-hour movie.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, some of these movies, I just thought I'd point out, "Mars Attacks!" [1996], Jurassic Park" [1993], "Hunt for Red October" [1990], "Beauty and the Beast" [1991], "Aladdin" [1992], "The Abyss" [1989], "Field of Dreams" [1989], "Terminator II [Judgement Day]" [1991], you know, these are all--and the helmets on Monday night football that would clash together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: These were all done at--
Speaker 2: --right, right, right.
Speaker 1: -- Silicon Graphics.
Speaker 2: And then we later [1995] bought the two leading companies that did the software for that kind of thing, Alias [Research] and Wavefront [Technologies], and so there was certainly, you know, a period of time where SGI [Silicon Graphics, Inc.] was sort of the complete solution in doing these--the movie special effects guys, there's always a lot of custom software they do, but the basic, you know, modeling rendering and--well, actually, I mean companies like Industrial Light [and] Magic and so forth, they're always pushing the edge of what's possible.  And so they do a lot of custom software for, to do special things like fur or fire or dust or, you know.  But, you know, more and more with, you know, the companies Alias and Lakefront, that kind of capability was pulled into a standard package that, you know, anybody could buy, any creative person and so you could do all kinds of really impressive things without having to write up a custom software.  And so you would see it not only in these, you know, multi-million dollar special effects movies, but, you know, in TV shows or in commercials or in, you know, all that kind of thing.  And so more and more, yeah, it just became more and more widespread as the software became more available and the hardware became faster and cheaper.
Speaker 1: Okay, so during this time period, did you make a whole lot of money?  That's the question.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I made a fair amount of money.  I, you know, if you look at today's standards of a whole lot of money, you know, (laughter), where, you know, people are making hundreds of millions and billions of dollars, no.  That was, that was actually, you know, a different time.  The entire founding team, engineering team of Silicon Graphics [Inc.] only got maybe--well, it was less than 10 percent of the company, sort of all of us.  Yeah, and Jim Clark [James H. Clark] got half of that.  And so the rest of us, you know, (laughter) were even smaller, you know, smaller chunks than that.  So as a percentage wise, when you compare it to the kind of piece that founders get these days, it wasn't a huge percentage.  But Silicon Graphics was a very successful company.  And so, and plus, you know, I'd started off as a member of the technical staff, but sort of over time, you know, was promoted from member of the technical staff, principle scientist, chief scientist, vice president and chief scientist.  So, you know, so I continued to get stock options and so forth.  So, you know, in the end, I certainly can't complain, you know.  I made, you know, millions of dollars in--at Silicon Graphics, and I was doing, you know, work that I really enjoyed and doing stuff that I felt had a major impact on, you know, society as a whole.  And, you know, not--of course, the movie special effects stuff was very fun and gratifying.  And it's always nice to be able to talk to anybody and relate to stuff that you're producing, but perhaps even more important was, you know, the way our computers were used in engineering and scientific fields.
Story_ID: 30552
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you became, you know, you were interviewed by "Ebony Magazine" in 1993 on what you do, and there was some attention.  But--oh, you were gonna tell us about the scientific aspects of SGI [Silicon Graphics, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah, so I think, you know, the--CAD-CAM, computer-aided design, computer-aided manufacturing, that was the largest market for SGI products.  I can't remember exactly, but it's maybe half of what SGI did.  And so companies like, you know, the car companies, major car companies, so, you know, Ford [Motor Company], GM [General Motors], Chrysler [Corporation], those, major aerospace companies like, you know, Boeing [Aerospace Company], you know, McDonnell Douglas [Aerospace], lots of, you know, government-Lockheed [Corporation], I guess, yeah, government contractors, doing military work, both on the flight simulation and the aircraft design side of things, used a lot of our technologies; medical uses.  There's, you know, part of drug development can be, you know, understanding a molecule and sort of the shape of the molecule and how it may or may not bind with things you're interested in.  So there's a sort of a computational chemistry thing that our systems were used for, oil and gas exploration.  There're just a pretty wide variety of--especially, you know, early on we were focused on graphics.  But I guess starting, I think there was a big major push on just the purely computing side, maybe with the first product introduction might have been in '88 [1988] or something.  And so sort of half of SGI was focused on the combination of graph--real, you know, 3-D [three dimensional] graphics and computing.  But there was another half of SGI's business that was purely high-performance scientific computing.  And then, so sort of any scientific or engineering application where you needed super computers to do the work SGI was, you know, played a role in that as well.
Story_ID: 30553
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I don't wanna jump the gun, but there's a point where SGI [Silicon Graphics, Inc.] has to file for bankruptcy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's, so--
Speaker 1: What happened-- (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --you know, from '82 [1982] through '95 [1995], '96 [1996], you know, we were growing great guns, growing very rapidly, both in terms of, you know, revenue and the size of the company.  I think it was ninety--maybe it was '96 [1996].  So I think our peak year might have been '95 [1995], '96 [1996], '96 [1996] I think we acquired Cray [Cray Inc., The Supercomputer Company] which was sort of the biggest well-known supercomputing company.  And I think, we--at that time we were about seven thousand people, and I think Cray was four thousand people.  And so we merged with Cray, and I think that caused some sort of, just tactical missteps in terms of selling.  We had a quarter--as a public company, of course, the public is very focused on your quarterly projections, your quarterly revenue, your quarterly profits.  And I think we missed a quarter and the stock price declined significantly.  There was a lot--within the company, I think there was a lot of focus on trying to recover and get, you know, back onto a plan that would return to kind of our prior growth and profitability.  It's, there's sort of a (laughter), you know, you talk to different people, I'm sure you get different stories.  You know, to my mind, I was always focused on the lower end of the product line.  And as we grew into higher performance things, you know, and split into divisions, I was still focused on the lower end.  I felt there were--so the history of the computing industry is that the technology--it becomes cheaper and cheaper to do things.  And so the newer companies that are producing low-end technology, as that technology becomes faster, they sort of eat up, what formerly were higher end companies.  And so I felt that, you know, we had issues of, in terms of our product strategy in dealing with sort of the inevitable growth and performance of personal computing.  And, you know, so I was focused on trying to get our technology pushed into consumer applications and lower end applications, volume applications so that as, sort of the bottom came up into graphics that, you know, we were participating in that.  But I think, you know, with the Cray acquisition, we just got sort of defocused and I don't--it's, but, yes, (laughter).  So, you know, we grew great guns until about '96 [1996] and then sort of, shortly after the Cray acquisition, things started to go downhill.  And I was trying to push the company in one direction and couldn't really get any traction.  And so, late in '96 [1996] I decided to actually to leave Silicon Graphics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was, I actually left in '97 [1997], still did some consulting work for them.  But I left in '97 [1997] and then I guess at some point, some years after that [2006], it went through one bankruptcy and there was some restructuring and then went a number of years, but still not really recovering, still losing money and sort of shrinking down over time.  And then when was it, maybe a year or two ago [2009], went through another bankruptcy and was acquired by another company.  And then that combined company became SGI.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, SGI is still around in name, but they're not doing graphics anymore.
Speaker 1: What do they do now?
Speaker 2: These, sort of blade servers.  It's computing servers where you have processors on cards, and basically racks of computer servers that can be used, I suppose for a number of things.  You know, it can be used for web servers probably and other kinds of computing servers.  But the, yes, shortly after that--there were still some graphics going on until that acquisition.  And then shortly after that acquisition I believe they laid off all the graphics people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you left, you had the title of vice president and chief scientist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30554
Speaker 1: And it says here, in 1998, you became vice president of media technology for Omniverse Digital Solutions.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was, what, what, what?  Omniverse Digital Solutions.  That was a time where there were, you know, all these sort of Internet-related start-ups and so, you know, my girlfriend at the time was, wanted to do a start-up company that was--I mean we were playing around with various ideas, but one was basically sort of a web portal focused on the African American community.  And so I sort of joined in that effort, in parallel with that, I was still doing some consulting with selling graphics.  And I'd put some money into this Omniverse Digital Solutions to sort of get that off the ground.  You know, we hired a small number of people and wrote the business plan and were basically, you know, shopping that, trying to raise funding to get the, you know, the thing going.  You know, in the end, you know, we did a couple of consulting projects that brought in some money, but we were never able to raise the venture funding to actually, you know, go off great guns and push it.  And so, you know, I, at some point I decided to, you know, stop putting money into it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And then probably in '99 [1999] I think, I joined Pulsent [Corporation].
Speaker 1: It says '98' [1998] with--
Speaker 2: Okay, maybe it was '98 [1998], '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: So you became vice president of product architecture for Pulsent?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that was a company that had started, I believe, a couple of years prior to my joining it.  It was started by sort of math, sort of mathematicians and physicists who knew a lot of math to develop improved compression, video compression algorithms with the idea of doing video on demand over DSL, Digital Subscriber Lines.  So DSL could provide maybe, you know, one, one and a half megabits per second.  And the idea was to be able to--if you can compress high-quality video down to that kind of bandwidth, then you could basically watch whatever you wanted to watch whenever you wanted to watch it.  And so the company was started.  They developed the algorithms for doing this compression.  They thought it was like mostly completed, mostly effective, and then they need to hire a team of people to implement the algorithms in hardware and chips.  And so I was hired to sort of define the hardware architecture that implemented the algorithm.  And so, did that, but sort of once I joined the company, and was able to sort of dig into the algorithm in detail and what would be required to implement it.  One thing, you know, it was really complex, and so it would have taken, you know, quite a bit of time to implement in silicon, it was probably at least a couple year process to design a chip to do it.  And then even as we were working on that, the--there were artifacts.  And compression is kind of a hard thing, and the mind has a way of picking up things that aren't quite right in an image.  And so--and this was striving for a very high level of compression.  And so what happened is sometimes it would get it wrong, and so--
Speaker 1: That's what you mean by artifact?
Speaker 2: Artifact, it's just, yeah, it's just something that's not right about the image, right?  So, if you look at my head, if I move there's new stuff behind me, and then I may move back, and that's covered up.  If I move back over again, maybe you don't wanna retransmit the stuff that I've uncovered because you've already seen it once before.  Just save it from--look back a few frames, take that piece of the image and put it back where my head moved away.  So a lot of it was sort of figuring out--you've taking arbitrary shapes in the image that you think are correlated from one frame to the next and saying okay, this is the same stuff, but it just moved over here.  And so you don't have to send the entire new image.  You just send the fact that this bunch of stuff moved, you know, 1.7 pixels to the right.  But the problem is that there are other things that can go on.  The lighting may change a little bit or other things that can happen so that when you just take this other stuff and move it, it's not quite right or if the stuff you're filling in behind isn't quite right.  And so as you move, you know, there's stuff being filled in behind that is basically generated by the algorithm, and if it's not quite right, your eye picks up on that kind of thing.  And, you know, there are all kinds of--things might work well in one kind of scene, a conference room scene where people are mostly stationary, but if you wanna take a picture of somebody going down a rapids, you know, it's like a totally different kind of thing.  There are just lots of different classes of images of video, and you need to be able to do well on all of them.  So, so even as we were working on the hardware, they were still sort of evolving the algorithm to try and get rid of, you know, these last bit of artifacts.  And I just, and--
Speaker 1: I remember those in video games a lot.  It seemed they were some, you know, my son would have video games and sometimes there'd be something left over.  A figure would move (laughter), and I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, well, I mean you see it on your cable channel when there's an era in the stream (train horn) and there'll be this sort of like shadow image of what was there before (laughter) or, yeah, I mean there're various artifacts that are a function of if you drop--since image to image is being generated from stuff that's gone before, if there's a chunk of stuff that gets left behind, that gets left out, then until you send a whole new image, you're sort of manipulating stuff that isn't correct.  And so (laughter) and so, you see these little blocks moving around on the screen and so forth, and it's not--yeah.  So that's a function of sort of data being dropped.
Story_ID: 30555
Speaker 1: But, so anyway, so after, I don't know what it was, you know, perhaps nine months there [Pulsent Corporation], I decided--and actually, while I was working there in the evenings I was also doing a project for Silicon Graphics [Inc., SGI].  So I would, you know, put in eight or ten hours at Pulsent and then I would go over to SGI and work, you know, another four hours or something.  And it just--so it was a combination of--I guess the biggest thing was that I felt that the algorithms still hadn't stabilized.  And at a certain point, they decided to sort of back up and say, let's look at this in a fresh way because we're incrementally trying to get rid of things.  And it's not leading anywhere.  We're sort of going around in circles.  They said, let's back up, reset.  Let's try and take nine months or a year and sort of get it right.  And so I felt there was gonna be that delay.  It was gonna take another couple of years to implement the hardware, and I just felt that there were other technologies, competing technologies that were moving on and that there was a window of opportunity that was gonna be closed by the time, you know, we could get to market with a product.  And so, and I've questioned whether even there would be funding to last.  So I left the company just to focus on this one project that I was doing for Silicon Graphics.  And it turned out Pulsent, they did get more money and they were in existence for another couple of years before--but they--and they reintroduced the technology [video compression].  But I don't think anything ever came of it.
Story_ID: 30556
Speaker 1: Okay, now at some point you seem to change gears and you got involved in urban development.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: This is like 2002 or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, actually, there was another thing, SongPro [Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So basically, I was kind of going in and out of retirement, based upon (laughter)--I'm making no real effort to say, okay, this is what I wanna do, and doing it.  So I would sort of get into things because I got a call from somebody or a friend was working on something, not the best way to do things.  But, and so I was sort of, you know, I left Pulsent [Corporation] and I finished this project for SGI [Silicon Graphics, Inc.].  And then I was sort of in this retirement mode.  And a friend of mine, Ron Jones [Ronald L. Jones], called me.  He had started this company, SongPro, and got a license from Nintendo to do a cartridge, a media cartridge that would plug in and be able to play music and video on a [Nintendo] Game Boy, a little portable game machine.  So he had gotten some money, had gone through it, and was keeping this thing alive basically with his own money.  And he'd run through most of that.  And so he was like, you know, sleeping in the office and--but still trying to keep things going.  He had some prototype hardware.  He wanted to do another version of that and needed a little bit of help.  So I helped him out there, and then I had a spare, you know, a guest room in my house that was sort of separate from the rest of the house.  And so I let him move in, and, you know, it was an interesting application.  I always liked, you know, high-volume applications, low-cost applications and (train horn) so [pause for loud train horn]. Stopping for the train (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I, you know, I helped him out and said, you know, well, if you can get some funding, you know, I'd join up and, you know, we'll see where we can take this thing.  And at some, you know, so he was able to get a million dollars in funding, hired a CEO [Chief Executive Officer] out of Disney and so we were off and running, developing this technology.  Unfortunately, the--and actually, most, the marketing and CEO were down in Los Angeles [California] and the engineering was being done up in the Bay Area, the San Francisco Bay Area [California].  But unfortunately, what happened there was sort of the CEO was used to being, having a lot of money at his disposal.  This was his first start up.  I guess he was confident in his ability to raise more money.  And so he ended up blowing through that million dollars very quickly--were able to, at some point, get some additional money, but blew through that very quickly as well.  And so, sort of, we were able to sort of develop the first initial product and manufacture some number of them.  But right as we were doing that, the money ran out, and also, my friend, he developed cancer, and so it was a combination of the lack, you know, his motivation to push it forward and the lack of money sort of spelled the end of that endeavor [Ronald L. Jones died in 2004].  But it was, you know, it was an interesting--you know, I think there was, it was an interesting thing to play around with for a while, you know, took a trip to China for a couple weeks to bring up the manufacturing process there.  So, you know, it was an interesting experience for me to go to do that.  I don't consider it by any means a waste.  So that was like from 2001 I think to 2002 was SongPro.
Speaker 1: Okay, it says here--So it's founded 2000 and runs 'til 2003?  Does that sound like that could be true?
Speaker 2: SongPro?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was started before I joined.  And I think my primary involvement was 2001 and 2002.
Story_ID: 30557
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about SUDA (ph.)?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Strategic Urban Development [Alliance], well, I mean, and then--yeah, so that is, so, yeah, so with the demise of SongPro [Inc.], but sort of back into the retirement mode, a very good friend of mine, Alan [East] Dones who was the president of SUDA, you know, my sort of real estate related, development related activities were sort of an outgrowth of that relationship and that friendship.  And so, he's done some real estate development things and also we're trying to do something with Africa and--.
Speaker 1: Okay, when did SongPro start?
Speaker 2: SongPro--
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry, SUDA, SUDA?
Speaker 2: SUDA.  I don't know the year specifically that it started.
Speaker 1: Did it start--
Speaker 2: My involvement with SUDA is more financial.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you get involved (train horn)?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't have a hard date in my mind.  It's probably 2000--you know, sort of in the 2004 to 2006 sort of timeframe.  You know, as I said, you know, primarily, you know, my involvement with SUDA has been financial in providing funds to do some of the projects.  And--
Speaker 1: You were talking about an initiative in Africa--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --before I interrupted you.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so one of the activities of SUDA [Strategic Urban Development Alliance] that interested me was pursuing a power plant in Africa, yeah, building a power plant in Africa, there in Ghana, specifically.  Their activities over the, you know, last few years to sort of, they created this organization, the West African Power Pool [WAPP] to sort of do regional planning for power infrastructure.  And I believe there are thirteen [sic, fourteen] countries in West Africa that are part of this organization.  And they're building, you know, power line--power transmission lines and power plants and so forth.  And so, you know, we've, several years ago, approached them about basically doing a development project there or build a power plant.  And it's evolved into, I mean we've been working with them--Alan, primarily has been working with them for a number of years in developing this plan.  And--
Speaker 1: Alan?
Speaker 2: Alan [East] Dones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, I mean those activities are ongoing.  The whole financial collapse sort of dramatically slowed things down because, you know, those kinds of projects rely on, you know, major loans (laughter), and, you know, investments, private investments.  And, you know, that kind of stuff was basically shut down in 2007, 2008.  And so it's, it's slowed a lot but, you know, there's still ongoing discussions.  Some progress has been made, and you know, we hope to be able to push that forward, you know, in the next year.  It's also sort--there're two aspects of it now.  One part is the power plant, natural gas fired power plant.  There's a pipe line, a gas pipe line that comes out of Nigeria, and it runs along the coast of West Africa.  But the gas supplies out of Nigeria are unstable, and so there're even some existing plants that were built, depending on that natural gas supply, and it hasn't materialized, and so they're now burning alternative fuels.  And the new power plants that are planned, they have to allow for some alternative fuel which makes the thing more expensive.  And so Alan, you know, came up with something, a proposal that would involve storing liquefied natural gas using the pipeline, not as taking gas--as a delivery mechanism, not just from Nigeria, but from these offshore floating, natural gas storage platforms.  And so it's a way to ensure that the supply of natural gas is there, decoupled from whatever happens in Nigeria.  And therefore, you don't have to resort to burning these alternative fuels in the existing plants and new plants, and you don't have to build them to accommodate alternative fuels because, you know, with this off store, off-this liquefied natural gas storage facilities, natural gas can become a reliable fuel.  And so that's--Alan's back and forth over there to Africa and--
Speaker 1: Have you been?
Speaker 2: I went once, once?  Yes, in association with this I went once.  There was, way back in the days of Omniverse Digital Solutions I actually made another trip to Nigeria to sort of explore some possibilities.  But I went to Nigeria once to meet with WAPP [West African Power Pool] and people there in Ghana and Liberia.  And I had planned to go back again, but sort of, when things slowed down because of this sort of this financial collapse, you know, I haven't made another trip back there.  But, Alan, as I said, he's back there several times a year.
Story_ID: 30558
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're--all right, what are your future plans?  Do you have a future kind of scenario that you would like to do because you're still pretty young, and you have an interest in working it seems on some level?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what are you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I'm definitely--
Speaker 1: Cause you're kind of semi-retired, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I mean, so I, you know, there's SUDA [Strategic Urban Development Alliance] stuff that I was invested in and other real estate stuff that I was invested in.  And the last few years was not a good time to be invested in real estate.  So there's sort of a level of-- and one of them got tied up in, you know, lawsuits, craziness.  And I'm in general conflict averse (laughter).  So I don't like conflict.  I like to work things out.  And then, and then the legal system is just crazy.  It's not something--the civil legal system is not something you wanna get mixed up in cause it's, it takes forever to resolve what seems like the simplest problem.  And you spend hundreds of thousand dollars on attorneys.  And so after, you know, spending, you know, half a million dollars in legal fees and four years trying to straighten out this problem.  In the end, you know, it was straightened out in our favor, but (laughter) you know, I don't wanna have to go through that process again.  And it seems like it's a common thing in the real estate development business.  Plus, you know, even through these years I've always been an observer of technology even when I wasn't actively developing it.  And so always thinking about the evolution of technology and how technology can be applied to solve problems and, you know, make people's lives better or make people's lives easier.  And so there's a certain little frustration associated with, what I believe, knowing how to make things better and sort of waiting for other people to do it and it not happening, you know.  And so the combination of this frustration with not being able to implement my ideas, my own fault (laughter).  And, you know, getting mixed up in all the craziness of real estate has convinced me that, it's like I need to stay away from that kind of stuff.  And I need to just focus on, you know, the stuff that I really enjoy doing and the stuff where I think I can make the biggest contribution.  And that is, you know, developing technology.  So I'll have to say that I'm, definitely in the coming year [2011], you know, trying to figure out what I want to do as a sort of second major act.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I have several ideas in pretty varied fields, and--but I expect that will all be resolved, you know, over, you know, over the course of the next several--certainly, you know, this year.  And then I'll be off and running and, you know, in some direction to try and--I suppose it's probably likely to be some kind of start-up.
Story_ID: 30559
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask people this, and what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Its hopes, sort of like-hopes, concerns--I guess it's all tied up.  I, I mean, you know, fundamentally, it all revolves around sort of education.  You know, I view education to the key to sort of advancement and success, both in terms of, you know, personal success and contributing to society as a whole.  And, you know, I think the education system is--what's talked about a lot, right, in terms of, is the American education system, you know, up to competing, you know, in the world marketplace and particularly in the--so that's in general, but and particularly in the African American community which, you know, tends to be more, you know, in these lower economic classes, and, you know, education is sort of the way that you get out of those classes, but, you know, if the schools are not good, then it's really hard.  So, so that is, you know, I think a big problem that I'm hoping technology can contribute to.  I mean, of course, nothing replaces a great teacher, but, you know, and there is a part of the problem that's motivating the students to do well.  You know, for me I was motivated by, you know, my parents to a certain level to at least the A-B level, let's say.  But at some point, there was something internally that had to click for me to wanna like say, well, the A is all that I'm satisfied with.  So, so what am I saying?  I guess, so there are external factors, and, you know, the example I gave of, you know, I was headed down one path that was, you know, fine, get a master's degree and work in engineering because I didn't really know what the other alternatives were.  And so once I was, you know, had a chance to interview in research at Bell Laboratories [AT&T Bell Laboratories], it's like, well, get a Ph.D., work in research.  And then likewise, I was on that path until Jim Clark [James H. Clark] said, you know, let's start a company with this.  And it's like now, you know, I'm, you know, off on this path, can make more money, you know, have a bigger impact and so forth.  So, and so--but I feel like it starts with education, you know, and you have to motivate, you have to provide the teachers and the materials and so forth to allow students to learn and keep things interesting.  And you have to somehow motivate them so that they're willing to, you know, to put in the work.  Now, I don't think computers are gonna help motivate people, but hopefully--so part of that is exposure to things that may be outside of your normal sphere of everyday activity.  And so, in that sense, you know, role models and so forth are important, good teachers to motivate students, parents being involved to motivate students, but I feel, you know, given the motivation, the actual learning process can be greatly helped by computing technology.  And people--you know, so students who are having a problem in one area (train horn), they can, on their own, with a computer, get reinforcement and guidance in terms of, you know, to improve their skill set (train horn).  And also, you know, if there're a set of teachers that are especially good, you can use technology to allow them to influence a much larger (loud train horn) group of people, not just twenty kids in a class but maybe hundreds or thousands or, you know, potentially millions.  There can be superstar teachers, right, that sort of at least, they're not gonna teach the everyday stuff, but they can serve to introduce, you know, new ideas and new possibilities to students.  And so, hopefully, you know, I think the whole education system has lots of problems and it's particularly bad in the African American community, but hopefully, technology is one of the things that can be brought to bear to improve that situation.
Story_ID: 30560
Speaker 1: Okay, have you thought of any ways, maybe your knowledge of computer graphics and that sort of thing, could help motivate people more.  I mean, you know, I see kids now can go, they get online and there's a--Facebook has a virtual farm.  People are milking cows on a farm on Facebook.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They're doing, and they think it's fun, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean there're all kind of things that people are doing now in a virtual way that are not necessarily for real, but they are real in the sense that they feel a sense of accomplishment or they get motivated to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm afraid I can't claim to understand why people get a kick out of this virtual farm kind of stuff or similar kinds of things, you know.  I'm not that much into Facebook activities and so forth.  But I'm sorry, the question behind that is?
Speaker 1: No, I was just saying have you ever thought about maybe developing programs that, I mean that--or using that, or funding somebody to use that technology?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I think about it in general.  It's not really my area of expertise, and so I really, never really seriously thought about doing any, taking any actions.  The hope was, I mean part of the reason for wanting to like get involved in this stuff over in Africa [with Strategic Urban Development Alliance, SUDA] was, I think there are needs over there, and I was hoping to be able to do two things.  You know, first was from an investment activity, to generate a revenue stream that would come out of there and then having a revenue stream, then to be able to invest it back in trying to--and maybe bring some of my own ideas to helping in that area of, in terms of bringing, you know, power, communication and education, you know, to various areas of Africa.  And then, with that to just sort of raise their whole standard of living.  So, you know, and so I've thought about it to some degree, but not to any great extent really.  I haven't really taken any action in that direction yet, partly of the, as I said, I was sort of hoping to generate a revenue stream that could fund that.
Story_ID: 30561
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question too.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and do it?
Speaker 2: I, think the biggest thing is I feel like the last ten years or so have been kind of a waste.  It's not that I--and then I was sort of doing things--rather than say, okay, these are my ideas, I'm gonna--and this is where I wanna head, and this is the path I wanna take to get there, I was sort of, to some degree, drifting and sort of the things I did was more effected by who I knew and who called me up saying they had a problem they wanted me to work (chuckle) on or something as opposed to sort of myself stepping back and saying, okay, this is my objective, you know, for the next five years or ten years or in this part of society, this is what I want to do.  And, and so I was willing to go into this semi-retirement mode, and then, you know, occasionally, I got pulled out of it by, you know, a friend or a phone call.  But I feel like there was a lot more that I could be doing and contributing to society, and you know, so if there's a regret, it's that I haven't been, you know, actively cranking out technology for the last ten years.  You know, I've sort of bounced in and out of it a little bit.  But, especially for the last five years when I've been mixed up in all this real estate stuff.  I still spend a lot of time thinking about it, but not really acting on it.  And so, so, so anyways.  So that, you know, the biggest thing that I kind of regret and that I hope to change, you know, moving forward is, as long as I'm physically and mentally able, I have no plan to ever retire or semi-retire again, you know.  I enjoy pushing the technology much more than I enjoy, you know, visiting some spa somewhere (laughter).  And so I really, you know--it's nice to take a trip to a spa or a retirement--not a retirement, you know, a resort area some time.  But I, you know, I think fundamentally, you know, I get more enjoyment from, you know, pushing the technology than hanging out by the beach.  So, so from here forward, you know, I really intend to, you know, work until I drop dead or am no longer able to, you know, as I said, physically and mentally do it.
Story_ID: 30562
Speaker 1: Okay, now, once again when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, definitely Silicon Graphics [Inc.] is the big thing.  And, you know, we had, developed this great company, a lot of really talented people, doing, you know, great stuff.  It was a really great work environment.  We developed this technology that people use to do these really incredible things.  Then I, you know, and I always got a kick out of going, you know, going out to visit our customers to see what, you know, the way they were using the technology and, of course, going to movies that used the technology and so forth.  So, you know, that's the biggest thing at this point.  As you say, you know, I've got a few years left in me I think, and, you know, I'm hoping to be able to do something that, you know, that matches Silicon Graphics and its, you know, its level of impact.  You know, I'm not, you know, I'm not into the money thing.  So it's, to me, it's more important to have a major impact than to make a lot of money at it, although sort of one thing tends to follow the other.  But I think, you know, I see, you know, areas where the technology can make a huge difference.  And so I hope to be, you know, a part of making that difference.
Story_ID: 30563
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us a little bit about your family.  You have children, right, and are you still married?
Speaker 2: No, I never married.  I, you know, I have a girlfriend of a number of years.  She was previously married, and she has three kids ages--eleven, thirteen and fourteen--boy, girl, boy.  And so we all live together there in Los Altos [California].  And so that's my family there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you've got your brothers and your sisters, are they still with us?
Speaker 2: Yes, so my, I guess starting from the oldest, Hubert [Hannah, Jr.], he is married.  He had ten kids.  He lives in Petersburg [Ohio].  He grew up in Dayton [Ohio]--I mean I'm sorry.  He went to Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and lived in Dayton for a number of years.  And then part of the Omniverse Digital Solutions stuff we were, we had an office in New Millennium Studios [Petersburg, Virginia], and this was a studio that, a film studio that Tim Reid, Tim and Daphne Reid were trying to start up in Virginia.  So we, at some point we--
Speaker 1: That's right in Petersburg, yeah, I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Petersburg, Virginia.  So, you know, we set up a little office there.  We were doing some special effects stuff there and, you know, while we were working on the business plan and trying to raise money, but my brother, I moved him out to Petersburg to work with us there.  And, you know, ultimately, nothing came of Omniverse, and nothing really came of New Millennium Studios, but he stayed in that area.  So he still lives there in Petersburg.  My next oldest [sibling], Dwayne [Hannah], lives here in the Bay Area [California].  His field is finance and so he's, works for a tech company down in the valley in finance, and he has three kids, three boys.  Then my oldest, my sister [Judith Hannah] is in Chicago [Illinois]. She's an attorney; still lives in Chicago.  Me, and then my youngest brother [Don Hannah] is, lives in Los Angeles [California].  He's the really creative one.  His degree is in communications, but he's into music and photography and he's very technical as well, but very much on the creative side of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did your father [Hubert Hannah, Sr.] get a chance to see you become a success?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Unfortunately, my father is suffering from Alzheimer's right now.  Basically, it was about two years ago when he started to decline.  But--
Speaker 1: And your mother [Edith Hannah]?  She's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's in good health.  She's taking care of him right now.  And actually, just sort of finding, trying to find a longer term, cause she's reached the limits of being able to do that, and--but she's still in, you know, reasonable health and, you know, mentally very sharp and so forth.  So, right now it's just the issue, it's the stress of dealing with my father.  But hopefully, you know, we can get that settled, and, you know, sort of offload her and either--I mean ultimately it would be good to have her, you know, living out here [Bay Area, California], nearby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I go back to Chicago several times a year right now.  I'm on the Board of Trustees of IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] and one of Boards of Overseers in the Institute of Design, so there're meetings that pull me back there several times a year.  And generally, when there's a meeting, I'll go back for about a week.
Story_ID: 30564
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I should ask you before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, well, here's my last question.  It's like legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess the biggest thing is to have, you know, to have made a difference, you know, to have made a contribution to society, some lasting contribution to improve the lives of, you know, some set of people.  The more people the better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I mean there are good things about improving the lives of one or two people or a few people, but, you know, I feel like, you know, I have a certain talent.  And I think I have the ability, when applied, I think to some degree I've shown that in the past, and I hope to do more in the future of like me doing major things that can affect, you know, millions of people.  And that's why I've sort of always been interested more on the low end of things than the high end of things because I feel, you know, ultimately, the cheaper things are, the more people can afford to take advantage of them.  So, so that's, I guess, you know, (train horn) sort of a vague and general way, but I just, you know, wanna be remembered as someone who, you know, made a difference in sort of improving people's lives (train horn).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much for this, sir
Speaker 2: Alright, sure, my pleasure.
