Story_ID: 633448
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers and I will conduct the interview today. This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm glad to meet you guys, yeah.
Speaker 1: He will videotape the interview today. So we will start by just having you state your name, your full name--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And spelling out any parts of it that may be confusing to anyone.
Speaker 2: Okay. My complete name is Wade Hudson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson]. And Wade is spelled W-A-D-E, and Hudson is like the river [Hudson River], H-U-D-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Ten, twenty-three, nineteen forty-six [October 23, 1946].
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mansfield, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, what, April 29th or 30th, 29th; right?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Twenty-eighth.
Speaker 2: Twenty-eighth, April 28th.
Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: East Orange, New Jersey, and this is the office and warehouse of Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a writer, publisher.
Story_ID: 633449
Speaker 1: If you can just give me your mother's full name, your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay. My mother's full name is Lurline Jones is her maiden name.
Speaker 1: And you're gonna have to spell that first name.
Speaker 2: L-U-R-L-I-N-E. Yeah, that's important because often it's spelled L-U-R-L-E-N-E, but she spells it Lur-line but it's pronounced Lee, Lurline Jones Hudson. And she was born February 22, 1923 in Mansfield, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: So she was born in the '20s [1920s] right before the Depression [Great Depression]?
Speaker 2: That's exactly, right. That's exactly, right.
Speaker 1: Did she, so she grew up during the Depression and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she, she, she did grow up during the Depression and very difficult time for, for many people in America but particularly for black folks in, in Louisiana 'cause she grew up on a farm. And it was really a, a, itinerant kind of farming situation for her and her family.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: Well, what that really means is that she lived on a farm that was owned by a, a white owner and they were given a house to live in, and also to work the, the crops on the farm and they had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's similar to sharecropping?
Speaker 2: That, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly. And so she actually stopped school I think around third grade to work on the farm and to, to help the family produce the crop because they had to deliver the crops.
Speaker 1: So they were sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So go ahead, they had to deliver.
Speaker 2: They had to deliver the crops and if, if not, you know, the, the, the white man who owned, his name was Claiborne [ph.], I believe, his name was, he would put 'em off the farm, you know, and they would have to find another, another farm to, to live on.
Speaker 1: Did they move around a lot?
Speaker 2: Not really because they, they were able to actually produce enough crop, crops, to satisfy the, the landowner.
Speaker 1: And what crops were they producing?
Speaker 2: Cotton and a lot of vegetables like watermelons or corn, okra, you know. And then they would obviously give the crops to, the majority of the crops to the, the landowner who would then sell it to the city--
Speaker 1: Well, you hear all the stories about the, you know, all the sharecroppers being taken advantage of by the white guy, he would, you know, they would be so in debt by the end of the year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that's exactly, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, it's, it--
Speaker 1: Was that--
Speaker 2: --really, it, it really was another form of slavery, you know, because you never really were able to pay off the debts, so you were indebted to them and which means that you had an obligation and they would not let you leave, you know, you know, unless you pay it off. You know, and oftentimes they would, because of the situation, and you're talking about the '20s [1920s] now, the '30s [1930s], they would beat and sometimes kill blacks who sort of stood up for themselves.
Speaker 1: Were there any people in your family that had been lynched or killed as a result of having--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother has told stories about cousins who were beaten severely. I don't remember her saying anything about anyone being hanged but certainly being beaten severely or thrown in jail for long periods of time without really any reason or even going through the court system, you know. So it was an extremely, extremely difficult time for my mother and also for, for my father [Wade Hudson, Sr.] as well and we'll get to that but--
Speaker 1: About how many siblings did your mother have?
Speaker 2: There were seven.
Speaker 1: Seven.
Speaker 2: There were seven.
Speaker 1: So there were seven children?
Speaker 2: Seven children.
Speaker 1: Can you name them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Uncle Buddy, Thomas Jones was the oldest, Bruce Bale Jones [Bruce Jones] was the second oldest, my mother, Lurline Hudson was, I'm sorry, was the fourth oldest, and Essie [Essie Jones], Margaret [ph.], and then there were two who were born with like half, half relative, half, half brothers--
Speaker 1: Brothers.
Speaker 2: --and sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did the seven, all seven children worked on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And almost every one of them dropped out of school at, you know, third or fourth grade to do that. And as my mother recalls, I think that school for blacks at that particular time only went as high as ninth grade in, in our, our area of Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And, and then, of course, they started school later than the white kids (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --because they had to work the crops.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, that's right. In fact--
Speaker 1: --through the, that season, yeah, so.
Speaker 2: Right, right, because, you know, the cotton season would extend, you know, picking the cotton and all of that, would extend to sometime October, so they wouldn't go to school until like mid-October.
Speaker 1: So they would get like a seven, six, seven month school year--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --as opposed to the nine months (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --that the--
Speaker 2: And any time there was an emergency where they had to work on the farm, I mean, that took priority over going to school, you know, so.
Story_ID: 633450
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were some of the good times that she [Hudson's mother, Lurline Jones Hudson] talked about? Like in the midst of all of the work and the, and the struggle, what did they do? Was it religion? Was it church that relieved them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's a very, very good question because I think it's important to recognize that in the face of all of that, the negative things, there were many positive things. And, and, and that is so crucial that we point those out because that's how you maintain your humanity and, and your hope and your, your will to live and to go on. Yes, church was a major, major part of, of the experience. And, and church was a place where they would come not just, my, my mother's family but other families in the area because most people lived on farms too, and often they wouldn't see each other for some time weeks at a time because they would be working, working their farms. So they would come together to go to church. And during that time, regular church service was like once a month. They didn't, they didn't go to church service every Sunday like we do now. So they would usually have cookouts and, and, and meals where people would come together and just enjoy each other, the company of each other, and sharing stories and telling, telling stories about the old days and the old days being, you know, the turn of the century and, and even before then because obviously some of the, the elders grew up during Reconstruction so they were sharing some of those stories. And I think also the, the, the, the, the love, the bond, the family bond, was really extremely strong because I think black people recognized that they needed to, to be together, they needed to, to, to pull together in order to survive. And, and, and also to protect themselves as best they could, you know. So it was really a close-knit family but also a close-knit community. Mansfield [Louisiana] which was the, the town in the area but most, most blacks didn't live in the town.
Speaker 1: What was the size of it?
Speaker 2: I was gone say the population at that time probably was around two thousand. And obviously, you know, all of the, the, the mayor, and the, the police department was all-white obviously and blacks had no, no role in running the, the, the city or the county, well, they call 'em parishes in Louisiana, at all, you know, and so blacks were powerless. But again, I mean, there were obviously happy times. You know, people would come together and celebrate the birth of a child, you know.
Speaker 1: How would they celebrate that? Did--
Speaker 2: Well, they, well, eating was a major, a major, major deal. They would cook, you know, cakes and pies and, you know, collard greens and ham, you, you know, big ham or chicken or turkey and, and everybody would come and just eat and talk and share and laugh and, and talk about their kids and the future for their kids. So it, it was a really wholesome kind of experience and I guess without those, I mean, you know, you give up without those happy times.
Speaker 1: So did you, do you, how do you feel they saw their kids? Did they, did they see their kids as the hope for the future?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I, I, I'm certain they did. But I do have to preface this with, with this point though. I think for my [maternal] grandparents [Bernice Jones (ph.) and Theodore Jones], I, I really wonder what, what did they see in terms of the future for my mother and, and her sisters and brothers.
Speaker 1: Well, what did your mother say she wanted to become?
Speaker 2: You know what? She has never really said to me what she wanted to be. And I don't really think that she thought of being anything other than a housewife and a mother. I believe that she started to perhaps think about what she could have been when her children started to achieve success and to move up the ladder. Again, there were, there are eight of us, and eight children that she had, and so she spent most of her time having babies and raising them, you know. So I don't even think that, and I think you have to really understand the environment in Mansfield. I mean, it, it's, you're talking about apartheid. I mean, it was a sibling to apartheid. I mean, just, you really couldn't have any dreams of being a, a teacher, a lawyer, I mean, there were no teachers around, black teachers around, no black lawyers, there were no role models for them at all. Everybody they knew did the same thing they did and that's work the farms, you know. And, and I think about that now as my mother look around and see what's happening now, it must be, I, I, I missed out, you know, I missed out. But it was such a, such a difficult time, you know, for them.
Speaker 1: Not necessarily that she missed out because, you know, it's on her shoulders that you stand because--
Speaker 2: Well, well, in terms of being able to perhaps even have the right to dream.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --even if you can't realize a dream, you have a right to dream.
Speaker 1: And you don't think she realized she had the right to dream even?
Speaker 2: Right, I think, that her, her dream deferred, you know, I mean, to put it another way like Langston Hughes, was a dream deferred. I mean, so you, you, you're focused on what you recognize that you can do, you know.
Story_ID: 633451
Speaker 1: So let's talk about her parents. Did you meet your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I did not know her mother, her mother died when she was very young, I think she was thirty-five when she died. Now, my, her father, my grandfather, I knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, did she die, did her mother die in childbirth?
Speaker 2: I think it was pneumonia.
Speaker 1: Pneumonia.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And again--
Speaker 1: So did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in, in that area--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in that area, there was no black hospital, right, so and I think there was a small sanitarium that whites could go to. So she was ill for a period of time and so they had to actually take her to Shreveport [Louisiana], which was the next largest city to Mansfield [Louisiana] which is like forty miles away. So probably not having a hospital that she could go to in the immediate area had a, had a part to play in her demise.
Speaker 1: So she died in what year, do you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't remember the year.
Speaker 1: How old was your mother when her mother died?
Speaker 2: My mother was sixteen, was sixteen. And she has described that quite often, you know, what she went through because she in effect became the surrogate mother for the other siblings, although she had brothers older than she was, she, you know, she was there and so she assumed that role. And, yeah, she was around sixteen, I think, she said, yep.
Speaker 1: And did your father then, I mean, her, your mother's father remained single?
Speaker 2: He did for a period of time but he remarried.
Speaker 1: Now, let's just get his name. Then--
Speaker 2: Theodore Jones--
Speaker 1: Theodore Jones.
Speaker 2: --is his name.
Speaker 1: And your mother's name--
Speaker 2: Lurline [Lurline Jones Hudson].
Speaker 1: Your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Bernice.
Speaker 1: Bernice Jones [ph.].
Speaker 2: Bernice, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he remarried a second time. But the second marriage didn't last that long, I think it was a few years. And but he subsequently married a third time, and the third marriage lasted a long, long time and he actually died while he was still married to the third wife. But now, he, he was a very strong, strong man. And he, you know, he was tall, dark, very dark, about six--6'2", 6'1", big, big hands, you know. And we really looked up to him. And, and I, I can remember when he would come to visit us and he used to like, he couldn't read, he never learned to read but he listened to the radio and would listen to the news, so I used to look forward to, I think I was like nine, eight, nine, ten years of age, I used to look forward to him, his coming to visit with us because we would sit and talk about the news and what was going on. And but he was very, very, very knowledgeable about world affairs and what was going on. And, and we would sit down, sit for sometimes hour, hour and a half just talking about world affairs, you know, even though he, he wasn't able to read. And he, he, 'cause he was, he was, I guess, the, the first one other than my immediate family, my mother and father [Wade Hudson, Sr.] to tell me, you know, that you're gonna be somebody, you know. And he passed away my sophomore year in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], yep, yep, yep. But very, very, very strong man. And, you know, given the opportunity, I mean, who knows what he, what he could have done with his life, you know. Although, I mean, he certainly made enormous contributions to us. And as you said earlier, you know, we stand on his shoulders and the shoulders of my mother and father, those people who made the sacrifices for us to, to do what we're doing now.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather worked the farm also?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there distinctions between what the women and the men had to do on the farm? Do you know?
Speaker 2: You know, actually, well, obviously the women had to, to cook, and to take care of the kids but they also worked the fields too. They, they had to hoe the cotton and to pick, as they say hoe the cotton and, and pick the cotton right along with the men, you know. But at the same time they had the responsibility of, of raising the kids primarily, cooking the meals, you know. And depending on the, the, some men also cooked too and chipped in and helped because my father cooked and that's why I, I learned to cook, you know, from watching him. So it wasn't a female, male thing in my house, household.
Story_ID: 633452
Speaker 1: How did your [maternal] grandfather [Theodore Jones] deal with racism that existed in Mansfield [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: You know, very seldom did they talk about it, you know. It was, I think that they recognized it was the way it was, you know, and, and I don't remember, I mean, very few people as I can recall when I was growing up, really dealt with racism. I mean, in terms of talking about it and, or talking about white folks. I mean, it, you know, generally they would say, you know, white people are crazy just like, you know, white people will say, those folks are crazy. But in terms of dealing with it in any, any systemic way or even expressing how they really felt, I don't recall that really happening. It was, people talked about what was happening in other places but not in, in Mansfield. I, I think you have to understand because it was such a, it's such a small area and almost provincial, you know, that most black people knew most white people and most white people knew most black people. And, and so there was like this, this relationship, you know, that's written about, you know, obviously been written about by, by many black writers, where folks had sort of learned to accept the status quo and, you know, you didn't really talk about it. And, and I don't recall other than a few situations where white people in Mansfield really said any negative things to us. But the system itself, you know, which was, was in place, so, you really didn't have to.
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Lurline Jones Hudson and Wade Hudson, Sr.] or grandparents ever get the opportunity in those days to vote?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about it?
Speaker 2: No, nope. I don't even think they even had any expectations of voting. Mansfield, blacks started to vote in Mansfield, if I remember, I wanna make sure I get the, the year correct, either '68 [1968] or '69 [1969]. And that happened, 'cause when I was in college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] I, I joined a number of civil rights organizations including SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. And so we, you know, I said listen, you know, we need to go to my hometown of Mansfield because see the thing about the civil rights struggle that most people don't really understand, that it had to be fought almost like a war, you had to go to different cities and towns and actually confront the power structure in those towns to change things. I mean, what, the laws were passed but it wasn't this, you know, a, a magic wand and say, okay, everything is all right, you had to go to different towns and fight the power structure. And even today if you go to some of these small towns in Mississippi and Alabama, many of them are like they were thirty, forty, fifty years ago, you know, because nobody has gone there to really confront the, the power structure to get that, to get it to change. So, you know, it, Mansfield was, you know, it was an extremely, extremely segregated place. And I think that the system was so successfully put in place that blacks didn't even contest.
Story_ID: 633453
Speaker 1: I can remember, I must have been like seven or eight grade, the theater that, there was one theater and blacks had to sit upstairs and the whites, whites sat downstairs. And so we had to stand in line and wait until all the whites had gone in, they would, they would hold the movie, (background noise) they wouldn't show the movie until all the whites were in place and then we had to then go in, we couldn't go in together even though we're going to separate locations. And it was like maybe like seventy-five or eighty blacks, oh--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay. Continuing. Mansfield [Louisiana] theater.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that's the name of the theater too, the Mansfield Theater. As I was saying earlier, it was segregated, you know, like everything else in, in Mansfield and blacks sat in the upstairs and the whites downstairs. And I can remember one, it was a Wednesday evening, they had some special promotion where there was a tie-in with the supermarket where we got free tickets or something to go see the movie but I remember we, maybe about seventy-five or eighty blacks were in line waiting for the whites to go in to be seated and they had three or four cops sort of walking the beat, making sure that we stayed in line. And there was a young lady who just started laughing and she got out of line and a cop pushed her. Her brother stepped in and started fighting with, with the cop, and, and he got some, some blows in, you know, and but they beat him but he ran and they were looking for him, he, he left, in fact, the entire family left the city because they were gonna kill him, you know, and they just had to leave, you know. He left that night and the rest of the family left, I guess, the next couple of days but he stood up for his sister and you don't, you, you don't do that, I mean, it just put your life in jeopardy but he defended his, his sister, you know. A number of us, and I was like, I don't know maybe nine or something like that, you know, and other adults, black adults, kept us from, from going to, to help because, you know, we wanted to help too, you know. And but anyway the, the family moved, moved out of town. That's, that's, that's one occasion where I remember someone stood up to what was happening to blacks in, in Mansfield. But, you know, I, I know that there were at least, when I was growing up, three or four cases where blacks were actually killed by either white people or a cop, you know, for basically nothing. There was a house about three or four, about five houses down from where we lived on Mary Street, and actually it was the house of Vida Blue. Vida Blue was a baseball player, played with Oakland [Oakland Athletics], San Francisco Giants, really, really big name in the, in the '70s [1970s]. It was a house that his family lived in when he was a little boy. There was a man who actually had started working for one of the richest white men in Mansfield and this man's name was Frank Mathis [ph.], I believe. And you don't stop working for Frank Mathis, you know, you pay a price for that. But so he went looking for him and he ran through, through the, the, well, we lived in the Eastside [Mansfield, Louisiana], the area of town where we lived was called the Eastside and he ran through the Eastside down Mary Street and he ran up under this house, like in Mansfield they put houses on cinder blocks it's probably the same thing in Mississippi, you know, so you can actually crawl under the house, you know. And so that's what he did. And cop came, white cop came, looked under the house and just (makes noise), killed him right under the house. And they said after he did that he said, "Drag that nigger out of there." And, you know, there were a number of other occasions where that happened. But there was one black guy, I think his name was, what was his name? Oh, I can't remember his name. The, the, the sheriff, in, in for the, for the parish [DeSoto Parish, Louisiana] his name was Roy Webb. There was another black guy, I think, his, was it Lucky O'Key [ph.]? Big, big black guy. He and Roy Webb used to get into it all the time but for some reason, Roy Webb would not arrest him. I, I don't know if he respected the guy for fighting back but they, I mean, they were like two big men, you know, Roy Webb, was a big, big, big white guy and, and O'Key was big too, big fist, they would get to fighting on the Eastside, which is the, the black section of town, and Roy Webb would put him in jail for a couple of days then let him out but, but if anybody else did that, you would, they would shoot you or hang you, you know. But it was amazing because he never really paid a price for, maybe Roy Webb just respected him, you know.
Story_ID: 633454
Speaker 1: We talked about your mother's [Lurline Jones Hudson] side of the family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) let's talk about your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay. I know less about my father's side of, of the family than my, my mother's.
Speaker 1: But tell me your father's full name?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Wade Hudson, Sr.
Speaker 1: And his date of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth was January 14, 1919. He was born--
Speaker 1: Mansfield [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No, no, he was born in a town called Bernice, Louisiana, which is the, in the northeast section of the state. It's, Mansfield is in the northwest about twenty-five miles from Texas and about a 110 miles from Arkansas. Bernice is east towards Mississippi, closer to Mississippi. And he moved, his mother [Geneva Johnson (ph.)] moved to Mansfield when he was young. He had three whole brothers, Jack [ph.], Paul [ph.], and then my father had the same father. And I think my grandmother, his mother, moved to Mansfield I think when Paul was young. And her husband left her and then she remarried and then she had three other kids. So there were six of them all together. But my father was, basically grew up in, in Mansfield but he wasn't born in Mansfield.
Story_ID: 633455
Speaker 1: And your father is Wade, Sr. [Wade Hudson, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you were telling me, you, that he grew up in Mansfield [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Why would someone move to Mansfield though from Bernice [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know why my, my grandmother moved from Bernice to, to Mansfield.
Speaker 1: Did she do it after the breakup? So she moved alone or did she do it with her husband?
Speaker 2: She left, she moved alone.
Speaker 1: She left him.
Speaker 2: I think they, they had already--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they had already separated (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she moved with the three boys?
Speaker 2: I don't know if she was looking, looking for something different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my grandmother, ironically, had finished ninth grade which is the highest school went during that time. Very, very bright woman. And she, in fact, a lot of people in Mansfield would, would come to her to explain legal documents and things like that. Very, very bright woman. And, in fact, one of my teachers told me when I was growing up, that my grandmother could have been a teacher too, if she had wanted to be. Because, you know, once you finished ninth grade you could start teaching in the, I guess, up until, I think, I was third grade when the state passed a policy saying that all teachers had to have a college degree. So some of the teachers who had been teaching went back, went to college and others who didn't wanna go 'cause some were too old, they just stopped teaching, you know. So they started to, you know, they phased them out. But my, my grandmother could have been, been a teacher.
Speaker 1: And what was her, your mother's--your grandmother's name on your--
Speaker 2: Geneva.
Speaker 1: Geneva.
Speaker 2: Geneva Johnson [ph.] was her name.
Speaker 1: And that was rare for her to get to--
Speaker 2: Ninth grade.
Speaker 1: --go to ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she not have to work the fields?
Speaker 2: I think that she, I think she did work the fields but she also still went to school, you know. And I think it, it's a testimony to how bright she was.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about her parents?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. 'Cause if she were alive she would be a hundred and, 107. So I didn't know any, actually I only knew one of her siblings, her brother, who actually lived with her but he had, he was in an accident, he was run over by a train and so he was a paraplegic, so, you know, she looked after him, after that accident. So I think he stayed with her probably twelve years or so before he passed on, yeah.
Story_ID: 633456
Speaker 1: So on your father's side, what did your father [Wade Hudson, Sr.] do for a living?
Speaker 2: My father was just a common laborer. He worked at a number of jobs.
Speaker 1: He didn't work the fields then?
Speaker 2: Actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he didn't do farming?
Speaker 2: No, no, no. We, when we were growing up, wait, and when he was growing up he did.
Speaker 1: That's what I mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when he was growing up he did. And but actually my father and his siblings and his mother [Geneva Johnson (ph.)] lived in Mansfield [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: In the town?
Speaker 2: In the town. Whereas my, my mother's [Lurline Jones Hudson] family lived on the farm in--
Speaker 1: Were there distinctions in, amongst black people like class distinctions versus the city people and the rural, country people?
Speaker 2: Probably to some degree. But I don't think it was a, was a major distinction.
Speaker 1: No, I mean, was there discrimination amongst black people against each other in Mansfield (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I don't, I don't, I don't think, so. I think, I think, you know, people recognized that, you know, that if you lived on, on the farm that you were, you know, probably country versus, you know, growing up in the town. But, hey, listen, everybody was country 'cause--
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: --be- being in Mansfield with two thousand people, (laughter) I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, were there any black people who owned their own businesses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you name any of 'em?
Speaker 2: Fred Jefferson's barbershop, and he had two or three other barbers working for him. Johnson's Funeral Home [Mansfield, Louisiana], Winsfield- Winnfield Funeral Home [Mansfield, Louisiana]. Winnfield Funeral Home was, I think, one of about maybe fifteen or twenty in the State of Louisiana in different, different parts of the state. There was, what's the, there was a cafe, what was her name? I can't remember the name now. There was a cafe, James Roots [ph.], it's R-O- R-O-O-T-S, but they called him James Root (laughter) store. He had a little, little corner store.
Speaker 1: We used to call it a cafe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Cafe, yep, yep, yep. And but most of the businesses were, were small. Okay. There was a, a cleaners, one, one, black owned cleaners. As I said earlier, there was also a black owned theater when I was like, this must have been like in the early to mid-'50s [1950s] and it showed black movies. And but I think it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you remember any of those titles of those movies or--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --even the movie posters themselves what they looked like?
Speaker 2: Not really. 'Cause I think it closed down when I was maybe seven or so. So I, I really didn't have a chance to go to the movies.
Speaker 1: Did minstrel shows come through--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Mansfield?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Like 'Silas Green' ['Silas Green from New Orleans']?
Speaker 2: No, no. Baseball was the big deal in Mansfield. I mean--
Speaker 1: They had the Cotton State Leagues?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, the, they didn't really have leagues but like every Saturday and, and sometimes on Sunday, there would be some team barnstorming, coming through, they would play the local guys. And, I mean, people would turn out by the hundreds, man. In fact, the park where they played was like, people had to pass my, our house to get to the park, so we used to see people, you know, with their picnic baskets and all of that stuff. So it would be like an all-day kind of, kind of activity. And so, I mean, we grew up, grew up on baseball, you know. But I don't remember minstrel shows at all. No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Maybe they had ended like or it was before your time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 633457
Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest memories of Mansfield [Louisiana], you as a little boy?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories of like, it's like running on the grass and on the dirt and without shoes on. Playing ball with, with my, with my friends. There was a, a pasture as we called it (laughter) about two, two houses down from us and Vida Blue, I told you about who became a professional baseball player and my brother, Willie [Willie Hudson] who works with us now, and some of the other guys Ray, Ray Bogan [ph.], we would play ball almost every day after school we would play ball and in the summer, every day. It was either football or baseball, we didn't play that much basketball, baseball or football. And I remember organizing a Little League team, you know, because during that time, you know, they, they didn't have Little League teams for blacks. And, in fact, my brother was reminding me of the fact that I went around in the community collecting money so that we could start the, the, the team and buy gloves and equipment and stuff and people actually donated, you know, and that's how we started the, the, the Little League team. And once we got it started then the, the school district, well, actually it was the, the school superintendent who was for, for the black schools, were black, it was a black lady--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Oh, Nettles [ph.], Mrs. Nettles. She donated money and then the next year they actually hired a coach to coach us but we actually got it started ourselves, you know.
Story_ID: 633458
Speaker 1: What street did you grow up on?
Speaker 2: Mary Street, Mary Street. When, when we, Mary Street is now paved but it wasn't paved when we grew up (laughter). And, and when it rained, I mean, you're walking in these puddles, water and stuff, so it was, because we lived, well, what the city said, we lived just outside of the city limit, so we could not, we didn't benefit from any privileges from living in the city. Although in the black community it didn't matter anyway really.
Speaker 1: And you were born in nineteen forty--
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946].
Speaker 2: Yeah. But I, you know, when I was growing up, I mean, we had outdoor toilets, that we, we had no inside plumbing, no hot water. I mean, we had to, to boil our water. And it was that way for, for us and most other families in Mansfield [Louisiana]. When I went to college, you know, you know, we, we had no, no hot water, no, no indoor plumbing, you know. So when I went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] that was the first time that on a regular basis, you know, that I could take a shower and things like that, you know. And, and, where things were really convenient because we had took baths in tubs, you know, you had to boil the, you know, boil the water to take baths and throw it out as each person would take a bath or each child would take a bath.
Speaker 1: And then you only did that once a week or so?
Speaker 2: No, actually we did it--
Speaker 1: Every day?
Speaker 2: Not every day but we did it probably three, four times a week, you know. But, I mean, which required a lot of work, it's a lot of work, you know.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about religion growing up during those early--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --days before--
Speaker 2: Well, the church, as I said the church played a very important role in our community and I would say in, in our family. I--
Speaker 1: Baptist?
Speaker 2: Baptist. Yeah, Baptist, yeah. Actually, that was it. I mean, with Baptist and I think there were a few Jehovah Witnesses [Jehovah's Witnesses], no Catholics that I'm aware of. And, and it, just, just to, to give a little better perspective of Mansfield. Mansfield, I, I can't recall, well, I'm sorry, one, one Italian family in, in Mansfield. Most everybody was either black or English white, Anglo. And there was, ethnic diversity, (laughter) was no such thing as that, you know. And so it was just basically a black and white world. You know, there were no, no shades of gray at all. And so it was a very provincial kind of setting. And so obviously when I left Mansfield and went to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], it was like a whole other world, I mean, a whole other world that I had to, to adjust to.
Story_ID: 633459
Speaker 1: So you, first grade--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you get into school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: It was called the DeSoto Parish Training School [Mansfield, Louisiana], DPTS. And I went, well, actually I went to kindergarten, there was a lady who was a teacher for a period of time and something happened, I don't know what happened but she was let go. And so she opened a kindergarten and so I went, went, went to kindergarten there with a few other, other kids. And my, my mother [Lurline Jones Hudson] and father [Wade Hudson, Sr.] paid, you know, what they could. And then I went from there to first grade. And I was at DeSoto Parish Training School 'cause at that time, it was, the, the school went from first grade through twelfth, you know, it was all, one, one location. And, and in, in my, after the sixth grade, they built an elementary school for blacks called Johnson Elementary School [Mansfield, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Who was Johnson [DeWitt Johnson]? Who did they name it after?
Speaker 2: Johnson was one of the first principals of the school, of DeSoto Parish Training School.
Speaker 1: Black?
Speaker 2: Black. He was black. So they named it in his honor. And I went to that school for like one, one grade and then came back to DeSoto Parish Training School for my junior high school years, and then from there to high school [DeSoto High School, Mansfield, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: So during your time in, let's say junior, during your time in school before you get off to college [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who were the teachers that served as role models or mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Henderson [ph.], she was a English teacher. She was very religious but, you know, she was strict. I mean, she wouldn't let anything go, I mean, we'd, we'd, we'd turn in a paper, you know, she would like, I mean, really force you to, to, to do your best.
Speaker 1: Can I ask you to sit up?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She would force you to do, to do your best. And, and I really liked her because she, she pushed me, you know, because I was, I guess, as they would say, brighter than most of the other kids and so, you know, sometimes, you get lazy 'cause it would come, comes kind of easy, you know. And so she would really push, push us. And that's, that's the thing I remember about the system at this time, not, not any particular teacher but the system is that if they saw students who they thought could really excel and do well, they would really spend time with them. Now, I, that's the positive. Now the negative part of it is the other kids need the same kind of attention, you know. But I think they were sort of moving on the Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], you know, the Talented Tenth kind of concept that you know, take the best of the race and you're gonna push them and they would then lift the, the others. And so, you know, they spent a lot of time with the so called bright kids, you know. And they had little organizations that we belonged to for enrichment and things like that.
Speaker 1: What were the names of some of those organizations?
Speaker 2: There was a, a, a club called the, it was just called the DeSoto Club and most of the students in that club were A and B students, you know, and students who had done, done well academically, you know. And, you know, we didn't really do anything extraordinary we just came together, you know, took on projects and things like that. But I think it was their way of saying to us that we are expecting something from you, you know.
Story_ID: 633460
Speaker 1: So you said to me that church was important.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Why do you feel church was so important?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that without spirituality, black folks would be in a lot of trouble. I, I think that in order to deal with all of that segregation and the negative stuff that, that, that comes along with it, that you had to have a connection to something that was more powerful than you. And not just more powerful than you but more powerful than the people who are telling you that you're nobody. You know, because this entity that's telling you, that's more powerful than everybody, telling you that you are somebody. You know, so I think that's where your hope and your inspiration can come from, you know, once you connect that way. In addition to that, church was a place where you can be somebody. Even if, if it's in your own setting and your own environment, you can be somebody. You, when you go to church you're in that, that wooden, 'cause most of those churches during that time were like wooden frames, you know, as, you know, and, you know, a 100 people, a 150 people coming together and singing with one voice and, and, you know, one deacon praying for two hours, but praying for everybody, you know. And I can remember even before I had joined church, when I would go to church, just the, the emotions and the, my body would just tremble, I mean, just hearing the songs and how all these people sort of came together and it, it was just like one voice, you know. And it was really weird because, I don't know if you remember those Old 100ths, they used to call 'em Old 100ths, it was like a, a long metered hymn and people would like do different things but it would all blend together. I'll give you an example. Like someone would lead it and say (singing), "I heard the voice of Jesus say, come unto me and rest," ['I Heard the Voice of Jesus Say'] and everybody, "Ah, ah, ah, oh, oh," and then everybody else would, and people are doing different things. But it all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Singing) "I love the Lord, he heard my cry."
Speaker 2: Yeah, it would all blend together, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, I remember that.
Speaker 2: And, and, I mean, I would just sometimes just sit there and just tremble, man, I said this, 'cause it's just so powerful how these group of people came together as one. And also from the prayers, you know, because the deacons, and not just the deacons but members also prayed but the, the prayers were for everybody, you know, and you can just feel the power in it. And just listening to the prayers, I just, sitting in there I said I know that this prayer is connecting to the, to this all powerful God. I know that, you know, because I can just feel it, you know. And the, I would just sometimes be in awe of the, of the, of the experience, and, and just the, the, the way in that particular setting for two hours or three hours, how people just connected and became one in that, that worship experience.
Speaker 1: I haven't thought about that in years but that's a great feeling.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it really is. You know, I, I think we've lost it and we don't have it the same kind of way.
Story_ID: 633461
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they have tent revivals? Did they, you know, did that ever happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, well, yeah, yeah, because you had to put a particular time of the year that, that new members would get on what they call the mourners' bench.
Speaker 1: Mourners' bench.
Speaker 2: And that's usually in the summer, you know. And it, two week duration in most churches. Because during that time we didn't, we didn't go to church every Sunday. It was like every church had a particular Sunday that was their meeting day. At Elizabeth Baptist Church [Mansfield, Louisiana], that was the church that I belonged to, it was the third Sunday. But what that did that freed you up to go worship with other people. So we would go, on the first Sunday we would go to Gethsemane [Gethsemane Baptist Church, Mansfield, Louisiana], on the second Sunday we would go to Mount Zion [ph.], you know, on the fourth Sunday another church. So it was more like a community kind of thing and other folks would do the same thing. They would come and worship with us on the third Sunday. So it, that really helped to keep the sense of community, you know, and sharing. And so people knew what was going on at, at other churches and knew who needed help, you know.
Speaker 1: When were you, when did you get on the mourners' bench and--
Speaker 2: I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: Thirteen. And tell me the, the experience?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I was reluctant to do it because it was right in the middle of baseball season (laughter). Yeah, so I said, "Oh, no, man, and we gotta play so and so," we gotta, you know. And but anyway, I, I, I finally relented because actually it was my, my, my [maternal] grandfather's [Theodore Jones] youngest brother who really encouraged me to, to, to get on the mourners' bench and I had a lot of respect for him and he died, yeah, actually he died like a year after I joined church, he was like sixty-one and very young. But he, he took me every, every night, you know, and, and I was sitting, here I am sitting on the mourners' bench and, and during that time, you know, old folks would say, "You'll know when you got religion because something is gonna happen." You know, it's, you know, so you, so I'm sitting there waiting for this, this magnificent something to occur, you know, whether it's a big flash of lightning or something to let me know that I got it, you know. And so I waited there for, I think it was ten days so, 'cause it was Monday through Friday. And I waited for like the entire ten day duration and then on Friday, that's when I joined church. And I don't remember what happened but I know I just, I was like overcome, you know, and I just broke down and start crying and I just felt something push me to, to give the pastor my hand and that's when I, I joined. And, and I don't even remember, you know, what actually happened. I mean, and people told me you, you cried, you did blah, blah, blah but I don't remember it, I just, I remember feeling the hand of the pastor after I had walked up there. And so I joined church. And after, after that--
Speaker 1: What were you thinking the whole two, the whole ten days you were sitting there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was waiting for something, I was waiting for something to happen.
Speaker 1: Right. But you're, you know, you prayed during that whole time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I prayed.
Speaker 1: Are you praying?
Speaker 2: I, I can remember, I can remember like on weekends, I would, I would go out in my backyard and I'd look up at the stars and I would say, "Lord, you know, please show me a sign," that's what they would say, "show me a sign, you know, that I'm converted, that, that, that I've given my life to you, please, Lord," you know. And I was waiting for that special sign that people say, you know, that you get when you, when you get it. You know, now obviously I know now that (laughter) it may happen for a few people, you know, but sometimes like as Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said with him, that his conversion or his commitment to, to Christ and to his religion was a gradual thing and not some, some great, you know, happening and, (claps hands) you know, and all of a sudden everything was right with him. And so but at that time I was waiting for that, that's what all of the, the elders said, you know, was, you know, 'cause I can remember my first cousin had been on the mourners' bench for like three years in a row and she would join, give the preacher the, the, the preacher her hand, and her mother would say, "You ain't got nothing, you ain't got nothing, you know, no, I'm not gone let you be baptized, you ain't got nothing." So then, you know, she came back the next summer, the same thing, you know. So I'm, 'cause she would say, "Well, you, you, you, you didn't act any different," you know, so I'm, I'm waiting for this, this, this great thing to happen to me, you know, to let me know that that I got it, you know.
Story_ID: 633462
Speaker 1: But anyway I joined the, the, the, the last, the last day. But once I joined, I really became very active in the church [Elizabeth Baptist Church, Mansfield, Louisiana]. It was a small church and--
Speaker 2: But you were baptized?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was baptized, I was baptized (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the church had a tub, or did, did they do it in the river?
Speaker 1: No, no, we, no, we went to a pond, there was like a pond. 'Cause the church was like, as we would say then, in the country, you know, 'cause we lived in, in Mansfield [Louisiana] in the, in the town. And the church was about five, six miles from, from, from where we lived. And there was a pond and--
Speaker 2: Who made your baptism robe?
Speaker 1: I think my [paternal] grandmother [Geneva Johnson (ph.)]. I think my grandmother did.
Speaker 2: It's white, she made it out of a sheet (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's white, yep, yep, yep. And I can remember after, 'cause, 'cause what happens like for, for baptism, no matter what church you belong to, other church members from other churches come and they are a part of that celebration, you know, and that's, they bring all kind of food--
Speaker 2: Can you tell me, just take me, like set up that day, like that setting for me at the pond and what it, you know, who is there, what it looked like? Do people picnic? Do, do choirs sings because you're not in the building?
Speaker 1: Right. Well, what happens is, in the morning, I mean, very early people start bringing their foods and stuff and, and setting up tables and preparing for the afternoon because, I mean, they would cook a lot of food, cakes and pies and collard greens and, and ribs, and, you know, all kind of stuff. And not just members of our church but other members too would do the same thing because everybody knew everybody, even, even though we may have belonged to different churches. And they would have Sunday school in the morning. Then after Sunday school they would then prepare to, for baptism. So baptism actually occurred before the church service itself. So because after baptism then they brought you in to get the right hand of fellowship. So everybody is there around the pool, you can just, I mean, there was, there was a picture of a, of a baptism, I think, it must have been taken in 1920s or whatever, it, it, it's, that's what it's like. I mean, all these black folks around the pool, around the, the, the pond and there are three or four deacons who walk out in the midst of the pond, you know, with you and the pastor and they escort you out and then the pastor then is the one who baptize you, you know, and--
Speaker 2: And what did he say?
Speaker 1: Well, he asked my name just for reinforcement, you know, and I gave him my name. And then he said, "My brother," you know, "I baptize you in the name of the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit," and (makes noise) brought me back up. And it was, I think it was like four or five others who were baptized along with me.
Speaker 2: Did anyone in the family shout at the time?
Speaker 1: Oh, actually what happened was, not at the, not at the pond, but when we had the, the right hand of fellowship after the sermon and everything was, was over and we were in line, all of the new converted members were in line and, and the church leadership would then shake hands with the, the new members first and then the rest of the congregation and other visitors. But my grandmother, when my, my grandmother got there, she shook my hand and all of a sudden she leapt, I mean, like it must have been four feet off the ground and she just kept doing it, just kept doing it, she was just, just was happy. And, and beating me, so they had to come and get her off of me and she was just so happy, you know. 'Cause I had a little, little welt (laughter) where she had punched me in the face. My mother [Lurline Jones Hudson] did a lot of crying, you know, but my grandmother really, I mean, she just, and actually, you know, and, and during the, the sermon, the pastor of my church, was Reverend Bass, M.B. Bass, and I had a really good relationship with him. In fact, he, he thought that I would become a, a preacher too, a minister, and he was encouraging me to do it. And he, he was also one of those people in Mansfield who told me, you know, you're gonna be somebody special, you know, the Lord got something for you, you know.
Story_ID: 633463
Speaker 1: The reverend [M.B. Bass] wanted you to become a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) pastor but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he thought that, that I had the makings of, of being a really good, a good minister. 'Cause when I was, after I joined church, I became very involved in the church and even though I was like in my teens, they asked me to become the assistant secretary. Now, at this time the women didn't really have any major roles in the church, it was the men did all of the, the work. The women were ushers and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And the mothers of the church.
Speaker 2: The mothers of the church. And so that meant that oftentimes there were men in positions who may not be well qualified to, to carry out their responsibilities. And some of these guys had been in the position for years. So anyway, they brought me in to become the assistant secretary to help Mr. Eddie Jones [ph.], that was his name, Mr. Eddie Jones. He could barely write his name but he was the secretary, you know, of the church [Elizabeth Baptist Church, Mansfield, Louisiana]. And so basically what he, his responsibility was to keep records, obviously he had not been keeping any records. So I came in and so, assisted him and started keeping records and so they, they ended up really having to come to me because I knew what was going on because I was keeping the records and he really didn't. They would ask--
Speaker 1: Did you write that stuff down?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a little, I got a ledger, you know, and, and kept track of, you know, what we were paying out and all of that stuff. And, you know, and I, when they asked me to become the assistant secretary, you know, I, I, I accepted it but then after a year or so, they asked me to replace him and that was a very, very tough situation for me 'cause I did not want to replace him, 'cause I had a lot of respect for our elders. And also even though I knew that Mr. Eddie was not proficient and he could not really perform, I, he had been there for years, you know, and, and, and he was on time and had tried his best, you know, he just wasn't capable. So it was a awkward situation for me and I--
Speaker 1: Did you do it?
Speaker 2: I, I, well, I really had no choice because he, he came to me and, and told me, he said, you know, "Little Hudson [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson]," he said, you know, you, you know, "go ahead and do it, you know, it's, it's, I've, I've been doing this for years and the Lord been good to me and blah, blah, blah," you know, so he gave me his blessing, so I went ahead and, and, and did it, you know.
Story_ID: 633464
Speaker 1: What did you think you would become or what did you wanna become at that time? Did you think you'd become a preacher?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Baseball player?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a baseball player (laughter). Yep, 'cause Ernie, [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks was, was my role model. He played shortstop for the Chicago Cubs. And, I mean, I used to, any, any time a game came on and he played I would--
Speaker 1: And this is on the radio?
Speaker 2: Or TV too.
Speaker 1: TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, TV (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had a TV?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you get a TV?
Speaker 2: Off and on, you know, we would have a TV for six months and it would play out and we may go a year or two without a TV and then they'll get another one. But my [paternal] grandmother [Geneva Johnson (ph.)] always had a TV. I can remember when we were like seven, eight, all of the kids in the community would go to her house and watch television after school, you know. 'Cause they had these old westerns, Ken Maynard, Lash LaRue, I mean, there are, it was, those movies would come on after school like around four o'clock and we would all go and, and watch, watch the, the movies on her television.
Speaker 1: When did it change you wanting to become a baseball player or, or realizing that maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it really didn't change until, actually, I think, my sophomore year in high school [DeSoto High School, Mansfield, Louisiana], I--
Speaker 1: Let's pause for a moment.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: But my sophomore year in high school I had a toothache and it had been bothering me for like two or three days and my mother [Lurline Jones Hudson] finally took me to a dentist, white dentist, no black dentist in, in town. And actually what had happened, I had an, an abscess and he pulled it. And I went home, my mother took me back home. And the next morning my whole face was just blown up, you know. And they rushed me to the, to the hospital. And actually I stayed in the hospital for three weeks or, or more. And they said that, you know, I, I, I, another day I would have been gone because all that stuff had gotten into my system, my blood stream, you know. And I can remember when, soon as they took me to the hospital, they put me in a big tub of water and that water started turning colors and stuff, I mean, I was so out of it, I can't remember half of this stuff, my mother, you know, told me about it. But anyway I stayed in the hospital for three weeks so I--
Speaker 2: Well, you had a staph infection that had gone into your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I, I, you know, honestly, I, I, it must have been a staph infection. I really don't know, I mean, 'cause they, they can't, they couldn't explain it. My mother couldn't explain it in, in medical terms. But what they would say is that, you know, that my blood had gotten poisoned from, you know, the, the infection that was in my gum and it had gotten into my bloodstream. But anyway so I was in the hospital for like three weeks and when I came out, the next day we had a game, a baseball game. And I was just so into baseball I'm gonna play and obviously I was just weak as, you know, I couldn't but I tried to play. And, and the coach was more concerned about winning the game. And I remember a, a ball was hit to me and again, I'm trying to, you know, I'm, I'm just out of the hospital, and instead of going for a double play, which I should have gone to second and then from second to first, I just threw to first base. And so he started yelling at me and all that stuff and I said well, I don't wanna take this so I walked off the field. And so that night I started thinking, you know, do I really wanna play, be a baseball player. And, and that's, you know, when I really started thinking about writing as a profession, although I didn't know any writer, you know.
Speaker 2: Why would you think of writing next (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, because, you know, since I was, you know, five or six years of age I would, I would, I used to write poems and short stories and, and plays and things like that. I've always, I've always, you know, written stuff, you know.
Speaker 2: What were you writing about?
Speaker 1: Basically about my life in Mansfield [Louisiana] and about the people I knew in Mansfield, about my experiences. And I had been doing that for, you know, since I was a little kid.
Story_ID: 633465
Speaker 1: Did you have any racial experiences when you were growing up in Mansfield [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, other white kids would, would obviously pick on us if we were alone or if there were like more of them than of us, you know, name calling and things like that.
Speaker 1: When did you realize there was a distinction between black and white and racism existed and one group of people were oppressed by the other group?
Speaker 2: Probably, that's a good question. 'Cause when you're born into a system and a structure that's already in place, you sort of just become a part of it yourself. And I think what has to happen, you have to recognize that it's something wrong with this picture, you know. I mean, something is terribly wrong with it. And, and I think that that probably happened for me probably around eight, nine years of age. I read autobiography of, I mean, a biography of, of Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver and, you know, and then I started to relate. And, and those were really the only black books in our library, 'cause, you know, the, the, the school system itself was run by whites and all the decisions about what books and what the curriculum would be was determined by whites and not by blacks so they kept the black books out. And the books that we actually had in our library, even the school books were hand-me-downs, you know, passed down from the white school. But anyway those two books were in the library and I read, and I think that's when I really started to, to, to identify with something beyond Mansfield, you know. Because if you're locked into thinking that Mansfield is your existence, you know, and, and there are people in Mansfield today who are locked into that kind of thinking, then you accept where you are, you know. And so I think I started to dream. The other thing that really, I can remember reading even those, those, those books that, that, that whites had chosen for us, I can remember reading about, particularly in the literature books, about what life was like for other kids in other parts of the world and I started to identify with, with that too, you know. How kids went to school in, in China or how kids went to school in the Netherlands, you know, or what they were doing and I started seeing myself not just as, as someone growing up only in Mansfield but recognizing that other people were growing up, other kids were growing up around the world and doing different things and, and had opportunities that I couldn't see in, in Mansfield. And so I, I, I really started to examine what was happening. And, and even as, as I know, I think, I was sharing with, with Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson], I can remember, I must have been like, this was 1960 when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected, I wrote a letter to Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] who was then the attorney, attorney general, basically describing what life was like for black folks in Mansfield and the need to do something about it and he actually responded. And he said that, you know, his brother, he and his brother are concerned about the plights of all Americans, blah, blah, blah and we are definitely, you know, trying to do our best to change things and, you know, and he responded. I can remember 'The Mickey Mouse-' Walt Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] had 'The Mickey Mouse Club' and, and it used to come on every evening after school, and they used to have these little thirty minute mini movies, you know, with, with Spin and Marty and all that. And I used to watch that stuff. And I wrote a letter, again, I must have been twelve, thirteen, I wrote a letter to Walt Disney and I got the address from those, those movie magazines that used to be, proliferated the, the area and complained, you know, asking why weren't there black characters, you know, and got a response too. I mean, they didn't, they didn't respond to my query but they sent me a whole lot of junk, (laughter) you know. So, you know, nobody else was doing that, I mean, in Mansfield. I mean, there were--teachers, nobody else was questioning what was happening and I wasn't around anybody, it just seemed to me that it's something wrong with this picture, you know.
Story_ID: 633466
Speaker 1: Where did you get the idea that the pen was mightier than the sword?
Speaker 2: I really don't know. To be honest with you, I really don't know.
Speaker 1: But if you just try to think, if you had to think about it, it's very young for you to, to conceive of writing these people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I can't think of anybody else who did that. Now--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it, it may be, you know, maybe, I, I really don't, I mean, I, I can't really, 'cause there was, there was nobody else who was--
Speaker 1: Because it was second to, only to baseball?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah. So you loved writing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --only second, you know, to baseball.
Speaker 2: Well, I hear, I hear you, I, I think that, that, that, that my writing was or is a gift from God. I think that's, and when we speak to kids, what we always say to them is that, each of you has been given some very special gifts or talents. And it's your responsibility and it's our responsibility as adults and as parents and as teachers to help you find out what it is or what they are, you know. We all, we all have it, we all have something special that we can do that I, that I believe because as a religious person that God gave us, you know. I don't think anybody would be born with not, with the ability to not do anything, you know. So I think writing was, was one of the, the gifts that that I was given. And, and that I--
Speaker 1: But then also, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And, and, and I think I recognized it early on.
Speaker 1: And you recognized, go, what else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I recognized it early on. But also I recognized that that words could change things and move people and, and, and promote ideas and things like that. And, and because I, I, I actually wrote stories and, and stapled them together, stapled the pages together and I sold 'em, you know, what I'm saying, you know, so people in the community would, would give you a dollar, you know. Oh, yeah, this is good, this is good, you know. So I knew, you know, that the written word could motivate and inspire and could educate and but also I, I guess, I recognized that you can make a few dollars too (laughter) doing that, yeah.
Speaker 1: That there was commerce attached to it.
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, exactly. So but I don't know, you know, where, because during this time and I had not ever heard of Langston Hughes or, or none of the, the, the, the, the outstanding writers, W.E.B. Du Bois, I mean, I couldn't find those books, I mean, Mansfield [Louisiana] was almost like growing up in, on the moon really.
Speaker 1: Did you get the, did the family get the newspaper? Shreveport [Louisiana] would have been the town with the newspaper right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, but, but there, there was, yeah, the Shreveport Times was, but it was a, it was a white newspaper.
Speaker 1: Was--but they had black--
Speaker 2: They had, they had, they had, they had the, The Shreveport Sun, well, but they didn't deal with any issues though. I mean, basically what, what, what the newspaper did, the black newspaper, it was a weekly, they dealt with, with, with church, church news, they never really dealt with any, any particular issues that I can recall, you know.
Speaker 1: But did you read the paper often?
Speaker 2: Oh, I read the paper. Matter of fact, I used to submit stuff to The Shreveport Sun and they, they published a lot of the stuff. I would write articles about baseball games and stuff and they would, they would actually, I mean, one of the headings was, "The Hudson boys lead So and So to, to victory," you know, and that was a story I wrote. And I, I did a lot of that. But it, they didn't really deal with any issues 'cause they probably wouldn't have stayed in business, I mean, they probably wouldn't have stayed in business that long. Now, it was somewhat different in like Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and, and New Orleans [Louisiana], now, we're talking about the northern part of the state which is basically agrarian, I mean, it's just rural. Mansfield is, I mean, Shreveport is now a rather large city but during this time Shreveport (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was small.
Speaker 2: --had less than a hundred thousand people.
Story_ID: 633467
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school and was it DeSoto Training--
Speaker 2: DeSoto High School [Mansfield, Louisiana]. It, it had become DeSoto High School then 'cause they separated the high school from the elementary school [DeSoto Parish Training School, Mansfield, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: What year did you get, receive--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: And so in '64 [1964] you received your diploma?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who helped you get into school and who planted the seed early on to say that you were gonna go beyond the twelfth grade, you were gonna continue your education?
Speaker 2: Well, I was told from elementary school on up, you know, that that I had to go to college. I mean, it was, it was expected because I was one of the bright kids, you know. I had a future, I had potential, you know, so it was a foregone conclusion that I was going to school. Now, I don't think people thought about how it would be financed (laughter) but--
Speaker 1: Because there was no Pell Grant during that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, but there were, there were loans though.
Speaker 1: There were loans.
Speaker 2: You had the national student loans, the National Defense Loan [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program], and, and I got some scholarships. But, you know, every, everybody, I mean, even, even 'cause I can remember the day before I was to leave to go to school, go to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], a number of like folks in, in Mansfield [Louisiana], black folks in Mansfield, came and, you know, they may have had two or three dollars in their pocket well, they would push it in my hand, I would say, "No, no, no." "No, you, you, you go, we want you to be somebody." So that was always sort of drummed into me, you know, that you were gonna be somebody. So how do you be somebody? You gotta go to college, you know. You've been, you know, blessed with special gifts, so, how do you take advantage of those gifts? You have to go further with your education. And teachers obviously encouraged that too. And I had the opportunity in, in Louisiana during this time, they had what they call rallies, they were really academic competitions in different disciplines between schools. And, and it started from ninth grade up through the twelfth grade. And they had it in music and history, current events, math. And we would all compete, we would compete on a regional basis, you know, like the northwest, all the high schools would, would compete. And then the winners, first and second place winners would then go to the national, to the state in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] at Southern. So I had a chance to go to Southern a couple times in high school. So I saw, you know, what it was like to be on a college campus and I said oh, yeah, this is where I wanna, (laughter) where I wanna go, you know. So but, but my seventh grade teacher Mr. Blow [ph.] lived across the street from, from us and he encouraged me too. Reverend Collins [ph.] the, the, my pastor also encouraged us, encouraged me and he actually wrote a letter of recommendation for me. 'Cause during that time you had to send your photograph and (laughter) all that stuff. And Mr. Blow as well. Another lady who really had a lot of influence on me was my current event teacher, Mrs. Collins [ph.]. 'Cause I won first place and she was my coach.
Speaker 1: First place in?
Speaker 2: In current events.
Speaker 1: Did you write about 'em or speak about 'em?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, what it is, it's like they ask you, they give you a bevy of questions like maybe fifty questions about current event, things in current events and--
Speaker 1: So it's like trivia questions?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well--
Speaker 1: Like--
Speaker 2: --it's really not trivia because the questions are all based on what's happening at that particular time in the world. And I don't know if they have current event courses anymore because at that time they felt that you should really be aware of what's happening in the world around you. And so they had courses where they actually talked about, you know, during that time, you know, you're talking the '60s [1960s], you know, what's, what's, what's happening with space travel and, you know, the, with Russia, and, I mean, and, and so you had to know the names of all these folks, Khrushchev [Nikita Khrushchev] and, you know. Anyway, I won first place and so she really spent a lot of time 'cause I would go to her house and then she would quiz me and, and that kind of thing. And, and she continued to encourage me, even after that. And, I think, there were probably, we had a 125 students who graduated but I think about maybe twenty, twenty-five went to college. But those who went to college they are all, are doing very well.
Story_ID: 633468
Speaker 1: So when you arrive at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], do you know what you're going to major in? Do you think at this time you gonna (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, by the time--by the time I had, well, I graduated from high school [DeSoto High School, Mansfield, Louisiana], I wanted to be a lawyer, yeah, I wanted to be a lawyer. And in my freshmen year at Southern, I, I knew, I really wanted to be a lawyer then because then I started reading all these books that I didn't know existed (laughter). And reading about all these, these great black folks who had done all these wonderful things, so. And so I wanted to make a difference so I thought that becoming a lawyer would, would be a way. And also I think I recognized, you know, too in Mansfield [Louisiana] that of, of, of the, one of the greatest needs in that town was to have a black lawyer who looked out for the interest of, of the folks there, you know. Of course, when I got to Southern, in, in '64 [1964], September of '64 [1964], this was like right in the, at the height of the civil rights struggle and the, and the, the student movement had started to really pick up steam and stuff. So I came right in the midst of all of that stuff so I forgot about becoming a lawyer (laughter) and then became a, a civil right activist. So much so that I actually just really forgot about my, my, my matriculating in college and all of my focus was like on voter registration drives and going to Mossville, Mississippi, you know, just conducting voter registration drives in upstate Louisiana, Jonesboro [Louisiana], Bogalusa, Louisiana, all these towns that were really in the news at the time.
Story_ID: 633469
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about your very first civil rights protest or, or ral- you know, event that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My, my--
Speaker 1: --what was the turning point?
Speaker 2: The very first activity that I was involved in as far as civil rights was in 1964 Nils Douglas, a lawyer, who lived in, in New Orleans [Louisiana], mounted a campaign to run for mayor of New Orleans which was a, I mean, it was a big deal during this time. And so they were looking for students, anybody who would come in and, and help register black folks to vote, you know. And so that must have been October or so. So they took a bus load of us to New Orleans and, and they took us to this, (laughter) the black community and the, the area where they, they dropped me off was called the Bluegoose [sic.] area. And, man, that was a frightening experience. I'm knocking on these, knocking on doors of these folks and these guys coming in with no teeth and (laughter) toothpick, "What do you want? Why do I wanna vote?" You know, so I wasn't equipped to deal with that stuff, you know. But, but that was my, my first experience, you know. And, and you have to really explain the importance of voting to people who have never voted and, and probably many of them didn't care about voting at that particular time because you're talking, you, you're talking about only a handful of black folks in this country who can, in the South who could vote around, you know, at that time. So, a lot of people just had given up hope, you know. So here I am like just turned eighteen, you know, and I'm trying to explain why it's important to register to vote and to fill out this form and all that stuff, man so. But it was a learning experience for me. But that was my first foray into, to, to civil rights activities at that time.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you think about your like life and the likelihood that something could happen to you when, you know, it happened to those three students [James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner] in Mississippi for registering voters?
Speaker 2: As we, you know, as we moved from, from, from that project 'cause Nils Douglas obviously didn't, didn't win, but he did succeed in getting more blacks registered to vote, which I think was the primary purpose anyway. Then we started going to these small towns like Mansfield [Louisiana] and registering people to vote. And it was, it was frightening. I mean, you know, at any time, you know, you could be shot, you know. And what they would actually do, you know, they would drop you off in a particular location sometime in twos, often times by yourself, and here you are knocking on doors, you know, in some country, on some country road, you know, you may go, you know, a half a mile before you get to a, to a house, you know. But that work had to be done, you know.
Speaker 1: So take me through one of those, a typical day. And, and when you say they, who were they who, that was organizing this, you know, the different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, different organizations. I was a member of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] for a period of time. I was also a member of an organization that we formed ourselves in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. And--
Speaker 1: What was the name of that organization?
Speaker 2: SOUL, Society for Unity--(whispers) S-O, a Society for Opportunity, Unity and Leadership [Society for Opportunity, Unity and Leadership, Inc.]. And but before that, you know, I was in SCLC, with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] for a short, short period of time. And there were so many different civil rights organizations that were doing things, you know, and they were, you know, Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] was a, was a big, big school, you know, so they would come and, you know, and we would just, we would sign up and go, you know.
Speaker 1: Like how many students at Southern?
Speaker 2: At that time Southern probably had an enrollment of maybe nine thousand students, eight, nine thousand.
Story_ID: 633470
Speaker 1: At Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you were talking about civil rights.
Speaker 2: Right, right. You know, during this time, I mean, Southern was a hotbed of, of, of civil right activities. I mean--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Rap, Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Rap Brown was a student there but he, he left the year before I came to Southern, but '63 [1963] but, you know, we knew who Rap was. And people like Ronnie Moore and, and Dave Dennis.
Speaker 1: Now, now just for a second, just because this question is on my mind.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: At this time you're at Southern, you're a freshman and you're heavily involved in the civil rights.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did your parents think about what you were doing and what was going on?
Speaker 2: They didn't really know.
Speaker 1: They didn't know.
Speaker 2: They really--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't know, you know. And when I came home for the Christmas vacation I had grown this big Afro and so soon as I came home, I mean, my mother said, "Unh-uh, no, you can't wear your hair like that." I said, "Uh-huh, I am gonna wear my hair like this." So it, it was for a couple of days it was very, very tense. And so she kept pushing and talking about others, other young men who had come home from college, you know, some of my, my friends and how neatly trimmed their hair was and all that. And I said, "Okay, well, you have a choice, you know, you, I can stay here and finish enjoying the holidays or I can just go," you know. And I said, "Well, if you want me to go, then I'll, you know, I'll leave. I'm embarrassing you with my hair being, you know, with an Afro or whatever." 'Cause listen, when I came to Mansfield [Louisiana] with that Afro nobody else had ever done that. It was, it was a big deal because people were talking about it in Mansfield. "Have you seen Lurline [Lurline Jones Hudson] and Wade's [Wade Hudson, Sr.] boy? His hair is long as my arm," you know. So it was a big deal, you know. And so my mother was embarrassed.
Speaker 1: What did that mean for you, the Afro?
Speaker 2: It, it was a statement of recognizing that I was beginning a journey to know who I really was. And also it was saying, I think, that like that that young man who stood up to the cops when I was a little kid, that I'm, I'm establishing my manhood and also my independence from my family and my right to, to determine my own future and my own direction. So it was, it was a lot of things involved in that, you know, because, you know, my mother had, she wanted me to be a teacher, you know, and she had already talked to, you know, some of the principals of the schools and trying to arrange for me to (laughter) come back to Mansfield and become a teacher, you know, that was her, her big wish for me. I didn't wanna, wanna be a teacher. So it, it, you know, it was, it was, you know, recognizing that my, my, my journey to define who, who I, who I am and who I want to be, you know, who I want to become.
Speaker 1: What about some of the people you were hanging out with who had gone, you know, the, what about the college students who had come back with the neatly trimmed hair--
Speaker 2: Oh, I, they, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) those people--
Speaker 2: Oh, they, they--
Speaker 1: --were they as radical as you were in the movement?
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no, I was, I stood out, man, 'cause, you know, they were going to get an education and, and, and many of them defended, you know, the government, they defended some of the policies that were actually causing pain for, for black people, you know. And I can remember getting into a lot of heated discussions and I would be the only one who would be taking our, what I would consider at that time a pro-black position on things, you know.
Story_ID: 633471
Speaker 1: Well, at that time were you called black or were you Negro still or colored? How did you identify yourself (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was black, it was black then, you know, it was black.
Speaker 1: It was black.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: So this is the start of the Black Power movement?
Speaker 2: The Black Power movement started about what, what, well, actually, you know, with Malcolm X, you know, that was really the beginning but the Black Power movement even goes further than that, it goes back to the 1800s. We've gone through so many inclinations [sic. iterations] of, of who we are, and, and what we need to do.
Speaker 1: But who did you see with long, who were you identifying with, with an Afro?
Speaker 2: There at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], at Southern.
Speaker 1: But what group of people? Were they the militant? Were you nonviolent? Were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at Southern there were different, there were some who were militant and some who just wore their hair like that because of style.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You know, they, they really didn't take any--
Speaker 1: But pro-black sort of indicates somewhat of a militant--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --personality.
Speaker 2: Well, that, that came from the folks, I was, I was around, my circle of friends at Southern when I, when I, after I had been at Southern for maybe three weeks or so, I recognized that most of the students, I, I really didn't have that much in common with them in terms of where I wanted to go with my life and what I wanted to learn, you know, what I wanted to know about myself and about my people and about the world. They weren't interested in that stuff so I would gravitate to, to people who were reading books and, 'cause a lot of these books I never, you know, the books that--
Speaker 1: Reading books about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, like 'Native Son,' you know, Richard Wright, I mean, Ralph Ellison, the 'Invisible Man,' all these wonderful books that had been written years and years before, didn't exist for me. And, and so some of these, some of these students (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So those books awakened something in you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, some of these students who were from New York [New York] and L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I mean, they, they knew about these books, you know, and many of them had read them.
Speaker 1: But what did the church think about this new person you were becoming?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, after my, after I went to Southern, to be honest with you, I, I became disenchanted with the church because I, when I said, and when I went back to Mansfield [Louisiana] with my hair and, and I sort of stood out, I mean, people in Mansfield also, now this is during the time that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was really, you know, very, very visible, there were folks who, and many of black people who disagreed with him, you know. I mean, we, we revere Dr. King now 'cause he's dead but (laughter) but, but during this period of time I would venture to say that more black people disagreed with him than agreed with him. And I can remember having long conversations with my mother [Lurline Jones Hudson], my, my father [Wade Hudson, Sr.] and teachers and--, "He's just a troublemaker," or even other preachers who would say things like, you know, "Can't he get his own church," why, you know, that is not what a preacher is supposed to do, you know. So he, and that troubled him, you know, because, I mean, he's written about it and, and other writers, you know, Taylor Branch, you know, in his books about, about the Kings, written about it. And 'cause he felt that he wasn't appreciated by his, by his people, you know, too. So, so, you know, it was, it was, it was really tough because, I mean, now we take a lot of this stuff for granted but people had to take stands and push positions.
Story_ID: 633472
Speaker 1: Were there ever any like sit-ins at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was involved in the student movement there. Southern has a history because in 1960, '61 [1961], the students at Southern, well, let me go back. See Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and, has a history of, of, of black protests. The, the Montgomery boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott] got its model from a boycott that, a bus boycott that was done in Baton Rouge.
Speaker 1: What was that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) by T.J. Jemison.
Speaker 1: T.J. who?
Speaker 2: Jemison, J-E-M-I-S-O-N. He led a, a boycott in Baton Rouge before and this was like a couple of years before Montgomery. And actually Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had conversations with some of the leaders of that boycott to the, so he could determine how he should lead the Montgomery boycott. So Baton Rouge was in the forefront, a lot of that stuff people don't know about that that that history. The, so in '61 [1961] because Southern, I mean, Baton Rouge is, was a middle sized town and maybe a couple hundred thousand people but it was the, Southern was a big influence, you know, the university because you had all these professors and who had read everything and, you know, they, they lived in the, in the communities, you know, so they shared with the community, so people were inspired. And you had some aggressive really forward thinking ministers like T.J. Jemison at that particular time. So in 1960 the students at Southern had a major, major protest. They marched on the state capitol [Louisiana State Capitol] in Baton Rouge. And all of the kids, I mean, the vast majority of the students stayed, you know, didn't go to class, they marched, they protest. And the way the, the school, the, the administration dealt with that, they picked the wrong time first of all, 'cause they, they did it close to the Christmas vacation. And so when the Christmas vacation came, the university just arbitrarily said, "You're not coming back, you're not coming back, you can't come back, you can't come back." And they, they stayed, they had cops and university officials at the entrance of the campus to make sure that those students who had been expelled couldn't come back on campus. And that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about that major protest though, the, the, the march.
Speaker 2: They marched, they marched on, they marched on the state capitol protesting discrimination.
Speaker 1: Is the state capitol that big, tall building?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: The skinny tall one?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep. Well, it's probably changed. I mean, because Baton Rouge is like almost metropolitan now so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I mean, I'm just thinking about some old pictures I've seen--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's it.
Speaker 1: --of students.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: And that's probably what that was, all those students were there--
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: --protesting.
Speaker 2: Right. Now that was in 1960 but we also marched on the state capitol too in '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 633473
Speaker 1: We had another major demonstration in '67 [1967] where some students were killed. And every time we've had a major demonstration on campus, the, the, the cops would come in, you know, or the, or the National Guard or the state troopers came in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) well, I'll, I'll ask two, two more questions--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --then we can, I could spend all day talking about this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But what were, what did you wanna get out of all of this?
Speaker 1: Well, the first demonstration that we had at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], we, we started by sitting in the administration office. We felt that Southern was being shortchanged because Southern is a state supported school. And in terms of the, the, the, the funding that it got at that time compared to LSU [Louisiana State University], which was the white university in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], was like peanuts, you know. And we also wanted courses that reflected the black experience as well. And we wanted the, because most of the decisions that were made at Southern were made by the folks in Baton Rouge, you know, the white people. And we said, listen, you know, we want to empower our leaders here at Southern, you know, the President Clark [Felton Grandison Clark] and all those folks, they would go and, you know, to the governor or, or the chancellor, you know, to get permission to do whatever they had to do, you know. And, and so they had no, no power. And we were actually protesting to, to empower them as well, you know. But they fought us hook, line, and sinker because, you know, the, the, the history of black colleges [HBCUs], particularly state supported colleges, was that once you got there, you know, these administrators were your parents and you, what's, what's the term they used? The, the, the, the, the, the Latin term, in loco parentis, they became your parents, you know. And, and the structure at these black colleges were very, very--
Speaker 2: Conservative?
Speaker 1: Very conservative. You know, and they had laid out or mapped out a structure that they felt would develop good Negroes, you know, who would become professional but, you know, but wouldn't, wouldn't buck the system, you know. Who knew their place, you know, and, and if you did that you could, you know, do well, you know, within certain bounds, you know, and that's what they prepared students for. And so we said listen, and, and also what they did too, the campus and even the community where the professors lived were like apart from the rest of the community. So Southern was set up like a little small town and Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] which was like the slums, which was across the tracks, they didn't want anybody from Scotlandville on the campus, so there was a disconnect and, and, and a deliberate disconnect. And we were saying, look, look, we are one community, we should be helping these people become better, you know, rather than separating ourselves. So those are some of the things that we, we had put on the table. But to the administration and also to, you know, the, the leaders of the state and the city, the governments, we were troublemakers. We, we, we, we are upsetting the apple cart, you know, everything was running smoothly until, until you guys coming in with this junk.
Story_ID: 633474
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you ever arrested?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yep, yep. That's a long story (laughter).
Speaker 1: Civil disobedience?
Speaker 2: Well, what, the organization that we formed, I told you earlier SOUL [Society for Opportunity, Unity and Leadership, Inc.], S-O-U-L, we, basically, we had set up a, a breakfast program for children, we had some tutorial programs for children.
Speaker 1: So you were like the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, similar, similar. Yeah, we modeled, actually we modeled that program after the Black Panthers' program 'cause that was, they was, they were actually on the way then. But anyway the--
Speaker 1: And you were helping that community across the street then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Scotlandville [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: I mean, across the tracks in Scotlandville?
Speaker 2: And in fact that we were, we had our office in Scotlandville and most of the folks that we helped were in Scotlandville and the children came, you know, 'cause, you know, it was just like today, man, the kids would go to school empty stomachs and stuff.
Speaker 1: Hungry, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, so, we, we tried to. But--
Speaker 1: So you were feeding people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --teaching people--
Speaker 2: Tutorial--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teaching black history classes, promoting self-esteem, you know, helping kids feel good about who they, who they are. Voter registration campaigns and things like that, supporting candidates, black candidates who were brave enough to, to run for office. But so what happened was, I mean, we were getting a lot of attention, a lot of news coverage and all of that so the founding fathers of the City of Baton Rouge [Louisiana] decided that we gotta get rid of these guys. So they sent a, a guy in to entrap us and that's, that's what, you know, the, the COINTELPRO [Counterintelligence Program], the, the, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] program that was launched by, what's the guy's name of the FBI? You know, who I'm talking about Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson], the FBI, the head of the FBI?
Speaker 1: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): J. Edgar Hoover.
Speaker 2: J. Edgar Hoover. The way they, the way they dismantled a lot of black organizations was to send infiltrators in to manipulate the programs and to set people up and they did that a lot. So a lot of the guys who were a part of organizations were actually working for sometimes city government, sometimes the FBI, you know, sometimes other state agencies. And, and they did a good job of setting these organizations and individuals up for confrontations with the cops and a whole lot of other things, you know. And--
Speaker 1: So what happened then with SOUL (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So with this, in this particular case, they sent this guy in--
Speaker 1: Do you know who the guy was?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And what they, they, his--
Speaker 1: Can you say his name?
Speaker 2: His name, they called him Tiny Tim [James Moore]. And what he did, he had taped, a tape in his car, a tape recorder in his car, so he would try to get us in his car and, and hold these discussions and, and he would like suggest things like well, we need to get rid of, the mayor of Baton Rouge at the time was Woody Dumas, he said, "Well, we need to get rid of Woody Dumas, what y'all think about that," you know. And, and so he had a whole lot of tapes. There were a couple of things that Frank Stewart was one of my partners.
Speaker 1: Who is Frank Stewart?
Speaker 2: Frank Stewart was actually the president of SOUL at this time. I was a vice president. And so he was arrested, I was arrested, another--
Speaker 1: But you were arrested for conspiracy to--
Speaker 2: Conspiracy to, to commit murder--
Speaker 1: --to commit murder.
Speaker 2: To commit murder of, to murder the, the mayor, the chief of police, the director of public transportation, it's, they had about five or six, I mean, I could just see them sitting there saying, I gotta get my name in, I gotta get my name in there, you know. So they had about five or six people that say we had conspired to kill and we had like a hit list of, of, of getting these people. And so they arrested me, Frank Stewart, and another gentleman, Alphonse Snedecor who was a Vietnam vet.
Speaker 1: Spell his last name.
Speaker 2: Oh, S-T-D-E-C-O-R--S-T-E-D-E-C-O-R [sic.], Alphonse. And he had a lot of problems because he came--
Speaker 1: What kind of problems?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he had been in Vietnam [Vietnam War], he had killed a lot of Vietnamese and he was angry, he was a angry, he had a lot of black rage, you know. And when he came back, I mean, there, there were a lot of, of black G.I.s who came back from Vietnam who were like, I mean, that were like so militant, we would pale in comparison to those guys. They wanted to, they wanted to blow (laughter) up the, the country, you know.
Speaker 1: So name those people again. It was Wade [HistoryMaker Wade Hudson], you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frank Stewart, yeah, me, Frank Stewart, and Alphonse Snedecor.
Speaker 1: Only the three of you?
Speaker 2: There was three of us, right. And they ended up calling us the Baton Rouge three.
Story_ID: 633475
Speaker 1: But anyway to make a long story short--
Speaker 2: Well, you can make it a little longer.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, Alphonse [Alphonse Snedecor], actually had said a lot of stuff that was captured on tape.
Speaker 2: But it was just his rage.
Speaker 1: But he, that's exactly right. They said well, it was more than that. And Alphonse had a major, major problem.
Speaker 2: He was crazy?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was his major problem?
Speaker 1: See, see during, during, during this time, man, there were some, there were some, some young blacks who, who embraced the struggle so, so much that that it became them, you know, and they couldn't really separate themselves from the struggle. And, and, for example, a friend of ours, hijacked a plane, you know.
Speaker 2: Who was that friend?
Speaker 1: What's his name? Hm, give me a couple of minutes. We used to call him Hip Dude [ph.]. But what's Hip Dude's name?
Speaker 2: Hip Dude is good enough.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, he, he and he was a, he was enraged, man, and so much so like--
Speaker 2: How could he hijack a plane though?
Speaker 1: He did it, he just, he just, this is like in the '60s [1960s], man, so he just walked up, put a gun to the, the pilot's head and said take me to Cuba.
Speaker 2: (Gasps).
Speaker 1: He went to Cuba. And he was there for years and years. I mean, I think he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before they got him back?
Speaker 1: I think, I think, I think he finally came back because of his mother's death or something.
Speaker 2: And then they arrested him?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they arrested him, yeah. It was a big article in The New York Times about it. But he--
Speaker 2: So he was in Baton, he was from Baton Rouge [Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: He was in Baton Rouge at the same, during this same period of time.
Speaker 2: So but not Hip Dude, go back to the other guy that was crazy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You said he had problems.
Speaker 1: But he had, and, in fact, after the trial, 'cause the trial went on for like--
Speaker 2: There was a trial?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean, actually--
Speaker 2: So they literally locked you up--
Speaker 1: But, but, but, but what happen, I was in jail for two weeks and I was in solitary confinement. But they, they didn't have anything on tape with me saying anything that could be used so they had to drop the charges against me. But they said that Frank Stewart had said something, they had, they had just enough to, to keep the thing going with him. So he actually end up, ended up fighting this, this thing for a few years 'cause after I had left Baton Rouge, in, in fact, had moved to Boston [Massachusetts] where Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] and I met, I had to come back for, for another trial to testify.
Speaker 2: So it was--
Speaker 1: So it was like over two or three years.
Speaker 2: And it became a big story.
Speaker 1: It was a big story.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And it was in The New York Times, it was a big story because but Frank eventually was, was freed.
Speaker 2: Well, what civil rights lawyer did you get to help you out?
Speaker 1: Well, Frank's lawyer was Ben Smith who came down from, from New York [New York].
Speaker 2: And he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My--
Speaker 2: Go--
Speaker 1: He, he was with--
Speaker 2: With the defense council.
Speaker 1: --ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union].
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --ACLU, okay.
Speaker 1: And, and my attorney was Murphy Bale [ph.] who was a NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] attorney and, you know, really successful attorney, he had done a lot of, a lot of civil rights cases, so he, he handled my case. And I can remember, 'cause actually I heard on the radio, car radio, that they were looking, they had arrested Frank, 'cause they came to the house where we were living, Frank and I, and they had arrested Frank and they had, had arrested Alphonse at a site that they said that he was preparing or, or, or doing a run through for the assassination of the mayor [Woody Dumas]. So they actually had him on, on, on this site and they said this is where the mayor, the, the road that the mayor takes on the way to work every day and blah, blah, blah. That's what I was saying, you know, Alphonse had a major problem. So it was really Frank and I who were really the innocent victims in this whole thing. But anyway, I was in a car and I heard this, this, this news flash that they had arrested Alphonse Stededcor [sic.] and Frank Stewart and that the cops were looking for [HistoryMaker] Wade Hudson, I said, "Oh, my god." And I was with this young lady I was dating at the time, and I said, "I'm outta here, (laughter) I'm gone." And she said, "No, but if you, if they catch you, they gone kill you," you know. So what I ended up doing, I thought about it and I went to the police station, down to the main headquarters in Baton Rouge, went up to the, to the desk, it was a sergeant there, and I said, "My name is Wade Hudson, I understand that you all are looking for me." And I guess it took him a second to digest what I said and he, then his, then he leaped up and they came and, you know, threw me up against the wall and all that old stuff.
Story_ID: 633476
Speaker 1: That case, you know, 'cause a lot of, a lot of white people in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Was the jury all-white?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and the jury was all white. It changed as it went because there were a number of appeals and all that stuff. But a number of white people who were, I guess, noncommittal to, about the struggle, actually started to step up and say, wait a minute this, this, this stuff is not right, you know, we, we gotta start doing something. And it was, it was a major, a major, a major case during that time. And 'cause we--
Speaker 2: Well, what did your parents [Lurline Jones Hudson and Wade Hudson, Sr.] think about it? Did they say we told you that Afro was gonna get you in trouble?
Speaker 1: No, actually, you know, my mother, 'cause I never, I never called them, I didn't, they heard about it on the news too. And my mother (laughter) said, 'cause somebody called my mother and said, "It's all on the news, I just heard on NBC News that your, your son is in jail for civil rights stuff, killing the mayor [Woody Dumas]." And so she eventually came down to Baton Rouge where, where I was. But by that time--
Speaker 2: Did you feel like a hero?
Speaker 1: No, not really. I've never really, no, not really, not really. I mean, to be honest with you, I was scared to death, I mean, I, I thought I was gonna do some time. And also what happened during that time that I was in jail, one day they came and took me out of the cell and took me outside, put me in this car, I was in the backseat, and these, these two white cops, they had on suits, I guess, they were detectives, but they had guns, you know, with them, so, and they took me out on this, this long road, dirt road, and, I said, man, this is it, they gonna, they gonna kill me. And I just, I started praying, I said well, this, if, if this is the way I gotta go, you know, I, I gotta go, I'm a try to go like a man, you know, but I don't know what happened, what they intended to do or whatever but they, they drove around for a period of time, then came back. They really didn't say anything to me. And they, they finally came back. I don't know, you know, as a, as a religious person now, I say the Lord intervened (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But I was scared. I said, man, this is, this is it because as, as you were saying earlier about being afraid, you know, 'cause so many other civil right workers had been killed, you know, and I said well, here it go, here's another one, you know, but obviously I escaped that one.
Speaker 2: Did you graduate from Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: No, actually I didn't, I didn't. 'Cause I, I, I got so involved in the Civil Rights Movement and then I really wasn't, I had gotten to the point where I started to even question the, the, the value of education itself, if it cannot help people and move people along, it, because I, I felt that what had started to happen was that we were being educated for personal gains and, and to a large degree just for education itself, you know, rather than to, to, to help people and to, to make things better, you know.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I, I regret that now but, you know, but that that was a decision that that I made at the time.
Story_ID: 633477
Speaker 1: You then, I'm assuming, someone says to you, you gotta leave the South or you, how do you get to Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I left, I left out some things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was also--
Speaker 1: You said you were writing at the time?
Speaker 2: Right, I was writing at the time, you know, I had done a few plays and, and that had been produced in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. But also what's important is that I had, I was drafted because I had gone to protest against the war [Vietnam War] and stuff, this one in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] so I was involved in that that movement too. And so what was happening during this period of time was that the local draft boards if they knew that you were involved in, in anything with antiwar, you know, (snaps fingers) it would change your classification to 1-A, you know, so you couldn't get the student affirmative, it didn't matter whether you went to school, if they found out that you were protesting or whatever, 1-A and then the next thing you know, you're drafted. So I got drafted, you know. And I said I'm not going, you know. So I refused to go, you know, to the, to, for, what they call it? You know, where you, where you, where they actually give you the oath and all that stuff, I, I said I'm not going. And that lasted for (laughter) a year or so. And so I ended up really going to San Francisco [California] for, for a period of time when I was on the, on the run from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]. But they eventually caught me, but because I had not refused to go, I had not done anything that they could say that I refused, I just didn't, didn't show up, they gave me another notification or whatever they call it and then I got another draft notice. And but this time I had, guys had been telling me about different ways that they had, they had used to, to get out of the, out of the draft like playing crazy and stuff, so that's what I did. And so I, I started acting crazy and, you know, and calling, you know, all the guys, white guys around me names and stuff. So they sent me to see the army psychiatrist, right. And so when I walked in, white guy too, he started talking and he said, "You just don't wanna do you?" And I said, "To be honest with you, I sure don't." And he gave me a 1-Y, he just gave me a 1-Y.
Speaker 1: What's a 1-Y?
Speaker 2: 1-Y is a, is a, a physical classification where you don't have to go because there's something physical or mental, mentally wrong. And that's--
Speaker 1: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) how I got out of it.
Speaker 1: --what sorts of things are you saying to those white guys (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I just called 'em, you know, crackers, and, you know, and I'm a punch you out and all that stuff, just acting, really acting anti-social, you know. And so they sent me to see the, the psychiatrist. And so when I walked in, I mean, we, we end up talking about a lot of stuff 'cause he was well read and stuff and he said, "Well, you just don't wanna go." And I said, "Honestly, I don't," you know, and he gave, gave me the 1-Y and that's how I got out of it 'cause if he had not done that, I would have probably have had gone to jail 'cause I wasn't gonna go. I wasn't gonna go.
Speaker 1: And they couldn't force you to go?
Speaker 2: No, they couldn't force me to go.
Speaker 1: They could only put you in jail?
Speaker 2: They, they would arrest me.
Speaker 1: Had Muhammad Ali--
Speaker 2: Like same thing that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Muhammad Ali had.
Speaker 1: This was before or after, were you drafted before or after him?
Speaker 2: That, that was before.
Speaker 1: You was before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Muhammad Ali was '60 [1960]--
Speaker 1: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): He was '65 [1965] I think.
Speaker 2: No, no, Muhammad Ali was '65 [1965]? 'Cause they, they stretched it out for a long period of time with a court case 'cause he fought it. 'Cause he had applied for--
Speaker 1: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): Conscientious objector.
Speaker 2: Conscientious objector.
Speaker 1: Which is what you were, right?
Speaker 2: Right, I didn't, I didn't apply. I didn't know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I just, I, you know, I--
Speaker 1: But that was the grounds you didn't wanna go 'cause you objected to the war?
Speaker 2: I thought the war, and I wasn't, you know, what a conscientious objector says that I don't believe in violence. I said, the war is wrong, you know, I think we, we're in Vietnam for the wrong, wrong reasons and I don't support this war, you know. So that that was my political position, you know.
Speaker 1: So how do you get to Boston out of all of that?
Speaker 2: Okay. I was in California for a second visit with, with some friends. And my college roommate, Peter Jackson [ph.], was in Cambridge [Massachusetts]; he was attending grad school in, in the Boston area. And he asked me to come up for a visit, you know. And it was in the summer. So I did, went, went to visit with him and ended up staying for a period of time and I met my wife. What, I must have met you, what a few months after I had been there? And, yep.
Speaker 1: And Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] was at Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was at, at Radcliffe. And, and so I stayed with my, my friend, Pete, my college friend. And actually, I, I had planned to, to stay for a couple of weeks or a month and then come back to, to California. But, you know, time started passing and I met Cheryl and I, I stayed there. And we got married. Well, that must, I think that was in the summer of '71 [1971]--
Speaker 1: When you married?
Speaker 2: No, when we, when I, when I came to Cambridge, and then we got married in June of '72 [1972].
Story_ID: 633478
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go back to two things and then we're gonna keep (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --moving forward. Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination happened in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did that affect you?
Speaker 2: I was in New York [New York] when that happened and I think I mentioned a couple of the names to you, Ronnie Moore, Dave Dennis, what's another, what this other guy's name? Who were involved in the Civil Rights Movement in the South, either with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Also they had, they had formed another organization called Set Free [ph.], and what is Set Free? It was a, a fundraising group that they, that they had organized to fund other civil rights organizations and other movements around the country and they had their headquarters in New York. So I was there and in that office with them talking about something else when that, when, when the bulletin flashed. And I had, by this time, I was extremely militant, you know, like Black Panther [Black Panther Party] militant, you know. And felt that the old civil rights strategies of protesting and sit-ins and marches, had become counterproductive, you know.
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you when, so this is '68 [1968], you'd become extremely militant?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: When did you start the movement and get involved? When you were eighteen or nineteen?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) actually when I--
Speaker 1: So what year was that?
Speaker 2: --when I went to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: Southern. What--
Speaker 2: --in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So from '64 [1964] to '68 [1968] you'd become totally different?
Speaker 2: Not, not different, it just, I had, I had, I had evolved my, my thinking about the solutions to our problems.
Speaker 1: So continuing you--
Speaker 2: Right. And, and so I was--
Speaker 1: --in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: --I was, I was there with them when we got the news. And they, they were, I mean, started crying and stuff and, and I remember saying now, maybe the revolution will start. And what did I say that for? I mean, these are guys, you know, I mean, I never, I, I never met Dr. King, you know, you know, I, you know, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and those guys I met, I would never, never had the opportunity to meet Dr. King, they had, you know, and they had relationships with him, so. And I remember, was it Ronnie Moore? He said, "Young blood, you don't know what you're talking about, you just get out of here, get out of here." I said, "Aww, man, them, them, we need a revolution." He said, "You wanna blow it, get out of here, you don't know what you're saying." He was right, you know. And so I, I left and left the office and, you know. But that was, that was my reaction then, you know, and--
Speaker 1: So during that time you were in New York did you know of any of the, like The Last Poets and their, because they were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I was familiar with, I mean--I knew of them but I, I wasn't, I did not (unclear)--
Speaker 1: And did not know them but you knew of them--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What they were doing and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --so did you really think a revolution may come about?
Speaker 2: We were, I was certainly hoping, you know, because now there were a lot of, a lot of things happening in the, the Puerto Rican community, you know, and, and there was a lot of talk about coalition building and all of that, so. We, we, we were hopeful, you know--
Speaker 1: And you were looking for a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But on hindsight, you know, you're--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, on--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --hindsight, you know, it's, you're, you're, you, what kind of revolution, I mean, you know, what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: But, but before we get to hindsight--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: During that hotbed of it when you're thinking--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about it, what did you want this revolution to look like? Did you want black people to take arms and--
Speaker 2: We wanted black people, I mean, I guess, I guess, the face of it was similar to what, what Malcolm [Malcolm X] had talked about, you know, black folks being self-sufficient, self-reliant, independent, our own communities, you know, controlling our own community, our own destiny, you know. And we felt that, at that time, I guess, the thinking was the only way you can break away is through revolution, to be able to do that, you know. But, you know, that's, that's obviously (laughter) the, the, the thoughts of, of young people who have a lot of energy and, and are dreaming for a, a reality that's, that wasn't really possible.
Story_ID: 633479
Speaker 1: What were the plays about that you were writing at the time?
Speaker 2: One play, was a play called 'Dead End' [Wade Hudson] and it was about ghetto life and this is, this is like in the late '60s [1960s], ghetto life in Scotlandville in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Mostly about, about black life, you know, black challenges, the, the struggle for manhood and self-esteem and, and all of that, you know. And, and the settings mostly, you know, urban, southern urban, you know.
Speaker 1: How did you become a reporter, a news reporter?
Speaker 2: It's all these different things going on at the same time. My freshman year, like I had told you, I, I wrote for the weekly newspaper, The Shreveport [The Shreveport Sun] from time to time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were a kid then?
Speaker 2: When I was kid.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I, there was another black weekly called the, the Baton Rouge News Leader. And I went for an interview, I said I'm a writer, you know, and they hired me, you know, they hired me. And I started out writing sports. And ironically the, the, the editor of the, the sports editor of the paper was, was a white guy who had a drinking problem. He had worked for the, the daily newspaper and because of his drinking problem they had canned him, so he was working there. And he sort of, I think he sort of knew that eventually I would replace him like the, the, the church secretary, it was a similar kind of situation. So but he sort of took me under his wings, you know, and showed me, you know, really how to, how to write newspaper stories and stuff 'cause I, I had not been trained, you know. I was also, also working, writing for the, the campus newspaper [Southern Digest] at, at, at Southern at the same time too. And but I eventually became a sports editor for the, for the paper and I had my own column, you know, the whole bit and got some awards for my writing, you know, and so that's how I started writing. And then I ended up doing freelance articles for other papers, like the L.A. Sentinel [Los Angeles Sentinel] and the Michigan Chronicle which is a black weekly out of Detroit [Michigan], I think it's still, it's still being published. I know the Sentinel is. And, you know, just, you know, writing. Oh, I, I'm trying to remember the year too. There was a magazine called The Black Collegian, are you familiar with that magazine? It's, it's published out of New Orleans [Louisiana]. The, Preston Edwards [Preston Edwards, Sr.] is, he was a professor at Southern University, started it. And I was one of the, the, the students that he sort of used to help launch that. You know, he got ideas from us on how to, how to set it up and it's still going on, it's still, it's doing well. In fact, I think, Preston, I just read an article, Preston and two other gentlemen in, from New Orleans, have a book out where they are talking about, 'cause I think he had prostate cancer, and they are talking about the challenges of, of dealing with cancer. And I think the book is just out. And but anyway, I, I was involved in, in that start-up project. And it, and it kick, kicked off, uh-huh. And it's still being published. So it, so I've done, you know, a lot of different, different--
Story_ID: 633480
Speaker 1: And all of that was going on at the same time the whole, your participation in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In civil right--
Speaker 1: --the movement was happening.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And now as, as we, as, as I, as we go on from '64 [1964], '65 [1965] to like '66 [1966], then I become more involved in the Civil Rights Movement and less involved in other kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Well, how were you making a living though?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was paid, I was paid 'cause I would, I would, and I was still, (laughter) still in school too, but I was paid by the, by the newspapers, you know, if I did freelance articles, I would be paid for those. And I was, I, I was getting a weekly salary from the Baton Rouge News Leader, you know, because I didn't have to be there 9:00 to 5:00, I was, I had some hours I had to be there but a lot of the writing I did, I would bring, bring it in, you know, I would go in and see what was happening. So from time to time I had to cover a game or something and write, write, write about it. So I had some flexibility because as I think about it now, the newspaper was owned by, J.K. Land owned the paper and he had about five different News Leaders in different cities in, in the state and he was a white guy but he needed a black face. So, you know, so that gave me the, the flexibility to, to do that, you know, to make it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when you get to Boston [Massachusetts] you continued to do news reporting?
Speaker 2: Actually--
Speaker 1: Playwright?
Speaker 2: --not so much, I guess, in Boston, I guess, I was doing more, yeah, playwriting. What was the name of that theater? People's--the People's Theatre, right?
Speaker 1: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): I think so (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I working, yeah, in Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Did you work with--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis?
Speaker 1: Hosea Williams' daughter [HistoryMaker Elisabeth Omilami] out at the People Theatre in Cambridge?
Speaker 2: When, when was she there?
Speaker 1: I can't remember.
Speaker 2: 'Cause this, this is like, I don't, I don't remember her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is like '71 [1971], part of '72 [1972] but I, I don't think, I never, I never did a, I never, I never did a play with them.
Speaker 1: But you worked with the People's Theatre?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for a period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: And you continued as a playwright and writing plays.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right. And I was writing, you know, even though at this time I wasn't being produced, my plays weren't being produced. And also I think that that's when, during this period of time is when I started to recognize the importance of writing for children 'cause I created a, I created a series called 'Hometown' [ph.] that was based on kids I knew growing up. We never really did anything with them but Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] actually did some illustrations and rendering of, of the characters for that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, because by now when you're in Boston you get married--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --soon after that.
Speaker 2: In '72 [1972], yeah.
Speaker 1: In '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And your daughter [Katura J. Hudson] is born?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Right. We had been married four years when she was born.
Story_ID: 633481
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But when you became a couple you started to collaborate, I think, about ideas for books? How did that come about?
Speaker 2: You know, actually our relationship, the, the write- the book thing for children didn't really happen until '70s [1970s]--'87 [1987], '88 [1988]. My playwriting career really started to take off when we came from Boston [Massachusetts], well, let me back up. While we were living in Boston, I applied for a program that Channel 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York] had to get more minorities in film and television and I was accepted. So that's why we moved from Boston to this area and we, rather than live in New York [New York] we moved to New Jersey 'cause it was cheaper and, and Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] had a cousin who helped us find an apartment here. And so that program lasted for a year and so we just, just stayed here. Now, during that, that time, I became involved with a theater group here in, in Newark [New Jersey] called the Theater of Universal Images. And I had probably five plays over, over some years that were produced by that theater company. And, and Cheryl, actually, you know, did some of the, the advertising, illustrations, and things like that for, for, for the plays, playbills and things like that. So we still collaborated but it wasn't for children's books. Now, my first, first children's book was a book called 'Beebe's Lonely Saturday' [Wade Hudson] and it was published by New Dimension press out of New York, it's no longer in business. And it was, and I did another one to, what was that other one called? I did two books for that company. And it was mostly for the educational market. And so all these things were happening before we even decided to launch our own publishing company which happened in, actually we formed the company in '88 [1988] but we had started producing books and T-shirts and posters.
Speaker 1: What made you go from playwriting to producing books, T-shirts, and posters?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, Cheryl had an idea for a group of characters.
Speaker 1: Well, your daughter is born and, and that has something to do with it; right?
Speaker 2: That, that did but, but--
Speaker 1: This is before she's born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but what I'm saying is like Cheryl had a idea and I think the idea that Cheryl had was a, a result of her and I, and myself too, not finding books and images for Katura [Katura J. Hudson] that reflect our environment, our culture. So I think that, and she can probably speak to that, but I think that led her to creating a group of characters she called the 'AFRO-BETS' kids. But they were, she had a character for each alphabet, so (laughter) as a playwright I'm saying well, you really can't, can't handle that many characters, you know. So we, we ended up narrowing the characters down to, to six characters and we gave them, you know, names and, you know, personalities and blah, blah, blah. And we started doing T-shirts with the characters and then the 'AFRO-BETS ABC Book' [Cheryl Willis Hudson] was our first venture, book that Cheryl wrote. And that book really took off and we did some really good marketing and publicity behind it and we printed five thousand copies which was a pretty good printing for a, for a couple that doesn't know what they're doing (laughter). And, and we sold those five thousand copies in about three months, three or four months, you know, and then we did a rush back to, to do another five thousand printing. And then so we ended up starting the company, Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.], because we recognized that we were on to something and that's how Just Us Books started. And then we followed the 'ABC Book' with the counting book, the 'AFRO-BETS 123 Book' [Cheryl Willis Hudson]. And then the third book we did was a book that I and Valerie Wilson Wesley wrote together called, the AFRO-BETS' 'Book of Black Heroes' ['Book of Black Heroes from A to Z: An Introduction to Important Black Achievers for Young Readers,' Wade Hudson and Valerie Wilson Wesley], where we featured blacks who had made significant contributions to society. And we would present it alphabetically, you know, Muhammad Ali, you know, with A. And so that's how we, we, we launched the, the, the company.
Story_ID: 633482
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What were the challenges in the early days for an African American publisher--
Speaker 2: Well the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who wants to do his own thing?
Speaker 2: Well, the big challenge and still is, is having sufficient capital necessary to, to, to do what's required to really grow a company and not just to grow a company but some, just maintain a company. But in addition to that, during this period of time, I mean, many, many booksellers and wholesalers and distributors, were under the impression, mistaken impression that there was no market for these books, you know. Many of them felt there was no market for black books period but specifically black books for children, you know. And some of them told us that, you know. So you couldn't go to Barnes and Noble [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.] or B. Dalton [B. Dalton Bookseller, Inc.] or some of the major bookstore chains and find black interests books for children at all. So the major challenge for us was to get these, 'cause we had to go through these people to get to the, the, the mass market, you know, even though we did, I think establish a solid foundation of selling to, to church groups and, and sororities and fraternities and the handful of black bookstores that were there but in order to become a more viable company we had to grow the company which meant that we had sell through these people, Ingram [Ingram Content Group], Baker Taylor [Baker and Taylor] and all these folks who then sell to other bookstores, independent bookstores, schools. And so our challenge was to really get them to see that there, that there was and there is a market for these books, and if these books are made available a significant number of the black market would respond and, and purchase those books. So that was a big challenge. And obviously as I said the biggest one is really having enough capital to do, to hire, the, the, the, the staff that, that that's needed to really cover the various areas of responsibility in, in marketing and promoting books and the editorial process.
Speaker 1: Because you were still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we had to do a lot of that stuff ourselves, you know.
Speaker 1: Right. And today you're still one of the only African American owned--
Speaker 2: That's right. That's, that's, well, we are the only African American owned company that's publishing books, black interest books for children exclusively, that's our focus. You have other companies like Third World Press out of Chicago [Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, his company, they do a variety of books, a, a few children's titles but our focus has been exclusively on publishing books for, for children.
Speaker 1: Why did you drop the T-shirts and all of the other end of the business [Just Us Books, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it goes back to the, the, the, the capital issue. We had to decide what we were gonna focus on because selling books versus selling T-shirts are like two distinct markets. And so we had to really learn the, the infrastructure of, of, of book publishing. You know, learn who the, the, the distributors and the wholesalers are, who are the promotion people, who the sales reps are, you know, so that takes a concentrated effort to do that. So rather than trying to spin our, well, I won't say spin our wheels, but spend time trying to sell T-shirts to schools, you know, and 'cause we had a small staff, we had to focus and we had to concentrate our efforts on really learning the publishing industry itself.
Story_ID: 633483
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in the music industry?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay. The music industry, boy, I had a pretty interesting background. The music industry really came about because of my brothers.
Speaker 1: And you should, we should list your siblings because we didn't talk about them at all.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there are, there are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Six, you said it was eight of you?
Speaker 2: There are, there are eight of us.
Speaker 1: Just in order, if you could--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --list them.
Speaker 2: My oldest sister who is now deceased is Mary Geraldine [ph.].  She died about what, twelve years ago.
Speaker 1: And what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a homemaker. She was a homemaker. And I'm the next, I'm the oldest boy. Next to me is Willie Hudson and he's director of sales for Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] and he's been with us for about sixteen years. Next to him is Wilbert Hudson, he's going through some changes now, so. And next to him is Curtis Hudson. And he is a song writer, musician, was a recording artist too and that's how I got in the music industry helping him and managing his group and also managing a music publishing company that we set up to handle songs that that he and, and I, and my other brother had written. Next to him is my sister, Lauriece [Lauriece Hudson Lane], she's a writer.
Speaker 1: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: L-A, L-A-U-R-I-E-C-E. And next to Lauriece is Raymond [Raymond Hudson], he's a musician, he plays bass. And then the baby is Major [Major Hudson], M-A-J-O-R. And he is our shipping manager for, for Just Us Books. So that's the, and we all live here in East Orange [New Jersey], well, in this, in this area. Curtis lives in South Orange [New Jersey] but the rest of us live in East Orange.
Story_ID: 633484
Speaker 1: You wanna make one correction.
Speaker 2: Yes. Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] was in the Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] program in 1970, I believe. And we met in '71 [1971] after she had finished that program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think she was gainfully employed at the time we met.
Speaker 1: She was working for?
Speaker 2: Houghton Mifflin [Houghton Mifflin Company; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt], right?
Speaker 1: As an illustrator?
Speaker 2: No, I think, I don't think, I think you were working in--
Speaker 1: What were you doing?
Speaker 2: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): I was an art editor.
Speaker 1: Art editor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Art editor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, art editor.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 633485
Speaker 1: We're gonna continue to--you were just gonna wrap up for me--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your, are you still in the music business? Do you still do that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Because there was a company that you, Pure Energy--
Speaker 2: Pure Energy music publishers [Pure Energy Music Publishing, Inc.], yeah. We sold the catalog for that company.
Speaker 1: And what was in the catalog? What songs were in the catalog?
Speaker 2: Well, the really big song was 'Holiday' that Madonna recorded, that my brother, Curtis [Curtis Hudson], and his ex-wife, Lisa [Lisa Stevens] wrote. And there were probably about, shoo, thirty songs in that catalog.
Speaker 1: Did, I mean, I'm just gonna ask outright.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Did that make them rich? I mean, that is one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --most popular songs in the world.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, yep. And he's done--
Speaker 1: And I thought Madonna wrote it.
Speaker 2: No, no, it's Curtis Hudson. And he's, yeah, he, he got, (laughter) he got, yeah, he's, he's, he's done very well (laughter). He's doing very well. In fact, you know, as I said his son [Eric Hudson] is now in the music industry and he's writing and producing stuff for Mary J. Blige--
Speaker 1: Well, how did he get that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Whitney Houston.
Speaker 1: --how did Madonna get 'Holiday'? How does that work?
Speaker 2: Well, okay. When we, when I was managing my brother's group, you know, they had records out and they were performing at different venues around the country, and so was Madonna. And so we got, we met her, you know, at, I think, it was at the Garage [Paradise Garage, New York, New York], so we would, you know, end up in the same place a lot, you know, and so--
Speaker 1: So did you, go, I mean--
Speaker 2: And, and--
Speaker 1: We could talk forever about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Garage and Larry Levan and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yep, yep, yep. And, you know, Roseland [Roseland Ballroom, New York, New York] was, was still open then. And but anyway, Jellybean Benitez [John Benitez] who was a--
Speaker 1: Deejay.
Speaker 2: --a deejay, and was a good friend of ours at the time, he was dating Madonna, one of the many, (laughter) many friends that she had. And so she gave him a shot to produce a record for her album that she was working on. And so he didn't have any, anything so he came to us and said, "I'm looking for a song, man, I need a song." So Curt had written 'Holiday' and we were just sitting on it and the company that we had, they, they had signed with then didn't see the potential in the song, they passed on it, you know. And so, we said, okay, you know. And so Madonna heard it, she liked it, she recorded it. Now, the other, the songs on the album, I think the album was, who, who was the producer on that album? I'm trying to remember. Anyway, well, that was the one song that Jellybean did, you know, and the rest of the, the songs were produced by another producer, I can't remember who it was now. So obviously, you know, he had more clout at the time, so he was pushing his stuff. And so when they sent the, the album, they selected a single and they sent the album to the radio stations and, you know, the jocks checked all the cuts to see what's happening and they kept going to 'Holiday.' And the next thing we knew 'Holiday' was being banged all over the radio stations and, and all the clubs, they just started, and so her label, I think, it was Sire Records at the time, they had to then catch up with the song, you know, 'cause they hadn't planned to release that as a, a single, you know, 'cause at the time they didn't even do a video, you know, that's how, that's how fast it just took off, you know. But, yeah, so that opening, we did another song with her called 'Spotlight' and it wasn't quite as big as 'Holiday' but it, it did okay, yeah. And but we knew her, I mean, we knew her from, you know, the club scene when she was just trying to get, get out there, you know, and--
Speaker 1: And I think the first, that single they released was 'Everybody.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Singing) "Everybody."
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it, it did well, you know, but not, not like 'Holiday' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But not as good as 'Holiday.'
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: 'Holiday' was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Put her on the map.
Speaker 2: That's exactly, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, 'Holiday,' I mean, because we all thought hearing it on the radio that it was a black girl.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly right, exactly. Well, my brother, you know, they played the music--
Speaker 1: And then you see the video and it's like oh--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --she's white.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they played the music, you know, the guitar licks that you hear, my brother did those and so. So the song has a feel. And if you really think about it, black musicians, writing and playing for white acts that was at the beginning of it.  That was at the beginning of it. I mean, now it's done all the time but at that time, you know, you're talking about the '70 [1970]--early '70 [1970], '80s [1980s], you know--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --eighty-two [1982].
Speaker 1: And, and in turn you sell the catalog?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I mean, and all of those songs and that ends Pure Energy Music?
Speaker 2: Right, that's exactly right. And so--
Speaker 1: What year did you sell that?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, that was, hm.
Speaker 1: In the late '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. No, it was later than that actually. This is 2007, it must have been '98 [1998], '99 [1999]. I'll have to check the date but I think, it, it was, it was in the '90s [1990s] though, I believe, '98 [1998], '99 [1999], I believe. But, you know, during this time we, we, we had Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] too, as well.
Story_ID: 633486
Speaker 1: So back to Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because that's, you know, that's your claim to fame today?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Although you've done so many things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's like you, each period has been--
Speaker 2: Different things.
Speaker 1: --defined by something else.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you consider the highlights here of Just Us Books? What have been the books and or the things you've done that you consider the highlights?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that what's most important to me is the fact that we have produced books that have helped to impact and change the lives of young people. And so looking at it from that perspective, all of the books have played a role. And, and it really captures the reason why we started the company. Obviously, there are some books or some titles that have sold better than others. But if one book is sold and that one book can change the life of a eight or nine year old child and help that child see the possibilities then, you know, that book, that book is successful. So I think that I would look at it from, from that that perspective. I think that we have also played a role in helping the industry recognize that there is a viable market for black interest books for children.
Speaker 1: Is that market greater today than it was when you started?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is. There, there are many, many more players, many more companies producing books. Also I, I think that we've also helped them understand to a small degree that that that they have a responsibility in addressing the, the diversity of this country through books. That we must produce books that reflect America's diversity, the mosaic that we are. And the failure to do so, we pay a price for failing to do that. And one of the major problems I think that we have as a society and probably as a world culture, is that we know so little about each other. And, and oftentimes, you know, we only gonna learn about each other through books. Music and movies often paint, you know, caricatures or distorted views, you know. But through books, you, you, have a chance to, to really be engaged over a longer period of time and to use your, your own mind as you read and decipher and interpret what you're reading. So I think that those, those are areas I think that we've, we've had a, a major impact and, and done some good, you know. And, and also I think that we've also helped other African Americans and other quote minorities understand that publishing is a worthy endeavor, you know. So there are many, many more folks who are publishing books now and people of color who are publishing books. When we started in '88 [1988], I mean, you can count them on, I, I remember going to--
Speaker 1: Who were they in '88 [1988]? But go, you remember going to.
Speaker 2: In '88 [1988] I remember going to, Just Us Books went to, was it eighty--'89 [1989], we went to BEA [BookExpo America]. BEA is, is a book expo. And it's, it used to be the, the ABA, American Booksellers Association convention but they sold the rights to the exhibit to BookExpo. But that's where all of the publishing companies and the, the, the book retailers, the distributors and the wholesalers, you know, there are twenty-five, thirty thousand people come to see what's coming out for the coming year. And the first time we went was '89 [1989], I believe. And Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois] was the only other black company there that I, that I remember. I think the year after that, Africa World Press [Trenton, New Jersey] came. But we would walk the floor and of the convention and of those thousands and thousands of people we may see one black face every, every now and then, you know. And that has changed tremendously since then, you know. And I think that among other people, you know, you know, Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] and I and Just Us Books have had a role in, in helping to change that face of the industry.
Story_ID: 633487
Speaker 1: You have also played a role in going outside of Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.] to act as consultants to larger companies (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah we--yeah, we've packaged--
Speaker 1: --Scholastics [Scholastic Corporation].
Speaker 2: Right, right, we've, we've packaged books for other companies, namely Scholastic. We've done I think about fourteen or fifteen book projects for Scholastic in--
Speaker 1: So how does that work? They come to you and they say we want a black book or an African American book?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, they say that, you know, we, we, we're looking for, for product. And, in fact, they'd call us and say we wanna work with you. And, and so we sort of discussed a relationship and agreed upon a relationship. And we then bring the concepts or the idea or the manuscript to them and they agree or disagree whether or not we wanna pursue that particular idea for a book. And they really didn't turn anything down actually. And so we just develop the product and then they act as the publisher and we are the packager or the developer of the product. You know, and that is, we haven't done anything with Scholastic for, I guess, maybe four or five years now.
Speaker 1: Well, since they got 'Harry Potter.'
Speaker 2: (Laughter) They don't need us now, right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, they need a black Harry Potter, I mean, like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, there's, you know, what--
Speaker 2: But I don't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have you ever thought about creating a character like that to have that sort of appeal to--
Speaker 2: Well, it's easier said than done.
Speaker 1: It is easier said than done.
Speaker 2: We, we do have characters that we've created.
Speaker 1: But you never know what's gonna--
Speaker 2: But, but you never know, I mean--
Speaker 1: --take off, yeah.
Speaker 2: --I think that 'Harry Potter' had done well in England when Scholastic picked it up, I believe. And so you really, you really, really never know. Sometimes there are characters or series that take off and do well and can then become an albatross because the focus is so much on that particular product, you don't, the company doesn't take the time to develop other products, so eventually, no matter how successful a series is or a character is, you know, that's gone become, the downside is gonna, gonna come. It's sort of like with CBS [CBS/Sony Records Inc.] with Michael Jackson when the 'Thriller' album came out, they put everything behind there, and they, I mean, they broke all kind of records, you know, with 30 million units, you know, with records and CDs and all the other formats but then after 'Thriller' started to die out, they ran into a problem because they didn't have any product to follow up, you know. But it's a good problem to have (laughter).
Story_ID: 633488
Speaker 1: During the day to day tasks here at Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What role do you play versus the role that Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] plays?
Speaker 2: My area of expertise is mostly in marketing and publicity. I'm the CEO too so I handle a lot of the business stuff, interact with the, with the sales area, the fulfillment or shipping area. Cheryl's responsibility is editorial. She interacts with the authors and the, the illustrators and the book designers, the printers, you know, and they are really distinct responsibilities, uh-huh. And, in fact, she can carry out her responsibilities sometime without even seeing me during the day. And so, and we've made sure that, you know, our areas of responsibility are clearly defined, you know, because, you can step on each other's toes, you know, in particular when you're working close together and then you, and you are husband and wife too. So it's, it's, it's important I think to clearly define, I mean, as in any organization to clearly define what the roles are and the responsibilities.
Story_ID: 633489
Speaker 1: So how would you say that you guys [Just Us Books, Inc.], how do you distinguish yourselves from just the major publishers like Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] or--
Speaker 2: I, I think that--
Speaker 1: --or Scholastics [Scholastic Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that we give the authors and the illustrators more of a personal kind of touch. We are more accessible because there are not as many layers to our organization as there, there is with Scholastic or some of the other major publishers. Also I think that that we bring a, a sensibility and a sensitivity to what we feel is needed in the marketplace. That being, you know, finding products that really address holes that we see in the marketplace. And, and for us, we certainly wanna make as much money as possible but a decision to, to acquire a manuscript is not solely a financial one. And with most major publishing companies now because of the way the market is set up, it's usually a financial consideration whether or not to pick up a manuscript. They, they are more concerned about, you know, how much money can they make, what the competition is like, how would it be placed in bookstores in their market. And so we can say this is a good manuscript and our kids need to read this, you know. And we can make that kind of decision.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you look back over what you, what you've done, are you doing now what you, does it all make sense to you what you're doing now at--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, it, it does. I mean, and, and obviously as you look back, you know, you know, hindsight is always 20/20. I mean, there were some things that we probably would have done differently from a business standpoint but yet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, yeah, what I mean even more so is that you said very early on that books, books opened your eyes to a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --world outside of Mansfield [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What you're doing now is putting books in the hands of children who will open their eyes to--
Speaker 2: That's it--
Speaker 1: --the world outside of the world in which may, they may be--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --confined to.
Speaker 2: And, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, they write letters, you know, sharing, you know, with us, you know, what a particular book has, has done for them or inspired them.
Story_ID: 633490
Speaker 1: How did you get back to the church because now you're a deacon in the church and you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at some point said the church--
Speaker 2: Yeah. I, when I was younger, I, I felt that the church was not carrying out its historical responsibility for the black community and, and it had become more insular and become more about being big and, and, and, and doing meaningless things and, and as far as activities. But after my daughter [Katura J. Hudson] was born and started to, to grow up, I started to think about it differently. And I recognized the role that the church played in my life and I said that if, if it was important to me then there's no reason why it should not be important to my daughter and also important to us again, and that in order for it to become what we think it should be, we need to be involved in, in helping to make that happen, rather than staying on the outside and say well, you know. And I think that that's one of the reason I joined church again and became involved. Our churches still have a lot of challenges. You know, there are a lot of, lot of problems but I'd rather be a part of the solution rather than just being the critic. You know, I can be a part of the solution and be a critic, too.
Story_ID: 633491
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, you've received several awards--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Which one or ones are you proudest of?
Speaker 2: Hm. You know, I, I, I appreciate all of the awards that I've gotten and, and they do have meaning but they, they really don't measure up to the feeling that I get when I connect with a kid, you know, whether I'm doing a speaking engagement at a school and, and, and, you know, that you've said something or you've done something that, that you feel would impact that child's life, those are awards for me and those are, I mean, just seeing that is really more important to me. I mean, I, I appreciate all of the, the awards, you know, but if I never get one, if, if, if I never had gotten one and, and I can impact the, the lives of children through whatever way that I can, that's really what it's all about for me, you know. 'Cause those things last, I mean, and if you can impact someone's life, and, and what happens is, if you, you can inspire someone they can pass it on. You know, the awards are for me, you know, and I can look at them but, I mean, you know, they really don't go any further than, than that. You know, you can come in and say oh, yeah, great, great award, you know, then what's next? But if you can touch the life, someone's life and then they can touch someone else's life, you know, it's, it's exponentially, it's passing it on and I think that's really what it's about for me, you know. Again, I'm not saying I don't want the awards, I mean, I certainly appreciate them but they, they don't carry as much weight as my having the, the, the blessing of, of touching someone's life in a positive way.
Story_ID: 633492
Speaker 1: You said you received letters--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from kids. What are they often saying?
Speaker 2: It was one, one particular letter that I'm remembering, came in recently from, actually, I'm sorry, it was a e-mail, from a young man in high school and apparently he was being, he's being picked on in high school and he was just, just ranting about, you know, how he can't take this anymore. And at the end, what he say, "Can you send me, I need some books so I can learn how to deal with this, you know, they, they are driving me crazy, they are picking on me and blah, blah," you know, he's going on and on and on. And at the end he closed it with, you know, "Please say a prayer for me." Now, we couldn't find out how to contact him 'cause he didn't respond to our e-mail to him, but for him to reach out to us I think says something, I, I don't know if it's because he read one of our books and recognized our name, you know, the company's name and went to the website to, to e-mail us. You know, a lot of, a lot of the letters are like that. There was a young girl, actually about nine or ten years of age, she had some kind of illness but she said the same thing that kids were picking on her. And so, I, I think the point I'm making is that a lot of these kids feel alone and, you know, and so they're reaching out to, to someone or a company they feel is a friend and who would care and listen, you know. And other letters talk about how a particular book has impacted their life. I read, you know, "I read about 'NEATE to the Rescue!' [Debbie Chocolate] and, and oh, I just love Naimah, she's the so and so, so, she's just like me." And, you know, we get, you know, letters like that.
Speaker 1: So did you ever dream that you would become the letter receiver as opposed to the letter writer when you were writing to the president and to--
Speaker 2: No, no, not, and, you know, it's--
Speaker 1: Well, how does it feel to be the one, to be in the seat to write the kid back, the kid that's gonna say someday, you know, "I wrote Just For Us Books [sic. Just Us Books, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and he wrote me back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How does that feel?
Speaker 2: It, it, it feels really good because it's, it's all about connecting. And, and again, you know, there are so many people, young people, kids, who are alone, who feel unloved, so if you can, I, I did a school visit in February at a urban school in Paterson [New Jersey] and addressed, I think it was a fifth grade class and it was about maybe thirty-five, forty kids. And there was a really large young girl in the class and everybody else was like really attentive, you know, and she was like making noise and, and so I had to stop her a few times. So at the end, I asked the, the principal who was there, I said, "Can you call the little, call her over for me and I wanna ask her a couple of questions." So I, she came over and I said, you know, "You was disrupting the class and blah, blah, blah." And in talking to her I, I could see something in her face. So I stopped myself and I said, you know what, and I, I grabbed her hand, I said, you know, "I love you and that there are a lot of people who don't even, even know who you are, you know, who love you and don't you forget that you are loved." And she almost started crying and walked away, 'cause I knew it was something much bigger than the fact that she was just making noise and stuff. And so after she left, the principal said, "We've had a lot of problems with her, 'cause she has some major problems at home," you know. So I don't know what the result of that is but it, maybe that, you know, sparked something, you know, in her and she maybe think a little bit more deeper about who she is and that she is somebody, you know.
Story_ID: 633493
Speaker 1: What do you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: That I made a difference. That I made a difference. Whether it's in, in the lives of people, organizations, or whatever that I made a difference. That, that, that people know that I was here, you know, because I did some things, some positive things. And that's, really what a legacy is all about and, you know. So that's, that's about basically it, you know, that I, that I made a difference, I touched the lives of, of, of a few people, and by doing so I reaffirmed my reason for being here, you know, and that's basically it.
Story_ID: 633494
Speaker 1: This is our wedding day. That's Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl Willis Hudson] with the cake that she's feeding me. And actually during this time I had a part on the left side of my head, my Afro (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, go ahead.
Speaker 1: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): That's what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, it's 1972. Nineteen seventy-two [1972], yeah.
Speaker 1: In Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In, no, actually we were married in Portsmouth, Virginia. We wanted to get married in Boston, but Cheryl's mother [Lillian Watson Willis] insisted since she was the only girl in the family that we had to relent and let the wedding be held in Portsmouth and it actually ended up being a bigger wedding than we wanted. We wanted a very private affair.
Speaker 1: This is my graduation picture in 1964. I graduated from DeSoto High School [Mansfield, Louisiana]. And, young, debonair looking young man, hm.
Speaker 2: You didn't select this picture but--
Speaker 1: And what's the other, the young lady--
Speaker 2: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Perez [ph.] is her last name, Perez?
Speaker 2: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): I don't know the name.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'll, I'll identify whoever I can so. Okay. This is a staff photograph, I think it was taken 1971, I mean, 19--
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981], '82 [1982]. And that's Shonda Barnett [ph.], she was a, a secretary, actually, she was Cheryl's secretary, I believe.
Speaker 2: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): It was '91 [1991], not '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Oh, in '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: What did I say?
Speaker 1: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): You said '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: I thought (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, '91 [1991], whew. Do we do it again?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just correct it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Actually, this was taken in 1991. Shonda Barnett is to the left, that's Major Hudson, my brother, who is our shipping manager now, Larice Lane [ph.] who worked as a secretary for us for, for a while. The other young lady I can't remember her first name, I think her last name is Perez. To the right of her is Willie Hudson, my brother, who is our sales manager. And seated, Cheryl with her Afro. And that's me, [HistoryMaker] Wade Hudson.
Speaker 2: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): That was our first office on Main Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in fact, it was taken place, it, it, this picture was taken at our editorial office in Orange [East Orange, New Jersey]. We still, we, we had this, we were here too but that picture was taken in Orange.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you.
Speaker 1: This is me and my son, Stephan [Stephan Hudson]. And I think he is about to- twelve, eleven, on this, this photograph. And I am showing him where the house in which I grew up used to be. It burned down in the mid-'70s [1970s] and so I'm just pointing out where it was located. And this picture was taken around 1995, I believe.
Speaker 2: (CHERYL WILLIS HUDSON): In Mansfield.
Speaker 1: In Mansfield, Louisiana, yep.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken at the Million Man March in 1995, twelve years ago. To the left is my brother, Willie, with the hat on is my brother, Major, and that's me to the left of Major. My brother, Curtis [Curtis Hudson], also went with us and he is the one who took this particular photograph. I also took a photograph of Curtis, Major, and Willie. So the four of us went together, we went on a bus with some other men. And that was a very, very enlightening and very spiritual day for, for all four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay. I am receiving an award for a book that I, I did for Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] called 'Pass It On: African American Poetry for Children' [Wade Hudson]. And I think this was taken in 1994 and the book was awarded the book of the year by the New Jersey Writers Association. And the gentleman who is presenting the award is Mr. Essarin [ph.]. I don't remember his first name.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1995 in Mansfield, Louisiana. We had gone there to, to funeralize my oldest sister, Mary Geraldine [ph.], who had passed away. My son, Stephan, is to the left. My father has his arm around his waist and that's my father, Stephan is with the suit and the red tie. My father, Wade, Sr. [Wade Hudson, Sr.], that's me next to him with my arms around, on his shoulder, my daughter, Katura [Katura J. Hudson] is to the left, and the little kid in the front is my nephew, step- Eric [Eric Hudson]. And Eric is, is now a, a music producer and song writer.
Speaker 1: This little kid?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That was taken in 1995.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph that was taken at the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival] in Atlanta [Georgia] in 1996. The Black Arts Festival during that time was held every, every two years. The first year we went was in 1994 and so this is the, the second year that we went. And we exhibited there, we had our books, and we autographed copies of books that people purchased. Again, this is in 1996. And that's Cheryl, obviously, and, and Wade Hudson, yours truly.
Speaker 2: This is my first book with Just Us Books [Just Us Books, Inc.]. The first two books that the company did were authored by Cheryl. And this particular book, 'Book of Black Heroes from A to Z' ['Book of Black Heroes from A to Z: An Introduction to Important Black Achievers for Young Readers,' Wade Hudson and Valerie Wilson Wesley] was co-written by Valerie Wilson Wesley who is now a very famous African American writer who has done very well. But this book was published in, actually 1989 and it presents, a number of African American achievers, many of them were, could not be found in other books and so this book has done extremely well since it was released in 1989. I think we've printed probably seven- eight hundred thousand copies.
Speaker 1: But you said the--
Speaker 2: This is a book that I did for Scholastic. It was released in 2004, 'Powerful Words: More Than 200 Years of Extraordinary Writing by African Americans' [ed. Wade Hudson]. Actually uses the words either written, spoken, by African Americans to show the impact that those words have had on our society, and in particular African American and American history.
