Story_ID: 633495
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Donald L. Hense, H-E-N-S-E.
Speaker 1: What does the L stand for?
Speaker 2: Langford.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it please?
Speaker 2: L-A-N-G-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: July 4th, 1942.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I'm chairman and chief executive officer of Friendship Public Charter Schools [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We are located at 120 Q Street NE, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: April 23rd, 2007.
Story_ID: 633496
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: And what about food?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: And a season of the year.  What's your favorite (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Summer.
Speaker 1: --time of the year?  Okay, summer.  When you go on vacation, what's your favorite destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). You must be the change you seek.
Speaker 1: You must be the change you seek.  Very good.
Story_ID: 633497
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your family.  Tell me your mother's name.
Speaker 2: Lillie Hense.  Her maiden name was Ivy, I-V-Y [Lillie Ivy Hense].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Greenville, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know when?
Speaker 2: February 3rd, 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about her parents?  Did you know her parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I did not.  My grandparents were dead before I was born.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Marion Ivy [ph.] was my grandfather's name and Julia Ivy was my grandmother's name.
Speaker 1: And they, too, were born in, lived in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: They, they were born in Mississippi.  They grew up in Kennett, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Missouri, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did your mother share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  I--my, my grandparents died while my mother was still a child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she didn't, didn't know very many stories.
Speaker 1: Stories, okay.  But what about her growing up, your mother?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she tell you stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she grew up in a--in a small town, Kennett, Missouri.  Even today, it's a very small town.  And it was a, a town where most the people worked on farms and some of the people worked at businesses within the town itself.  For instance, from a young child, my, my uncle worked at the--at the local bank.  Some taught school there in Kennett, Missouri.  One of my relatives owned a, a--what, what we would now call a convenience store, and that's what I know about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How much education did your mother have?
Speaker 2: My mother graduated from high school and my father [Fred Hense] graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did your mother work outside the home?
Speaker 2: She never had a job in her life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She applied for one job and I think she was--this, this is really the truth.  She applied for, for one job and she came home and said the application was too long and she never went to look for another job again.
Story_ID: 633498
Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with your mother [Lillie Ivy Hense].
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother and I were, were really very close.  I was the middle child, probably what one would consider the spoiled child, very demanding, probably typical.  But my mother liked it and she liked it because I was a take charge kind of individual.  Some people often think of the middle child as being shy or withdrawn or--no.  I was not that person.  And so my mother really liked it because I, I, I--wherever I was, I took charge of the situation, whatever it might be.
Speaker 1: And, and tell me, what type of person was your mother?
Speaker 2: She only cared about the children and the house, what was going on in the neighborhood.  She was very, very, I guess, nosy, the kind of nosy neighbor, gossiper kind of person, and so she knew all of the other ladies in the neighborhood and they, they, they would get together at the store across the street in the morning and, and talk and, and, and drink coffee, so that was her favorite thing to do.
Story_ID: 633499
Speaker 1: Was she [Hense's mother, Lillie Ivy Hense] involved in your school [Lincoln School, St. Louis, Missouri] at all?
Speaker 2: My father was more involved in school than my mother because my, my father came to school every Monday, and so people consequently actually thought my father was on the school board.  Literally, every single Monday, he would come to school.  You couldn't do anything wrong because you only have four days to recoup from that.  I mean, he was there every single Monday.
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: Fred Hense.
Speaker 1: And you said he graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He actually worked at Krey Packing Company in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And what did he do?
Speaker 2: I haven't a clue.
Speaker 1: You, you--okay.  Okay.  And every Monday, was he off on Mondays or did he come after work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He--
Speaker 1: --or before work or something?
Speaker 2: He went before-- came before work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our father went to work at 2:30 in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--but every single--every single Monday, he would be in the door.  It was very scary.
Speaker 1: Would he talk to the teachers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was really big.
Speaker 1: --just to find out--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --your progress or?
Speaker 2: He would sit in class.  He would visit because there, I had other brothers and sisters also in school at the same time.  He would visit the classes, sit there.  He was very active in helping us with our homework.  He was really very, very smart and he was really very good at helping with the homework and things of that nature.  But he really loved coming.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell me where your father was born.
Speaker 2: Walnut Ridge, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know when?
Speaker 2: September 28th, 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: If there is, I don't know it.
Speaker 1: Don't know, okay.  And they, they married and settled--
Speaker 2: In Kennett, Missouri.
Speaker 1: In Kennett, Missouri.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 633500
Speaker 1: Tell me about your relationship with your father [Fred Hense].
Speaker 2: It was a good relation--excellent relationship.  My father lived until he was eighty-four years old, so he, he lived significantly longer than my mother [Lillie Ivy Hense] did.  My mother died quite young at sixty-six.  And, and so he really loved it because I, I liked to read books plus I was a good base--I was really a good baseball player.  And if you could play baseball halfway decently, my father just loved it.  And so he enjoyed me with that.  I wasn't my father's favorite, though.  My sister [Lelone Hense] was.  It was--my older sister.  It was just anything she wanted, it didn't even matter what it was, she got.  But, it was great.  He, he was always there for me.  We never spent time apart until I got old enough to leave because we always were together as a family.  That's the only thing I can ever remember is that we were always together, all of us.  Even as we grew older and my older sister and my brother [Calvin Hense] got married, everybody still came to the house for Sunday dinner, Saturday.  My nieces for instance, my younger brother when he got married and, and started to have children, they would bring them to the house in the morning and they went to the same school we had gone to.  My mother would take them to school and pick them up every day.  So, everything sort of like stayed in a pattern.
Story_ID: 633501
Speaker 1: Tell me about your childhood.  What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I, I knew that question was coming and I--and I actually went back as far as I--as I could and the one thing that stands out more than anything else was, was, was riding downtown St. Louis [Missouri] to go shopping with my father [Fred Hense] and going on the bus, and, and standing--I can remember standing on my father's lap and I was holding and I was reading the signs on the--on the bus.  And this lady said, "Is he reading?"  That--and that--that's the earliest remembrance that I have is that particular incident occurring.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Probably two or three.
Speaker 1: So you learned to read at a very--
Speaker 2: I was reading really early.  I was very, very precocious to say the least (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you said you were your mother's [Lillie Ivy Hense] favorite.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she teach you to read?  How did you learn to read at such a early age?
Speaker 2: Oh, geez, we, we always had, had lots of books around, children's books and so that was--that was just something where, where you were read to.  You had to read.  And I was very active, for instance, even in Sunday school and so you had to read, you know, to prepare for that, so it was always a part of--a part of my life.
Story_ID: 633502
Speaker 1: The neighborhood in which you grew up, the house that you lived in, do you remember what the address was?
Speaker 2: 3651 Cote Brilliante [Avenue].
Speaker 1: And what was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: It was a neighborhood of single family homes.  We owned the house on the corner.  It was a ten room house.  And the houses in the neighborhood were of reasonable size, same.  Almost everyone owned their own home.
Speaker 1: What were the occupations of the people in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: From ministers to business owners to retired individuals, but most, I guess you would consider them ordinary working people now.  But growing up in St. Louis [Missouri] at that point in time or probably any city at that point in time, everybody lived in the same neighborhood whether you were a teacher or a doctor or whatever, you lived in the same neighborhood, so you had the benefit of things that--being quite different than they are now.  There were not these huge gaps in income where, where people could, you know, buy multimillion dollar houses and move to one side of town.  Everybody stayed in the same, same community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were the businesses owned by African Americans in your community?
Speaker 2: Yes they were, absolutely they were.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the stores--
Speaker 2: I mean, the--
Speaker 1: --that you remember.
Speaker 2: The, the businesses that, that I, I remember, you know, the St. Louis American newspaper, the St. Louis Argus newspaper.  We lived probably two or three blocks from these businesses which were all along Eastern Avenue, and Eastern Avenue in St. Louis was the equivalent of what we would call U Street in Washington [D.C.].  It was the center of, of black commerce in St. Louis, Missouri.  And, and, so we were with--there, we always knew people who owned businesses and who were quite successful.
Speaker 1: Besides the newspaper, what other businesses were on that street?
Speaker 2: The typical undertaking establishments (laughter) that, that, that were in every neighborhood at the time.  You know, they weren't huge, huge entities at the time.  They were neighborhood businesses then, undertaking establishment, used car dealerships, things of that nature.  I lived not with the--we're--our house was not far from, from Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri], which back then was, was a major medical facility for, for blacks and, and so you had a huge professional population of nurses and doctors centered around that hospital which was a massive entity.  Stowe Teachers College which was named after Harriet Beecher Stowe and later became Harris-Stowe Teachers College [sic. Harris-Stowe State College; Harris-Stowe State University] in St. Louis.  That also was a part of our, our neighborhood, too.  My school was close in the neighborhood.  And consequently, the people who taught at the school or worked at the school also lived in the, in the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 633503
Speaker 1: When you think of a sound, a smell, or a sight, what takes you back to that time?
Speaker 2: Biscuits, my mother [Lillie Ivy Hense] cooking biscuits from scratch, something that nobody does now, I guess.  But, yeah, that would--that would be it.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about sounds of the community?
Speaker 2: We were always out playing, baseball.  Whatever, whatever the season was, that was the sport we played.  And we'd change up.  We had, you know, dragging balls up and, and gloves up and down the streets, that type of stuff.  It was fun.  I had a--I had a great childhood, I really did.  I had a wonderful childhood.
Speaker 1: What about sights?  What do you remember?  What do you think of when you think of Missouri?
Speaker 2: It was--it was not a very--not a difficult place to live in.  St. Louis [Missouri] became more difficult as we moved toward the '60s [1960s] than it was when I was a kid.  For some reason, early on if you were in St. Louis, St. Louis was a more forward city.  It sort of like took steps backwards as we progressed into the '60s [1960s].  For instance, St. Louis was one of the first cities to, to begin the desegregation process.  The Catholic schools were desegregated in St. Louis in 19--either 1948 or 1949 under the orders of, of then Cardinal Ritter [Joseph Elmer Ritter].  And so the city was a little bit more forward thinking at the time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 633504
Speaker 1: Well, what about religion?  Did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: We are members of Southern Mission Baptist Church [Christ's Southern Mission Baptist Church] in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me about your experience.
Speaker 2: 5630 Page Boulevard (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Know the address.  Tell me about your religious experience.
Speaker 2: Nothing--I, I went to church all the time.  That--I, I think that's the one thing that, that you, you have to understand, that, that if you weren't in church, you were in school.  If you weren't in church or school, you were on the playground but you were always where you could easily be found.  And, but I was very active in my church.  I was active in Sunday school.  I was an usher in the church.  I was president of all those groups and very active in the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] also.  So, that was it.
Story_ID: 633505
Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings, your brothers and sisters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  I had two brothers and two sisters.  I was the middle child.  My older brother, Calvin [Calvin Hense], is still alive and lives in St. Louis [Missouri].  He's retired.  My older sister, Lelone [Lelone Hense], lives in Las Vegas, Nevada, and she's retired.  My younger brother, Alonzo [Alonzo Hense], lives in St. Louis, Missouri, with all of his children and eight thousand grandchildren.  And my younger sister, the baby in our family, died about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name's Geraldine [Geraldine Hense (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Geraldine, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 633506
Speaker 1: Now, you told me that you played baseball.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was there an organized club outside of school?
Speaker 2: Outside of school?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Not organized, no.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even though the--we had teams up at the Vashon Recreation Center [Vashon Community Education Center, St. Louis, Missouri] which was just a few blocks away on the--it was a rec center, our high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] grounds, and so there were baseball teams and the rec center stayed open 'til eleven o'clock at night.  So you had baseball, basketball, volleyball, all of that kind of stuff that, that you could be on any team.  And they also had boxing, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any other sport that you played besides baseball (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was that?
Speaker 2: I was the leading tennis player, also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A very good tennis player.
Story_ID: 633507
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Lincoln School [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Lincoln School.  Now, tell me about your elementary school.
Speaker 2: It was directly--it was diagonal from our house and the principal's name was Lucian P. Garrett, and I can even remember my kindergarten teachers' names, Miss Miller [ph.] and Miss LeClair [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were fantastic.  The most significant experiences there was my first grade teacher's name was Evelyn Kaynin Spain [ph.] and she had a, a theater group called Kaynin's class of expression, so at six years old, I was a member of, of that group and very active in singing and, and recitation until I got to be I think four--probably fourteen years of age.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was extremely active with that group.  And she was a, a profound influence in my life.
Speaker 1: What other experiences in elementary school can you remember?
Speaker 2: Elementary school was great time for me.  I--you're gonna hear--keep hearing me say everything was a great time, well it was.  I had a--I had a good time.  I was an excellent student.  I remember all of my teachers, which is probably quite strange for the length of time we're talking.  I remember my teachers because they were--I had--I had good experiences in school.  The, the various things that we were involved in from, from being in plays to the--to competing in the science fair, things of that nature, I, I did all of that kind of stuff and, and enjoyed it.  I, I like winning if you probably--I like--I love trophies and stuff like that, I do, I really do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were your teachers black or white?
Speaker 2: They were black.
Speaker 1: All of them?
Speaker 2: Up until college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you have male teachers?
Speaker 2: I had lots of male teachers.  I--I'm still in contact now with my high school advisor, Mr. Beeks [Earl C. Beeks, Sr.], who was my advisor the entire time through school, fantastic person.
Story_ID: 633508
Speaker 1: In your community, did you have an opportunity to actually leave the community and interact with other races of people or, you know, as far as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a--even as a early teenager, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about those experiences.
Speaker 2: Well, the--in--way back then, they, they used to have the, the so-called interfaith commission and so this was a, a, a group which if you remember back then, they were established in, in, in many large cities, and, and what they were about way back then was trying to promote integration and, and I was a part of--a part of those groups.  I was extremely active, for instance even at, at--in the American Red Cross way back then.  Not only was I active, but I was--I was president of the St. Louis--St. Louis County [Missouri] Junior Red Cross and also a member of the board of directors of the midwestern Red Cross.
Story_ID: 633509
Speaker 1: And did you go straight to high school or did you attend a middle school or junior high school?
Speaker 2: We didn't have middle school in St. Louis [Missouri].  It was a K-8 [kindergarten to eighth grade] system, so I went directly from Lincoln [Lincoln School, St. Louis, Missouri] to Vashon High School [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell Vashon?
Speaker 2: V-A-S-H-O-N.
Speaker 1: And tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But--well, it was.  It was--it was fine.  I walked to school most days with my best friend, Samuel Wright [ph.], and that was--that was it.  Mr. Beeks [Earl C. Beeks, Sr.] was my advisor.  I took--I had wonderful competitions with, with kids in school, James Parrine [ph.] and, and Caroline Reynolds [ph.] and, and stuff like that, good friends, Edwin Bailey [ph.], and we're all by the way good friends now.  We are emailing each other back and forwards all the time right now, so they were friends then and they are, are friends now.  And I'm really not in St. Louis very often anymore, but we, we do keep in contact with one another.
Speaker 1: Now, in high school, did you participate in student council?
Speaker 2: I, I probably got more awards than, than any student in history.  One awards day ceremony, I got fifteen awards.  That was just for one day.  But I was active in student government.  I was active in almost every club that ever existed.  I was in the concert choir.  I was president of the concert choir.  I was in the school quartet.  I was active in the thespian society and starred in several of the plays as well as participated in, in operettas, so high school was good (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so you can sing a little bit, huh?
Speaker 2: I could at that point (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What are you trying to say, your voice went away?
Speaker 2: It left (laughter).
Story_ID: 633510
Speaker 1: So, in high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri], what were you--what were your desires or thoughts about what you would do when you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: The only thing I ever thought I would do was I was--I, I grew up--I was going to be an ambassador, and so I, I literally grew up moving to Washington, D.C.  I never, ever thought about living any place other than Washington, D.C.  And it really comes from a column that used to be in Jet magazine many, many, many years ago.  People will laugh, but it was called Gerri Major's Washington [sic. Gerri Major's Society World].  And so I didn't have any idea that she was only covering parties.  So I thought everybody in Washington wore a tuxedo.  So I used to say I was moving to Washington so I could wear a tuxedo.  And, of course, later I found out (laughter)--found out a little bit more about why they had on tuxedos all the time, but that was--that was it.  I always wanted to be an ambassador, didn't have a clue what an ambassador did, but I, I wanted to be an ambassador.  And two weeks after graduate school [Stanford University, Stanford, California], I moved to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: How did you decide what college you would go to?
Speaker 2: Ooh, that's a very ticklish subject.  I was accepted and got a curator scholarship [Curator Scholars Award] to the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], so I was going to the University of Missouri.  But that summer, the National Baptist Sunday school convention met in St. Louis, Missouri, and the first night, the speaker was Dr. Mordecai Wyatt Johnson [Mordecai Johnson], president of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate.  The second night, the speaker was Dr. Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays], president of Morehouse.  The third night, the speaker was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  And so I got on the telephone after that and called the college and said, "I want to attend Morehouse College."  And the school was quite small back then.  We only had about five hundred kids.  So everybody answered their own telephone.  And so the person who answered the phone was Dr. Henry Hamilton [Henry Cooke Hamilton] who was the registrar.  And, and I said, "You know I want to come to Morehouse.  I just saw Martin Luther King."  And he said, "Son, we don't register people on the telephone."  I said, "But I'm really smart."  I air mailed my transcript.  Now, that should tell you something if someone says they air mailed something how long ago that really was.  And I said, "I'll call you tomorrow after you had a chance to read it," (laughter).  And so the next day in the afternoon, I called back and said, "Did you get it?"  He said, "You really are smart."  I said, "Can I come?"  He said, "Yeah."  And I got accepted to Morehouse College on the telephone.
Story_ID: 633511
Speaker 1: Before we go into college, tell me more about family life.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you and your family do to have fun at home?  What was--
Speaker 2: Everything centered around playing games around the kitchen table.  We played Scrabble, we played cards, we played whist, we played Old Maid, things like that.  But it was all, all games where the, the losers got up and, and sat out, you know, that kind of stuff, but it was always together and, and it, it was a lot of fun.  And we did that on Saturdays and Sundays, but we were always together.
Speaker 1: What, what were you telling me about the dice on the, the games (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My--
Speaker 1: --Monopoly?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Fred Hense], the--Monopoly was one of our favorite games but my father wouldn't allow us to play with, with dice and so we had to take cards and turn it over and you move however moves the card said.  So, that was one of the odd things about it.  He, he would not allow, allow us to play with dice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about television?
Speaker 2: Well, television was, was a little late coming on comparatively speaking, but we had the first television in the neighborhood.  I can remember, it was a, a round screen Philco with a wooden, a--it was the wooden case.  It wasn't plastic but, but real wood.  And it--and it was a Philco black and white.  And the channel in St. Louis [Missouri] was either, I think it may have been KMO--KMOX [KMOX Radio], probably was the--was the first channel in St. Louis that I can remember.  You had one channel.  That was it.
Speaker 1: What programs do you remember that you used to watch?
Speaker 2: As a kid, John Cameron Swayze was the news man.  Then, Chet Huntley and David Brinkley were the new--were the principal news people, 'I Love Lucy.' 'I Married Joan' was even before I married Lucy (laughter).  Well, that is--that, that really dates me.  But, but 'I Married Joan' was, was probably way before that.  Then, 'My Little Margie,' you know, stuff like that.  'Julia' came on later on, on television, so that, that was essentially it.
Speaker 1: What about--
Speaker 2: There wasn't a lot.
Speaker 1: What about 'Zorro' and--
Speaker 2: Oh, 'Zorr-' --
Speaker 1: 'Rin Tin Tin' ['The Adventures of Rin Tin Tin']--'Rin Tin Tin'?
Speaker 2: See, 'Zorro' came on at eleven [o'clock] at night.
Speaker 1: Oh, really?
Speaker 2: It came on very, very late at night and so the--you had to try to stay awake to see that and I'm--right now, I'm not a person--if you're having something late, you should not expect me to be a part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I go to sleep very early and I rise very early.
Story_ID: 633512
Speaker 1: You're graduating from high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] in 1960.  No?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) One of us is wrong on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I think I graduated in 1961.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Did you go to the high school prom?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And who did you take to the prom?
Speaker 2: Laura Jones.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the--about your prom.
Speaker 2: We had an elementary school prom, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I took the same girl.  Four years later, I took the same one.  But that's--yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, you get accepted to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] over the telephone.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: My brother and I drove down to go to school.  I had a new convertible; it was beautiful.  And, but I was--I was really lost.  I got there and, and my brother just thought it was horrible.  And so he went back home and told my mother [Lillie Ivy Hense] it was the most awful place he'd ever seen in his whole life, that I was sleeping on army cots.  And my mother called every day for the first two weeks crying on the phone and saying, "Come home, come home, come home."  And I was like, I'm not hardly coming back.  When I left St. Louis [Missouri], I knew I was never coming back again.  I knew from that moment, never would I come back.
Speaker 1: But, was it horrible for you?
Speaker 2: No, I just knew I wasn't coming back.  It was small town-ish and I was getting away from it.
Speaker 1: No, I meant, was it--
Speaker 2: Was the school horr--
Speaker 1: The--yeah.
Speaker 2: No, I was--I was perfectly happy.  It was brother who was having the problem.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, he went to a state school.  So, you know, fine, they had lots of stuff.  Morehouse was a poor little private school and they didn't.  It was fine with me.  Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] went there, who cared (laughter)?
Story_ID: 633513
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you said you had a new convertible.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had jobs while you were in high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Tell me about them.
Speaker 2: I, I mean, I did everything.  I worked at the b- the, the summer before, I worked at the board of education, not doing anything but typing.  I knew how to type very, very, very well, to be honest, and so I had--took a summer job at the board of education in the--in the supply unit in the office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was just fine with me.
Speaker 1: So you saved your money.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, saved my money.  I had lots of clothes and I had a car.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which didn't last very long, by the way.
Speaker 1: How did you pay for college?
Speaker 2: The first--oh, I'll be happy to tell you that story.  So, with all of this stuff, right, and I had--I had money to go to college.  I had a small inheritance and--
Speaker 1: An inheritance from where?
Speaker 2: My aunt.  And my--when my aunt passed, she left me her stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and so when I--when I got to school, I had money.  But I also--the car was new and everything, so I, I was going out in the evening.  So the, the community, of course, tells.  At that time, the Atlanta [Georgia] community around Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was very small and so I would go up to a local nightclub called Paschal's [La Carrousel Lounge] in Atlanta, which you've probably heard, heard of.  And, and at that time, they brought in all of these stars, would come in, you know, for various shows and, and whatnot.  And so someone called the college and told them that I was hanging around up there.  And so I was called in and told either get rid of the car or they were gonna send me home.  That was clearly it, and that I needed to stay in the dorm at night.
Story_ID: 633514
Speaker 1: And who was the president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] while you were there?
Speaker 2: Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] was the president when that happened (laughter).
Speaker 1: And did you have any direct dealings with him?
Speaker 2: Yes, very--
Speaker 1: Tell--
Speaker 2: --much so.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.
Speaker 2: Lots of direct dealings with him.  The--I, I think he's probably the, the, the monumental figure in Morehouse College's history if you listen to everyone even if their, their association with him were peripheral.  But he was--he was not a difficult person, but it was someone who was accessible to students even though he traveled a lot.  And the most profound thing about him was not just his demeanor, but it was his memory.  And so I was--I was totally brainwashed by this so-called Morehouse mystique after probably the second or third day on the campus.  Because they--the, the, the--it was--it was so wonderful.  He--we had a convocation and it was the opening convocation in Sale Hall.  And the faculty were all in their academic garb and, of course, you only--you didn't see, see this and you were just like--just overwhelmed by it all.  And Dr. Mays, when the faculty stood up, he introduced every single person on the faculty and every single college and every degree they had, and he just had his hand in his side pocket, and that was it.  And by the time he finished, that was all.  It was over with.  I knew I was where I was supposed to be 'cause I had--I was just gone.  And then, you know, they started to teach you how to eat, you know, table manners, how to dress, you know, all sorts of things that, that, you know, they say make--made the Morehouse man, and it was--it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 633515
Speaker 1: What about chapel?
Speaker 2: Chapel, every Monday, Wednesday, Friday--oh, Jesus.  I, I--chapel wasn't a bother for me at all because it was always where they had the speakers.  And so I was very accustomed to being in, in environments where, where speakers were.  That was not an issue for me at all.  And, in fact, later on after chapel were disbanded, I was in a group that, that led for bringing chapel back because I felt it--that the college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] were missing an important aspect and that was passing information off to one another and how do you continue to transmit culture and, and I believe that that is extremely important.
Story_ID: 633516
Speaker 1: Now, you were very, very bright in high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri], got lots of awards.  How did you fit in in Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Did you find yourself centered around other bright students or did you feel that you can do just as well here as you did before?
Speaker 2: For me, the, the--I, I typically navigate to people who are--who are bright, who are extremely active, and so it was no different in More- at Morehouse.  And then I was extremely active in my fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and in what I thought was a, a, a great mission to, to, to turn my fraternity into something that, that I just--I was thrilled with and, and that's what I--that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So, your academics stayed--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the same.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I was a Merrill scholar [Charles E. Merrill, Jr. scholar], which at Morehouse, that's about as, as good as you can get.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your fraternity.  Which--what fraternity?
Speaker 2: I'm a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so tell me what you mean by turning it into an organization that--
Speaker 2: Kappas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) did a lot in the community.
Speaker 2: When, when I joined the fraternity, their reputation were they were party people and I didn't mind the, the reputation of being a party person.  I just felt it ought to be about more than, than that.  And so I, I got very busy recruiting people to the fraternity and I started recruiting people and--with, with--that either you were tops in sports or you were tops academically, and that's who I went after in terms of trying to get them in the--in--into the fraternity, that was it.  You had to be doing something where you were contributing to the community, not just I'm a, a bump on the log.  But what are you doing to improve where you are?  And I really believe that, very much.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the, the ideas that you brought to them to take to the community?  What did you do in the community?
Speaker 2: For--way--even way back then, we, we had--we had tutoring, and, and we're talking about in the--in the '60s [1960s], so that was--that, that was like, like nothing, nothing new.  That was just something that you did.  We were extremely active in terms of trying to--trying to improve the, the relationships between the various organizations on campus [of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], very active in student government, extremely active in student government in fact because it was--it, it was Nelson Dan Taylor [Nelson Dan Taylor, Sr.] who was president of the student government when, when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and Nelson, Nelson was a--was, was a Kappa and very, very active.  So, recruiting the people who were the student leaders was extremely important.
Story_ID: 633517
Speaker 1: This was in the '60s [1960s], the height of the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was going on, on the campus?
Speaker 2: For, for Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], the--if, if you were to look at, at the types of things that were taking place around the, the [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond era and whatnot, there were a lot of Morehouse students who were involved, but the campus really wasn't as directly involved as you--as you probably would think.  Several times, for instance, I know I was in--invited to speak away 'cause I'm very opinionated.  I was invited to speak, places like Fort McPherson [East Point, Georgia] and, and, and whatnot.  But the campus itself was not actively involved in, in the Civil Rights Movement as a, you know, a large group of people.  That wasn't true.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how--what was your involvement--
Speaker 2: Mine?
Speaker 1: --personally?  Personally.
Speaker 2: For me, I was--I was involved in the peace movement, believe it or not.  I actually was a, a member of the united--member of the board of the United States National Students Association, and that was, was quite interesting in that that was the group that, that sponsored the peace marches all over the, the country if you remember back then.  And I actually was coordinator for the peace marches for southern states.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember what you were doing when President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed?
Speaker 2: I was in St. Louis [Missouri] doing something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember--
Speaker 1: What about the--
Speaker 2: --what I was doing.
Speaker 1: --March on Washington?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Other than watching it on television.
Story_ID: 633518
Speaker 1: And when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.
Speaker 2: I was on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was not good.  He had--he had been seen walking across the campus the previous weekend and I was a student representative on the board, so I had been, you know, around him and that type of stuff in, in meetings.  Both he and his father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] were on the board of trustees of the college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  His sister [HistoryMaker Christine King Farris] taught at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and so that was--seeing these people was not an issue.  You could see them.  He, he, of course, was not a, a common figure, but he would appear from time to time.  But I was on, on campus that day, and, and I can remember people just gathering and, and trying to find someplace to, to hear about it, and it was--it was gripping and sad, and I don't think anyone really believed it.
Speaker 1: And you said that for his funeral, you were one of the ushers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was the chief usher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There were others who were usher, but I, I was the chief usher and, and I remember because I, I was the person who escorted people on--in the campus funeral like Nelson Rockefeller, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] came down the aisle, you know, these kinds of things, yes.
Story_ID: 633519
Speaker 1: Now, tell me more about the peace marches.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You said you coordinated them.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me some stories about the peace marches.
Speaker 2: Well, for me, that was a, a very defining time for me as an individual because you, you start to become, I guess, very, very serious about, about some of the issues of the day so much so that you, you actively rebel or, or whatnot against something.  And, and that's not necessarily a very easy thing to do as much as people would like to say, "Oh, yeah, it just came to my mind."  It really isn't a very easy thing to do.  And so it was--it was becoming actively in- involved in, in resisting what we felt was, was an unjust time for Americans to be off in a country where we, frankly, weren't wanted.  And I'm not sure we knew why we were there at all.  To this very day, I don't think it's easily explainable, but it was certainly a time for people here to say I want to do--want the, the country to do something else and it was time for other people to participate in, in trying to get some other type of change.
Speaker 1: Were you in danger at all of being drafted?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't, not to my knowledge.  I would suspect if in fact they wanted to, they would have, but they didn't.
Story_ID: 633520
Speaker 1: Tell me about more activities at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Other than being involved in the, the tennis team, the fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], student government, the most exciting things were being a Merrill scholar [Charles E. Merrill, Jr. scholar].  I was one of the first Merrill scholars to Africa which was, of course, all of this, coming through the same period where people were trying to, you know, to learn more about themselves.  And so I was, was a Merrill scholar to the University of Ghana [Accra, Ghana] and I went with my close friend, Tyrone Hote [ph.] who was also a Merrill scholar.  And then the following year, I was a Rockefeller [Rockefeller Foundation] intern in economics at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] since econ is actually my chosen field.  And after that, I went to graduate school [Stanford University, Stanford, California].
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the experience going to Africa.  Was this your first time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was.
Speaker 1: --out of the country?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  It was my first time out of the country and it was--it was exciting as it possibly could be.  I, I, I just thought it was gonna be wonderful.  I'm not quite sure I was prepared for everything that, that I, I faced while I was there.  But the, the most challenging thing that I faced there was not having hot water.  That was about all.  Everything else was fine.  We, we bunked, we had rooms at--on campus at the--at the University of Ghana in Legon [Ghana].  The, the students were absolutely warm and wonderful and the people we were with were fantastic people.  Dr. C. Eric Lincoln led the group and we just had a great time and learned a lot.  Went, went to the caves off the coast where slaves were housed before they were put on, on the boats and, and whatnot and listened to the--to African students actually tell us the history of what happened, so it was a--sort of an unvarnished version of what, what really happened, and I think that was probably the, the, the first real knowledge that you got of several different stories surrounding the slave trade, but it was--it was a very good time.  It was wonderful.  I really learned a lot.  I got a chance to, to interact with scholars like W. Arthur Lewis who later became a Nobel prize [Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences] winner at, at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], that kind of stuff.  That's wonderful.
Story_ID: 633521
Speaker 1: And what about your experience at--as a Rockefeller fellow [Rockefeller Foundation fellow]?
Speaker 2: Ooh, the coldest summer ever spent in my life.  Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], I was--I remember 'cause I was walking around on July 4th with my topcoat on (laughter) and I was about to freeze in, in Ithaca, New York, and, and kids were walking around with shorts on and I had on a topcoat.  I, I mean, I was really, really cold.  And the most significant event there is, is the person who--the teacher who was actually directing the program was Thomas Sowell, the noted conservative economist.  And so we, we hit heads on from day one.  And, and finally, he, he threw me out of the program.  And so I spent--I spent the rest of the summer working with Alfred Kahn [Alfred E. Kahn] and wrote a paper called 'Pricing Policies in the Petroleum Industry' [sic. 'Integration and Competition in the Petroleum Industry,' Melvin G. deChazeau and Alfred E. Kahn]  Dr. Kahn, if you remember, was a petroleum economist and later became head of the council of economic advisors [Council on Wage and Price Stability] under Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.].  And so I wrote--actually, ended up, I guess, much better off having to interact with a person who, who was at that time a really world famous economist.  So I knew coming from, from my background that, that after having a clear understanding of Tom Sowell's philosophy, that there was little likelihood that we were going to agree on very many issues, and I certainly was not gonna be one to give in, so it--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me.  What were the differences in how you thought about things?  What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --his ideology?
Speaker 2: --coming, you--
Speaker 1: Or philosophy?
Speaker 2: You, you really began to, to understand if you just look at it from an economic point of view that, that there are, are, are economic philosophies, there are conservative philosophy, there are the money--they call them the monetarist economic--economist, and, and that was the school lead by Milton Friedman.  And, and Tom Sowell walked in class, his first day of class with a stack of Milton Friedman textbooks under his arm and I just went berserk.  So, that was that.  And then I, of course, were--was really on, on the other side here, probably taking up my role as, as liberal or whatever you might want to call it.  But, but I just typically didn't agree with whatever he was--he was pushing at the moment and, and I would attack it, so.
Speaker 1: And so he couldn't deal with it.  Is that why (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he threw me out.
Speaker 1: He threw you out (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.
Story_ID: 633522
Speaker 1: Tell me, who were some of your professors at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] while you were there?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the most interesting one was, was Mr. Dansby [Claude B. Dansby].  Mr. Dansby was a mathematician.  And, and all the time in his class, he, he called me Mr. Dense, and he never, never got around to calling me Mr. Hense [HistoryMaker Donald L. Hense] except when he felt like it, it was Mr. Dense.  But, Pop was, was just absolutely fantastic, very, very good, helpful, kind person.  C.B.--E.B. Williams [Edward Buchanan Williams], the head of the econ, econ [economics] department, was fantastic because I also served on the advisory committee of the college and that was--that was the dis- school disciplinary committee, so he was the chair of that committee and--but--and I was one of the elected representatives on it as a student representative, so we got a chance to interact, but he was a wonderful, absolutely wonderful person.  Other people who were important in the college, Marcia Halvorsen, who was my econ professor, she was at, at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She taught me microeconomics.
Story_ID: 633523
Speaker 1: We were talking about professors at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you were telling me about a few of them that were inspirational to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so.  I'd, I'd spoken about E.B. Williams [Edward Buchanan Williams], the head of the econ department and Marcia Halvorsen who was my microeconomics professor.  But the, the most series of eventful things to happen at Morehouse was when Charles Merrill [Charles E. Merrill, Jr.] who was chairman of the board and the son of the founder [Charles E. Merrill, Sr.] of Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management], Charlie established a lectureship in economics and brought in some of the leading economic figures of the day, Paul Samuelson, who wrote the econ textbook that everyone--econ- 'Economics' is all it's called, Paul Samuelson, Charles Kindleberger [Charles P. Kindleberger], people like that came to visit the campus.  So you had all of these huge people, John Kenneth Galbraith, these huge people who were in the news and had written your textbook coming to lecture on your campus.  Well, it was just one more way of continuing to indoctrinate you in scholarship and, and, and achievement in a subtle way, but it--it's what happened.  It was a fantastic opportunity.
Story_ID: 633524
Speaker 1: And what about your classmates [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Who else was in your class with you?
Speaker 2: The significant figures that, that, that I can, can think who were in school at the same time as I was, Calvin Butts [HistoryMaker Dr. Calvin O. Butts].  Calvin is a pastor of Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem [New York, New York] and, and president of, of State University of New York at Old Westbury [State University of New York College at Old Westbury, Old Westbury, New York], and Roderic Pettigrew [Roderic I. Pettigrew] who is a outstanding biomedical scientist who also was very, very active in the fraternity.  James Haas [ph.] was in school with me who later headed up one of the major energy firms in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  But they were all just really solid, solid individuals who later did, did very, very well.
Speaker 1: You told me a story about Calvin Butts in the fraternity.
Speaker 2: Oh, Calvin?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Calvin was really smart.  He had a 4.0 average, and so he was really being sought after by all of the fraternities to join.  And Calvin challenged me to a debate.  And my agreement was, if he lost the debate, he would pledge Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  He's a Kappa.
Speaker 1: What did you debate about, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I really don't even know, but it was probably on the value of fraternities because that was his--one of his favorite topics was trying to debate whether fraternities were really valuable organizations that they were Greek letter organization, was there something wrong with blacks being members of Greek letter organizations, things of that nature.  He was really--he, he loved stuff like that.
Story_ID: 633525
Speaker 1: So, you graduated in 1960 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970].  Okay.
Speaker 2: I did a double major in economics and political science.
Speaker 1: All right.  And tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: I went to Stanford University [Stanford, California] in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And?
Speaker 2: I went to Stanford University.  It was in economics and when I--when I, I got to Stanford, it was--I guess it was a interesting, interesting story because during the, the lock-in and this was after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was, was killed, the board of trustees met to discuss the--where the college was going, everything had settled down.  And there was a group of students who decided to lock the board in and so we were locked in the boardroom for a few days.  And, and it was so interesting because I was put in charge of making sure Charles Merrill [Charles E. Merrill, Jr.] didn't resign from the board, so, so I was sitting up under the huge board table talking to Charles Merrill for two days, and we became really, really, really good friends.  And afterwards, we just communicated and communicated and communicated.  And so when graduation time came, he asked me, he said, "Well, where are you gonna go to graduate school?"  I said, "Well, Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays], said we should go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]."  It--this is another part of the brainwashing.  Because Dr. Mays would say, "When you leave Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], you'll be able to, to succeed at any college or university in the United States.  You can go to Harvard."  And, and so, obviously, you know, I said, "Well, I'm going to Harvard," you know, doc- and so he, Charles said, "Well I'm sending my kids to Stanford.  You need to try Stanford."  He said, "That's an up and coming school."  I can remember those words exactly.  "That's an up and coming school."  So, I applied to Stanford.  I didn't--all I knew, it was in California.  And, and I was accepted to Stanford and got out there and that, I think, was the most shocking experience of my life.
Story_ID: 633526
Speaker 1: Why so?
Speaker 2: I had never seen anything so big and so lavish in my whole life.  That's the truth.  And, and the student guide who was taking all the little newbies around, right, the guy said, "As far as you can see is Stanford University's campus [Stanford, California]."  And then, so they started to explain to us all of the things you could do like golf.  Golf?  On the campus?  And then you could board your horses just in case you wanted to bring your horses, right?  And the school had a ski lodge.  You know, you have to--only so many rooms were available to the students and this kind of stuff.  And so, clearly, this was a, a far cry from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] where we had army cots for your bed--for our beds (laughter).  So, it was--it was vastly different, so--and, and quite beautiful, quite a beautiful place to be.  And so I had I think overall very, very good experiences there in terms--I, I met obviously lots of famous people.  I was elected to, to Stanford's board of trustees committee on investments, so I had the opportunity over a couple year period to, to have conversations with I think some of the great captains of industry, Bill Hewlett [William R. Hewlett] and David Packard, to, to talk with these people and--you know, and, and stare, you know, as, as one would.  That's I think the, the interesting experience I had, had there was probably with the guy who, who was the former secretary of state, Warren [Warren Christopher]--and I can't even remember his name now, but he was secretary of state.  And his first meeting of the board, the--there was a cocktail party, and, and he walked over to me and introduced himself.  He said, "You're probably the only person here I have anything in common with."  And, and, of course, we were around all of these really, really conservative Republican businessmen and so he walked over and introduced himself.  That was--that was that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you got your degree in--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Nope.
Speaker 2: The--my experience at Stanford was a good one.  Stanford, I walked away.
Story_ID: 633527
Speaker 1: And I walked away from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] not because I was angry with anyone, it was that I was more determined.  I, I had completed all the requirements for my Ph.D., passed my Ph.D. qualifying exam, and had my dissertation proposal accepted in twenty-two months.  And I couldn't get people interested in what my topic was and it was--had to do with the events surrounding the founding and development of black colleges [HBCUs], and that was my--and, and I got such things as, oh, you know, you--why don't you think of a more rigorous subject?  And to me, that was the most interesting subject.  My life is the most eventful thing to happen to me, was to go to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  Now, how do you--how do you preserve and protect that experience for people?  Became extremely important to me and it's important to me right now.  And, and so when I couldn't find anyone who was interested, I, I had a conversation with, with my advisor and I said, "You know, I'm sure, sure you'll continue to be successful in your field and I will be successful in mine."  And two weeks later, I was on the staff at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  I established the department of governmental relations at Howard University July 1, 1973.
Story_ID: 633528
Speaker 1: When did you go back to intern at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 2: In 1969 is when I interned at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And so you were on staff at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So, tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I came to Washington [D.C.] for a series of interviews with each of the vice presidents at Howard University on Howard University's campus and--for various jobs that they had available.  And then I left Washington and flew to Atlanta [Georgia] to my godparents' home, and when I got there, there was a job offer waiting to come to Howard to establish a department.  The board of trustees wanted to establish a department of governmental relations, and that's what I got, a resolution to establish a department and I built that department over the next seven years, the university.
Speaker 1: And tell me more about what the function of this department--
Speaker 2: Howard at that time needed to expand what it was doing in terms of research and development, and they were not getting a very large amount of money in that area, and so they needed someone to focus university attention toward the acquisition of government grants, and so my department was established to do that.
Speaker 1: And how much did--were you able to bring to the university (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The--well, the interesting thing is--and, and, and my boss is still--former boss is still alive and well, Dr. Roger Estep [Roger D. Estep] who hired me, but we did a report where we predicted our success to the board and, and so I think the first year, we said in our report that we were gonna try to raise $5, 5.5 million.  In the first year, we doubled that amount of money.  And so we had a very successful time.  When I left in 1979, Howard was getting somewhere about $26, $27 million a year in federal grants at that time.  I'm sure they're hugely successful.  But there were a lot of good people at Howard, but there was not the encouragement to go out there and secure federal grants, and so we just simply highlighted it, brought it to the forefront, assisted in proposal writing, proposal development, things of that nature.
Story_ID: 633529
Speaker 1: In 1979, you decide to do what?
Speaker 2: In 1979, it was a--I guess it was a strange year because it was--it was time for a transition for one thing, but what occurred was is that we had the, the PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition] conference and--in Washington, D.C., and, and it had been a, a very, very difficult time in that we had to, to organize everything for this conference that was held on Howard University's campus[Washington, D.C.], Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and PUSH.  And so the, the conference was, was being sponsored by the [U.S.] Department of Health, Education and Welfare [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], Joseph Califano [Joseph A. Califano, Jr.], if I'm remembering correctly.  That's been quite a while.  And, and so when the conference was over with, after all the work that we had done, Dr. Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek] stood up and he thanked a whole bunch of people and he didn't say anything about the department, and we had written the proposal and dah-dah-dah-dah-dah-dah, done all the work, and so I, I said--I resigned and went to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And what was your position there?
Speaker 2: I established the department of governmental relations for Boston University.
Speaker 1: And did the same thing for them?
Speaker 2: And did the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was just as successful (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Successful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anything else significant happen there?  How long did you stay in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I--no, I was here.  I--my office was right in--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --what is--what is still the National Press Building [Washington, D.C.] and so I, I was--I was there two years.
Story_ID: 633530
Speaker 1: So, in 1981.
Speaker 2: In '81 [1981], after that, we were just entering the computer age and so that's when my entrepreneur streak showed up where this was--I was going to be rich (laughter).  Not often a good motive for doing things (laughter).  So, I, I established a, a computer company called Applied Information Management, AIM [Applied Information Management, Inc.].  And so what I was trying to do with that was to be a medical service bureau (laughter); oh, what fun.  And, and I was always one client away from breaking even (laughter), always one client away, so that lasted a few years.  I, I enjoyed it.  I learned a lot.  My passion for computers, obviously, in the early years 'cause, you know, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] didn't come out with a computer--the desktop until '81 [1981] and, and so my, my desire to be a part of technology I think really burns bright.  I, I really, really believe in it since--quite sincerely.  If you can see all the toys that I have here, you clearly know that.
Speaker 1: Well, you said you were one client away from breaking even.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was it exactly that you did as a, a medical service bureau?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, what I was--what I--what--something that is probably a huge business now because of the whole aspect of outsourcing your work, that this would've been billing the physicians' clients--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when they--whatever came, you know, billing and sending out those bills.  And, and we had software that would--that had all of the medical procedures in it and you could add new procedures as you went along 'cause it was open source and then you would simply create the invoices and mail them out to customers.  And so, obviously, the, the, the success of the business depended on the volume because you certainly couldn't--for a small, small number of patients, you couldn't charge a huge sum of money, so you really needed more, more, more, more in order to break even, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It never happened (laughter), but it was fun.
Story_ID: 633531
Speaker 1: So what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went back to work doing what I actually knew more about and I started to work for Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me.
Speaker 2: I, I opened the Washington [D.C.] office for, for Dartmouth College.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Innocuous at best.  The people were quite kind, somewhat aloof, and I think that's very easy if you spend a lot of time in some places isolated as Hanover, New Hampshire.  You can sometimes not understand an atmosphere like Washington, D.C., a more, much more intense atmosphere.  But they were--they were very, very nice people.  It was a, a good environment.  I have made a lifelong friend, the person who I reported to at the time, is on the board of trustees of this organization [Friendship Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.], and so we've been friends for, for oh, at least twenty-some years and, he, he is a great friend.  That's Dr. Gregory Prince.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you stay with Dartmouth?
Speaker 2: Stayed Dartmouth until 1988 and I was hired away.
Story_ID: 633532
Speaker 1: To who?
Speaker 2: To become vice president at Prairie View A&M University [Prairie View, Texas].  At Howard University [Washington, D.C.], the dean of the college of engineering was Dr. Percy Pierre [HistoryMaker Percy Pierre], and Dr. Pierre if you remember had become assistant secretary of the army for research during the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration.  And after that, he was named the head of Prairie View A&M University of Texas.  And so he remembered my work at Howard and asked me to come to Texas to be the vice president for development in university relations there.
Speaker 1: And did you enjoy that position?
Speaker 2: I had a ball in Texas (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.  And, do you have a family by this time?
Speaker 2: By this time, I have a--I have a son who is thirty-four years of age.  I have two grandsons, one ten, and one two, so some vast differences there, but, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you stayed at Prairie View for how long?
Speaker 2: Until 1988.
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought you went there in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Nope, '86 [1986].  Let's get it--we'll get it--get it--
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: --from '86 [1986]--
Speaker 2: And I stayed until 1988.
Story_ID: 633533
Speaker 1: In 1988, I was recruited to become vice president of the National Urban League.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a big difference.
Speaker 1: Very big difference.  But it was all about fundraising.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I was sitting in my office and the phone rang and, and the lady said she was with this firm in New York City [New York, New York] and, and, and that she had been talking to numerous people and she was recruiting for this job, and I said, "Well what organization?"  She says, "Well I can't tell you the client's name."  I said then, "Just give me more information," so she started talking about the job.  I said, "You're talking about the National Urban League."  She said, "Yes."  I said, "Well, that's clear."  And they were looking to establish the position of vice president for development there and so she asked if I would consider becoming a candidate and I told her no, that I was perfectly happy where I was, and that was that.  So we hung up the phone and she called back a couple times later and finally got me to at least come to New York for, for a interview, and I did.
Speaker 2: Who was the president at that time?  It was--
Speaker 1: John Jacob [HistoryMaker John E. Jacob].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Who's now at Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies].
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so you go to New York.
Speaker 1: Went to New York, very, very eventful time for, for the league because the, the highlight of the time there, believe it or not, was the--was the--really the establishment of a youth program at the league and we did so at the behest of all things, the hip-hop community.  There was a, a record, which was the first hip-hop record to go gold, as they say, and it was called 'Self Destruction.'  You're headed for self destruction.  And there was a video that was produced on 125th Street in Harlem [New York, New York] where all the proceeds from that record came to the Urban League to establish a youth program.  So, it was a--it was a good time for the league.
Speaker 2: Do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A time of transition, but a good time because this was in the--in the years where the league was, was moving away from the charismatic, charismatic type leadership of Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] to John Jacob who had been his deputy for a number of years.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the name of the, the, the record, the hip-hop record?
Speaker 1: It's called 'Self Destruction.'
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry, I meant the name of the, the group that, that made it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a series of artists.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Kool Moe Dee [HistoryMaker Mohandas "Kool Moe Dee" Dewese] and MC Lyte.  It was a whole, whole--all of the early hip hop stars were the people who, who got together and did this--did this record.
Speaker 2: Did--okay, the video.  And the name--I know that the Urban League has a group called the Young Professionals.  Was this the, the youth group?
Speaker 1: No, it was not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was totally, totally different.
Speaker 2: Different.
Speaker 1: This was aimed at, at, at young teenagers.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  And so this, this group became successful.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 633534
Speaker 1: So, what's your next step?
Speaker 2: I, I came home.  I was tired by then.  I--so I came back to Washington [D.C.] (laughter) and all the time that I have lived here, even the times when I was not in the city, I was associated with a organization called Friendship House [Friendship House Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.] and had been on the board of that organization since, since the 1970s.  And so after a stint around, a couple little jobs around town, I became the, the head of Friendship House.  I was the chief executive officer there.
Speaker 1: And in what year are we in now?
Speaker 2: I was there from 1996 to--was it--what year was it?  'Til two thousand and something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you--
Speaker 2: I gotta be much more clear.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: And I'm sorry about--
Speaker 1: Well, if you can't remember (laughter), we can't--
Speaker 2: Let's see, I, I left the Children's Defense Fund in 1996 'cause I worked for [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman, and--
Speaker 1: In 1996?
Speaker 2: I left there.  I, I was at the Children's Defense Fund.  And then I was asked to, to head up Friendship House.  And, and I went to Friendship House in December 1, 1996, and I stayed until 2004, May 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--was the first thing that you--your first action for Friendship House was to, to secure buildings for the program?
Speaker 2: No, the first--Friendship House is located in The Maples, which is the second oldest house in the District of Columbia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the former Francis Scott Key house on D Street on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].  It's this huge mansion on Capitol Hill.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And Friendship has occupied it for a number, number of years, number of generations.  And what in fact the first thing that I did at Friendship House was to look at how to revitalize the organization.  It was founded in 1904.  And what we did was to establish a series of task forces to see what impact could, what is called a settlement house in the tradition of Hull House in Chicago [Illinois], what--how, how do you reestablish its presence within the community.  And one of the task forces came and said you might want to look at having an impact on education and you might want to think about establishing charter schools, and that's when we moved to where the organization became involved with the charter school movement, and that's almost ten years ago.  We opened our first two schools in 1998.
Story_ID: 633535
Speaker 1: Let's go back just a little bit and fill in from 1990 to 1996.
Speaker 2: I left the National Urban League in 1990 and came back to Washington [D.C.].  I was exhausted and I just floated around my house and gardening and things of that nature for a few months.  And then I took a position as director of development of Arena Stage [Washington, D.C.].  And that was from my point of view a, a significant change from the fairly highly intense environments that I had been a part of my entire career either on college campuses or in places like the National Urban League.  Those are, are very, very difficult jobs.  And this job was somewhat easier to handle, had a lot more fun, connected to it, but it was still fundraising, and I'm very good at that.  So I became director of development of Arena Stage and was very, very successful in terms of directing the campaign and the development department at the theater.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I stayed there until 1993.
Story_ID: 633536
Speaker 1: And one of the board members at the theater [Arena Stage, Washington, D.C.] approached me about a development position at Whitman-Walker Clinic [Whitman-Walker Health], which is the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] clinic here in Washington, D.C., and said that, that there was really a serious need for professional fundraising capability and so the AIDS crisis was exploding all over the, the world by then and, and if you're in development, you're a issue person, essentially you really are, and, and so you, you--it was a hot button issue, so can you raise money?  And I did very, very significant fundraising for that organization.  And, I mean, really top notch fundraising centering, centering around both expanding direct mail appeals as well as around special events, bringing people to the city such as Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov] and, and the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, sponsoring Chicago [Illinois], here in the city, really important things, but all centered around raising money for this extremely important cause.
Story_ID: 633537
Speaker 1: After that, I went back to the more serious side, which is probably education, civil rights, and went to work for the Children's Defense Fund and [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman.  That is, in fact, a, a life-changing experience I think for anyone.  It can be a good one or it can be a bad one for, for people, and it was a good one for me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because it, in fact, refocused my life around education, but this time on a significantly younger population.  How do we get children to where we need to, need them to be?  And so the, the, the most wonderful thing about the Children's Defense Fund at that time was the Black Community Crusade for Children.  And it was headed by Lisa Sullivan, and Lisa died a few years ago, but, but Lisa was the most wonderful person.  And she was very, very instrumental in helping me start Friendship Public Charter Schools [Washington, D.C.].  She was one of the founding board members of the school and was quite active, and she died at a very, very young age, thirty-some years of age here.  But she was wonderful.
Story_ID: 633538
Speaker 1: Talking more about, about the charter school [Friendship Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how it started and what you were looking into doing.  Why, why charter schools?  What was the thought behind the charter schools?
Speaker 2: Well, we--you, you really begin at some point in time in, in how you define your life.  And, and, and pretty much you will see that I probably define myself as a change agent among, among things.  And, and for me, education is the most important thing to happen.  I think you, you probably could tell from my conversation, I had good times centered around school and the results of everything that I have are, of course, the results of my experiences and, and my reasonable and relative success in school.  And so this, to me, is how we as black people have to progress, is through education and our ability to use that education for the betterment of ourselves and society.  And so I saw here in the nation's capital the continued decline of the public education system.  You have to think that when we literally have more young men in prison than we have children in high school in the District of Columbia.  That is a phenomenal statistic, particularly when we have fewer than 50 percent of our young people attending high school who stay until graduation.  So something has to be done and there has to be an outlet, and that outlet at the time was the charter school law had passed, reluctantly, of course.  In the District of Columbia, people accepted it but, but I had absolutely no qualms at all about jumping into it at all because we have to do something and the measures have to be drastic.
Speaker 1: So what were those drastic measures?
Speaker 2: Just establishing the school themselves.
Speaker 1: Well, establishing the school--let me back up a minute.  The pub- the charter schools are public schools.
Speaker 2: They are, in fact, public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But, the difference between a charter school and the traditional public school are chartered public schools are established by private entities, and so we as a--as a nonprofit organization established the school, and even though we are certainly accountable to the public, we are--we run the school as a board of a--of, of a small, nonprofit organization.  We run it for the public benefit, but having a charter school also allows you some level of flexibility in what you might do, the ability to establish a curriculum, to focus on a particular type of child.  For instance, there are school, charter schools devoted to the arts, there are charter schools that are, are devoted to science and technology, and there are charter schools that are devoted to general education, and so you can focus on those things you believe to be important.
Story_ID: 633539
Speaker 1: So tell me more about Friendship School [Friendship Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 2: Friendship is a, a wonderful entity.  I'm sure you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) See, I like the--
Speaker 2: --expecting--
Speaker 1: I like the way you--
Speaker 2: --me to say that.
Speaker 1: --while you smile when you say it.
Speaker 2: Well, it is.  It's a--it's a wonderful entity.  We opened our first two schools in, in 1998 in partnership with Edison Schools [Edison Schools, Inc.; Edison Learning, Inc.] of New York [New York].  And we, we took two vacant and abandoned school buildings here in Washington [D.C.], the old Chamberlain High School [Friendship Chamberlain Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] and Woodridge Montessori School [Friendship Woodridge IB Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  We totally renovated those buildings and opened them as elementary schools in 1998, two campuses of the same school.  And so we opened with over thirteen hundred students and, therefore, we opened our doors as the largest public charter school in America and we still occupy that position now.  We now have five campuses with almost four thousand students.
Speaker 1: What makes your schools different from other schools?
Speaker 2: We, we work from a, a different model.  Friendship was started from a social services perspective in a sense that my belief is, is that in order for children to be successful in school that you have to be very, very mindful of the social and economic conditions from which they come.  And you have to address those social and economic conditions in order for them to be successful in school.  One cannot succeed without the other and, and so we have what are called wraparound services, is a phrase that's becoming much more popular now.  But we offer programs for our kids which address their needs from seven o'clock in the morning until our schools close at nine o'clock at night.  And that could mean anything from tutoring.  We have tutoring in some of our schools that begins as early as 5:30 in the morning.  We have Saturday school in, in order to help kids who might need extra help.  We have after school tutoring as well as after school enrichment programs, so it's all not geared toward remedial programs.  We have exciting technology based programs.  We have a robotics team.  For instance, our junior high school students won second place in the Maryland state competition, robotics competition.  But they won it in guess what area?  Research and development.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I wonder why (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is exciting.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And, and so you're, you're, you're talking about things that are, are huge, exciting.  And just last week, we had thirty-two kids who received the White House award for community and civic participation.  We had one student with four thousand hours of community service.  This to me is hugely important.  Not that you're just existing in a community, but you're actively working to try to make that community better.  How, how more--nothing could be more exciting than that.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, tell me more about the school.
Speaker 2: Well, we now--as I indicated, we have, have five campuses.  We have--all of our campuses are in--are in neighborhoods that are considered high need neighborhoods.  Our policy is to attempt to address the educational needs of the poorest kids.  It's not to, to put a, a school in the most affluent neighborhoods in Washington and we're perfectly capable of doing that, too.  But that's not where really our schools are needed.  Our schools are needed where there are poor performing schools and we have put our schools there, and we're doing quite well. For instance, our high school, which opened in 2000, the Friendship Collegiate Academy [Washington, D.C.], has a 95 percent college acceptance rate.  We have a 90 percent cold hard graduation rate.  When I just indicated earlier that the graduation rate in the District of Columbia really is less than 50 percent, and to say you have a 95 percent college acceptance rate is tremendous.  Think about it, we have this year our first Gates Millennium Scholar.  This young lady was named a Gates Scholar out of eleven thousand applicants.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And she's attending Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).  How great.  We have other students who've received similar accolades, Posse scholarships.  Posse scholarships are through the Posse Foundation [The Posse Foundation, Inc., Washington, D.C.] and they are scholarships valued at $120,000 and we have four students to have received Posse scholarships.  We have another young man who is really, really active on the robotics team.  His name is Joseph Brooks [ph.].  Joseph just received a thirty thousand dollar a year scholarship from Rochester Institute of Technology [Rochester, New York].  So, our kids are going to important schools, receiving huge scholarship benefits because they have worked hard to get there.  And this is exciting that they have this opportunity.
Story_ID: 633540
Speaker 1: What's in the future for the school [Friendship Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: For us, we are building a new campus as we speak.  Our new Friendship Southeast Elementary Academy [Washington, D.C.] building will be open in the fall of this year, so we will be able to expand our enrollment in Ward 8 which is the poorest ward in Washington, D.C.  In addition to that, toward the end of this year, we are going to announce a new $30 million building program to build an additional school in Ward 8 which we are calling Friendship Tech Prep [Friendship Technology Preparatory High School, Washington, D.C.], which is a technology preparatory school that will address the economic needs of this community.  It will focus on technology, health sciences, and environmental sciences, so hopefully it will be very exciting.  It--in the sense, the model is, is going to be quite different because the final two years, the eleventh and twelfth grade, the students will actually be attending college courses.  So our goal is for a student to graduate with both a high school diploma and the associate's degree.  So, if you think about how exciting that can be for a kid at eighteen years of age to have the associate's degree with just two more years to finish of college, that could be very exciting, particularly when you're trying to save money.  College is expensive and this is all free.
Speaker 1: Why do you think your schools are so successful?
Speaker 2: Passion.  You have to embrace the Friendship vision or you really can't spend a lot of time here.  And our little motto says, "Community vision, world class education."  And that's what we mean.  We want our kids to have the very best education that we can provide, but you have to want to improve the community in which you reside and this is extremely important, to understand that community and want to do well by it.
Speaker 1: Are the parents involved?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  For instance, it--it's not unusual for us at, at a parent meeting to, to have several hundred parents come and participate.  Just a few weeks ago, we announced the D.C. Achievers scholarships at our school and we had three or four hundred people participating in that program.  It's, it's not unusual but it, it is something that we are--do insist on because we, we do what are called quarterly learning contracts, which is a contract between the parent, the teacher, and student.  And so parents come in to, to meet with the teachers and their--and their child to talk about what happened the previous quarter but also to plot about--plot out what the kid might need to succeed in the coming quarter.
Story_ID: 633541
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and desire for the African American community, period?
Speaker 2: More than--more than anything, I, I really believe that we, we have to embrace community.  We have to embrace it in that we must work to help each other to succeed.  This does not negate the independence of an individual or the independence of a family, but we have to see that we are best working to bring us all up and, and that to me is extremely important.  I don't believe we can, can deny the existence or the need for, for other people to, to, to succeed and that we need to help participate in, in, in that, that success.  We absolutely have to.
Story_ID: 633542
Speaker 1: This interview will be available for the future generations to see, what message would you want to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: Stay in school.
Speaker 1: Is that--
Speaker 2: It's that simple.
Speaker 1: That, that simple.  Okay.  Is there anything else you wanted to talk about, about the school [Friendship Public Charter Schools, Washington, D.C.], something that you might not have--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --told us about?  This wonderful project.
Speaker 2: It is wonderful.
Story_ID: 633543
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you have not done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: Take a long vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it's pretty, pretty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pretty much it, huh?
Speaker 2: --close to time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: Not one thing.  The--you know, I take that back.  My mother [Lillie Ivy Hense] died before I moved in my house and I would have loved for my mother to have seen my house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think I still think about that today.
Story_ID: 633544
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As someone who worked for children, that's all.  Nothing famous, nothing big, just worked for children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well, if that's all, I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story with us because it will be most inspirational for the future generations.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 633545
Speaker 1: This is President Bush [President George Walker Bush] visiting the Friendship Woodridge campus [Friendship Woodridge IB Elementary School, Washington, D.C.].  The individuals in the photo, President George Bush, center Chris Whittle [H. Christopher Whittle], founder of Edison Schools [Edison Schools, Inc.; Edison Learning, Inc.], and Donald Hense [HistoryMaker Donald L. Hense] with our children.
Speaker 2: Now, you know I was handsome then, wasn't I?  Oh, Jesus.  That's President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Donald Hense.  This is--I took Mikhail Baryshnikov to the White House [Washington, D.C.] to, to meet Clinton.  He'd never been to the White House.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and what about this?
Speaker 2: This is Al Gore at the vice president's mansion.  The occasion was Gore asking African American leaders to support his candidacy for president.
Speaker 1: Did you have--which do you want--you want to do this one?
Speaker 2: That's more than enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  What about this one?
Speaker 1: That's David Bowie and Iman.  The occasion is a, a fundraiser for the Children's Defense Fund in New York City [New York, New York] at their home.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison of the Alvin Amer--Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.  The occasion was a benefit in Washington, D.C., on behalf of the Whitman-Walker Clinic [Whitman-Walker Health, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That is Tipper Gore.  The little lady is Helen VerStandig, V-E-R-S-T-A-N-D-I-G, better known as Madame Wellington of Wellington Jewels [Washington, D.C.].  And the occasion was the--a Whitman-Walker benefit, and Mrs. Gore was the honorary chair.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Donald Hense when he was very young (laughter).  That was the--in 19--or I shouldn't say that.  That's when I moved to Wash- 1973 when I moved to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture with Mikhail Baryshnikov outside of the--on the portico at the White House.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: What do I say about that?
Speaker 1: This is a picture of you.  Whatever you want (laughter).  (Unclear) whatever.  You are getting ready to go--
Speaker 2: I was--no, I was--I was actually hosting a party at my house that night.  That's not--that's not--who cares (laughter)? Oh, it is.  I know.
Speaker 1: You have so many pictures of yourself.
Speaker 2: Turn it straight up. That's my--
Speaker 1: No, we--they'll turn it around.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's my daughter-in-law, Liliana [ph.], and my grandson, Dana [ph.].
Speaker 1: Is this the same baby?
Speaker 2: Yes, that is absolutely him.
