Story_ID: 402796
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Donald Lyle Harwell, H-A-R-W-E-L-L [HistoryMaker Donald L. Harwell].
Speaker 1: Oh, Donald Lyle.
Speaker 2: Harwell.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Donald and Lyle for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, D-O-N-A-L-D--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --L-Y-L-E, H-A-R-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: One, nineteen, forty-six, January 19, 1946, Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm the vice president of sales for PowerStream Technology [Orem, Utah].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 15, 2008 (laughter) okay.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' chapel in Cottonwood Heights, Utah.
Story_ID: 402797
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask everyone by management and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: First one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: It's an ambrosia burger (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Do you have you got a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Usually blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm tempted to ask you what is an ambrosia burger, but--
Speaker 2: There's a place in Big Sur, California, called the Phoenix [sic. Nepenthe Restaurant], and they make Nepenthe burgers there and the thing that makes it different is they have this special bread they make and the ingredients they put on it, and it is delicious.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Football.  I know that's funny but yeah, fall, when football starts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  If I could go anywhere, it would probably be the Caribbean so I could go diving.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It is what it is.
Story_ID: 402798
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Andrew L. Harwell] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Veronica, V-E-R-O-N-I-C-A, Anita, A-N-I-T-A, Rodriguez, R-O-D-R-I-G-U-E-Z [Veronica Rodriguez].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh boy.  She's, her place of birth is New Orleans, Louisiana, 1924, March six- I think it's March 16.  I can't remember exactly, but I think it's March 16.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them, and--?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm working on that right now.  As far back as I've gotten is my great-grandfather because he was from Cuba and it's rather difficult to follow the history to Cuba.
Speaker 1: Now is there a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 1: --story about how he came over that you can tell?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't even know that he came over.  I think somebody before him came over.  He was born in New Orleans, Louisiana also.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.  All right.  So the family (unclear) go back to the 19th century, I guess Rodriguez in Louisiana (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think you'd have to go back to the, in the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's 19th century.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  But I, I've not been able to dig up anything on, past my great-grandfath- or my grandfather yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what did your grandfather do for a living then?
Speaker 2: He owned a mortuary and a small chain of grocery stores.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So he was a fairly successful man.
Speaker 2: Very successful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What'd they call them, Rodriguez--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name of the stores.  I was a little kids when I was in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was the funeral home--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) named Rodriguez?
Speaker 2: I couldn't answer that either.  I was there more than once, but I can't remember the names of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Usually funeral homes are required by law to be named after the owner, I mean his last name actually, I know in Ohio there's the law that--
Speaker 2: Then it would have been Rodriguez.
Speaker 1: I don't know if it's the same way in New Orleans, but I think it is fairly common in the U.S. that they're named after the, the person.  So, are there any stories about your grandfather or his people that are passed down?
Speaker 2: No.  That was the problem.  My mom died before I ever got, you know, I didn't get interested in genealogy actually until I joined the church and she passed away before, many years before I joined the LDS church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] and never questioned or never asked.
Story_ID: 402799
Speaker 1: Well did your mother [Veronica Rodriguez] ever talk about growing up in New Orleans [Louisiana] or what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My mother was very fair-complected with straight hair and sometimes when the stuff got ugly, they just passed for white.
Speaker 1: Were there any specific stories about that?
Speaker 2: No, just sometimes in those '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], you know, I guess since she was a little girl there was always somebody looking for trouble and because of her fair skin, she was--they just never were bothered.  It's not that they ran around claiming to be white, they just never said they weren't.
Speaker 1: So they, they, yeah, they looked enough like white people where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  They weren't bothered.
Speaker 1: --where other white people, I mean white people were confused as to who they were.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, well it seems like she may have grown up under fairly favorable circumstances with--
Speaker 2: Well, her dad, you know, they had money and they lived in a very nice house.  Was nice as you could get (laughter) you know in the town of New Orleans.  They lived on Claiborne [Avenue] and St. Bernard [Avenue], as I remember.
Speaker 1: Claiborne and St. Bernard.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, were they considered Creoles in--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) New Orleans?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you know if your mother grew up near the Youngs, Andy Young's [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] people, or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or the Morials, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --any of them?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) Never heard any of those names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your mother have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: She finished high school is as much as I know.
Speaker 1: So you don't, you don't think she attended college?
Speaker 2: I don't think she went to college at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, from what I understand she got married young.
Speaker 1: As far as you know, are there any Spanish tra- traditions in the family, you know, other than the name?
Speaker 2: New Orleans creole traditions you know.  Those were the traditions that I, when I lived in New Orleans, that we grew up with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did some of them speak, speak Creole?
Speaker 2: My grandfather could speak at it, but you know they weren't, nowadays when you say Creole, you'd think somebody was in the bayou, gets back and forth on a boat and speaks French and English, you know, that real (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's more like the Cajuns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, and well Creole is Cajun [sic.].  That's where that term came from.  And the Cajuns and the Creoles were mixed, you know, there was a lot of mixed blood in there, so never got to that part of it.  The closest I ever got to it was a canal back behind a house we lived in located in Gentilly, Louisiana [Gentilly, New Orleans, Louisiana] and we used to go catch crawfish, and so that was one of the fun things, and avoid the big snapper turtles.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you remember Mardi Gras, or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  My--Claiborne, or excuse me, St. Bernard is one of the main streets that the Mardi Gras used to go down.  I don't know what they do now, but when I was a kid, yeah, we'd just go out in front of the house and sit on the stoop and they'd throw you candy and beads and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite, did you know anything about the krewes, the different krewes and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was really young, I was like s- 1950s, I was ten years old--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I don't remember much of that at all.
Story_ID: 402800
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about--now, how, how did your mother [Veronica Rodriguez] get to Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: You know, it was during the war [World War II, WWII].  All I can tell you, it was during the war and there was a factory or something she went to work in.  I guess she signed up to work in the war effort and they sent her out to a factory in California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some defense factory or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Some defense contractor.
Speaker 1: Okay, well.  Any other stories about your mother's side?  It seems like it's you know--a lot of things in there to explore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm looking forward to doing it.  She had a brother, Uncle Earl Rodriguez [ph.], but that was the only two children from my grandfather.
Speaker 1: What did your uncle do?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He helped run the grocery stores and the, and the mortuary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was basically, when my grandfather got older, he was the one who basically ran everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now these businesses are no longer in existence, are they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, my grandfather, we were there and he died in 1956, I believe, and after he left, my uncle sold the grocery stores, and, but he kept the mortuary.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, a mortuary in a black community is usually a fairly lucrative business.
Speaker 2: Very lucrative.  He was the only one in town.
Speaker 1: Oh, well he--
Speaker 2: He had the ga- he was the only game in town.  So, he did, they were always busy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he should have known everybody in New Orleans [Louisiana] then.
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's--so--but you were last there when you were ten, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We left going back to California.  I think it was 1956 when we started back.
Speaker 1: Now did he leave your mother a big inheritance or something, or--?
Speaker 2: That could be a long, ugly story but I--we don't know because my uncle stole it all and put it in trust that he was the only one that get to it, in fact, that was a major point of contention at the end of my mom's life.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause like I said the black funeral home directors are usually the wealthiest if--black person--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --in a small town at least--
Speaker 2: And they had a--
Speaker 1: --and many big towns.
Speaker 2: --off of the mortuary, they had an insurance company that I think they sold death insurance, which is p- I guess pretty common.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well they probably had a lot of stories on that side of the family; the funerary history of New Orleans, the funerals and how they're conducted, the cultural aspects, the art, all of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's huge, yeah.
Speaker 1: Big--yeah, probably a lot of history there.
Story_ID: 402801
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  If you--can you give me his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Andrew, A-N-D-R-E-W, Lee, L-E-E, Harwell, H-A-R-W-E-L-L [Andrew L. Harwell].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He's December 22, 1916.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay and where was he born?
Speaker 2: We're not sure.  We think it was Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you know it's in Tennessee, probably Tennessee (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head) Right.
Speaker 1: Nashville, maybe outside of Nashville, or?
Speaker 2: Probably outside, because when he was born there I don't think they let blacks into Nashville (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear).  What do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Really not much.  He had a sister named Mimi [ph.] and they remained in Tennessee.  When he was thirteen years old, his mother died giving him birth and his father was an alcoholic and off somewhere, so he never knew him.  When he was thirteen years old, they--whoever the relatives were at the time put him on a train to Louisville, Kentucky and told him there was people waiting on the other end, and nobody was there.  That was, I guess that happened a lot in those days, and he had a dollar in his pocket and his story was that he got a job at a bakery and slept behind the ovens and worked in the bakery and went to school, and he got a few years, got some time in college, never got exactly how much, though.
Speaker 1: Where did he go?
Speaker 2: He stayed in Louisville.
Speaker 1: Oh, in I mean in college, what--did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I never got a name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: All right.  I know, in terms of black colleges [HBCUs] around there, Kentucky State [Kentucky State Industrial College for Colored Persons; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] was not that far away, and there are some others in Kentucky I guess--
Speaker 2: The biggest thing for him was, though, he graduated from high school and once he had done that he went in the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 1: Well that's really a, that's a horrible story.  And you say it's not unusual for those days?
Speaker 2: I guess in those--back in those days that happened a lot; not just to blacks, but that's the--previous to 1939, or right around 1939 when, what was that era?  The people jumping out of the windows on Wall Street [New York, New York].  (Laughter) I can't think of it.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--the Great Depression.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Depression.  And in 1939 was the first place Hitler [Adolf Hitler], whatever country it was he hit first [Poland], that's when the war [World War II, WWII] started.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so in 1929, that's the first year of the Depression, was the year that he was sent to Louisville.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, we hear comedians talk about you know my p- my parents sent me to the store and I came back and they w- they had moved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They weren't there, yeah.
Speaker 1: This sounds like that kind of a story.
Speaker 2: It was that kind of thing.  And he never would tell us the name of the relatives or anything, but he, you know, a lot of times that has pushed me through when I think things are tough, you know?  I start thinking, well, my dad made it through some pretty ugly things.  I guess I can.
Story_ID: 402802
Speaker 1: Your father [Andrew L. Harwell] went to college for a minute then joined the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is during the World War II [WWII] I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.  This would be, actually, s- he went in right before World War II, so--
Speaker 1: Now, what did he do in the Navy?  I know that the occupations were limited for blacks.
Speaker 2: He was a cook--
Speaker 1: Sailors, yeah.  That's what they all do (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and a server.  That's all they let him do in the Navy.
Speaker 1: That's, that's what Dorie Miller [Doris Miller] was at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: --a cook.  All the ones I've talked to have been cooks.  So, did he have any stories?  Did, did he like the Navy, or World War II?
Speaker 2: He said it was okay except every once in a while you run into some officer that thought his white skin made him better than him.  But my dad said one thing, "First thing I did was get the rule book and learn what I could and couldn't do," even though they were blacks and the only jobs they could get was, you know, cook's assistant type things, but he knew when they crossed the line and since he was the light heavyweight boxing champion of his fleet, nobody argued with him, but he never, you know, he said, "I was smart enough to know where my line was drawn too."  So, he just made 'em respect him and, I guess he did okay.  At the end of the war, he mustered out and moved to California.  In fact, he may have mustered out in California.  I don't remember that story, and met mom [Veronica Rodriguez], and my brother [Ronald Harwell]--I'm a twin, my brother and I were born in 1946--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit.  Now, did he go overse- well he's in the Navy.  Did he actually leave the U.S. waters and go into the Pacific [Pacific Ocean] or the north Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean]?
Speaker 2: Something else he never talked about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know it's, I feel so stupid now that I really want to do this genealogy.  Those are--there are probably some great stories in there.
Speaker 1: Well we can find out now from the, the [U.S.] Department of Defense has records now that you can access.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You can find out exactly what unit he was in, and where he served, you know, where they went.
Speaker 2: Just under his name, or do we need his--
Speaker 1: Under his name, but you've gotta, you've got to do a little searching to get the right, to the right site, but you can find all that out.  I know you can find that out.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you. I will start digging.  Probably through Google I could find (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's a black solider and sailor site, and there's a site run by [HistoryMaker] Willie McCray.  I'll give you, I'll give you the information.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But a lot of information on black soldiers and sailors now, especially in World War II, is available.
Speaker 2: I would really appreciate that.
Story_ID: 402803
Speaker 1: So he may have been mustered out in Los Angeles [California] you say?
Speaker 2: That's, that's what I'm thinking.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story, or has there been a story told to you by any other relative about how your parents [Veronica Rodriguez and Andrew L. Harwell] met?
Speaker 2: They, they met in a UFO?  Or--
Speaker 1: Oh, the USO club [United Service Organizations]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, USO club (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) UFO, that's different (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: That would have been exciting.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  No, they met in a USO is what I understand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At the USO (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There weren't too many places blacks should go in those days.
Speaker 1: That's a club where the office- I mean the non-commissioned officers get together--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --get--and have a drink or something, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they were segregated too.  There was a white USO and a black USO.  And they went to the bl- you know, to this day I can't figure out how come my mother went to the black USO when the stories about them, you know, not saying they were but just letting people think they were, but I guess she was black at heart.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, not everybody that could pass did.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know some people felt you know a lot more loyalty, I guess, on some level than they had a need for a practical solution to the race problem, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They saw beyond a personal struggle, you know.
Speaker 2: So (shrugs shoulders).
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so, so they met at the USO, so how long was it before they were married?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Again no (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it wasn't long because you were born in '46 [1946], right?  So, well, wasn't that long--
Speaker 2: In '46 [1946], yeah.  So, it had to be sometime in 1945.
Speaker 1: I would think, or something, 'cause the war [World War II, WWII] was over in '45 [1945]--
Speaker 2: At least we go back nine months.
Speaker 1: So yeah, that would, that--that is pretty quick--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so, it didn't take 'em long, I guess.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 402804
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' [Veronica Rodriguez and Andrew L. Harwell] per- personalities, and you know tell us something about them, their, their, their talents, their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think that I'm a true combination of both of them; my brother [Ronald Harwell] and I both are, you know, because I was raised with both parents which, you know, a lot of times that's just not the story, and so I think I got, my mother was the easy-going, compassionate type person.  My father was the, this is the facts, you don't have to like 'em but these are the facts type person.  So, sometimes I'm that way, sometimes I'm compassionate.  It depends on the situation.  I'm proud of both of 'em.  I don't think they had a great education.  You know they got through high school and they were successful people, they never wanted for anything and my father was a father to a lot of my friends, who didn't have fathers.  So, I have to figure he's a pretty good man because a lot of my friends would come over just so they could hang out with my dad and talk to him.
Story_ID: 402805
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about having any mentors or role models himself, or--you know because here's a, here's a man who was orphaned and abandoned by his relatives.
Speaker 2: No, never, I never heard those kind of stories, so I don't know.  Sometimes, he had a drinking problem, but when he wasn't drinking he was a great guy.  When he was drinking (unclear) most of the time, we tried to avoid him.  So, the story I remember the most, I was a freshman in college at East LAJC [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California], and all of a sudden my dad [Andrew L. Harwell] had to quit working because he had twenty-five veins in each leg, the little tiny veins, that were clogged, and that's, he said that's why he drank so much 'cause it was to kill the pain because he was at work every day and at central market, you're on your feet eight hours.  It's not like this place to go sit down, and when they finally found out what it was and they took care of it, he became a social drinker, not, not a--I call it, a pain drinker.  You know, somebody that was at it every minute they could get to it, and it really changed his, changed to him that he wasn't, you know, every once in a while he'd get drunk socially, but not like he was before that operation.
Speaker 1: You know, that's an aspect of alcoholic consumption or alcoholism that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's pain.
Speaker 1: --I think I heard that more than once that before the age of a lot of modern drugs, people would--that was a cheap way to anesthetize themselves.
Speaker 2: Right.  And that's what he did by the time he got home, we sometimes think the car drove ho- itself home, because when he walked in the door he was out and he would lay down and we'd--you'd--he'd get up in time to go to work the next day.  I can remember that a lot.  So (pause) in a way I felt sorry for him, and in a way I wish, you know, today that would never, today there's not an excuse for that because all the equipment, all the modern technology, they can find that stuff really quick.  So, but he was smart.  My dad could take a twenty-five dollar cash register tape and, in those days, that was a lot of food, and catch a nickel or dime mistake on the cash register tape, go back and show it to them and get the- you know, and for him it was more of a game than he really wanted the ten cents, but he wanted to show 'em that they had messed up.  He was really bright with math.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a foreman at Shapiro's Produce [Shapiro Produce Company], and in the produce markets what they do is all the fresh fruit and vegetables come in and I guess it's a bidding war and they go down and bid for so much and then they have contracts with grocery stores where they deliver this stuff, and then there's a lot of inner sales going on down there 'cause, you know, Shapiro may have gotten the best of the lettuce for that day, and then the other produce guys would come and try and buy so much off of them, you know what I mean?  And, when I was a freshman in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], or sophomore, we worked down there for one week to earn money to buy our football shoes because I was gonna try out for the football team, and I remember my job was to take big crates of tomatoes, lettuce, whatever, to the different places around there and that was predominantly what they did; somebody brought it and we loaded it up on the pallet jacks and (makes sound) took it over there.  So--and that's just an assumption.  I never knew the internal workings of the business other than you know--
Speaker 1: So he was in charge of the crew--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that loaded up the--
Speaker 2: --he's the one that set them, you go here, you go here, take this, and you know.  He directed everybody.
Story_ID: 402806
Speaker 1: Now you have a, a twin brother, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --do you have any other s--
Speaker 2: I have an older brother, Albert [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is he, is he your brother by a previous--
Speaker 2: My mother [Veronica Rodriguez], same mother, different father.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  Was he born before your mother left Louisiana, or--?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  (Unclear) so it's you and your, your twin brother is named--
Speaker 2: Ronald [Ronald Harwell].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are you all identical twins?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Except for facial hair if he walked in here you wouldn't know who to talk to (laughter).  We look a lot alike.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he has a mustache or something, or--?
Speaker 2: He has facial hair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mustache and a goatee.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--now, is it true?  People always say that identical twins have a lot of things in common.  They think sometimes the same thoughts and they do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what--
Speaker 1: --the same things without even knowing the other one is doing the same thing in another town--
Speaker 2: We were entirely different than that.  I was a football player, he played basketball.  We both ran track.  He, I don't know, he just had his own, he lived in his own world and I kind of lived in mine.  As a twin, my mother would dress us alike and try to make us do everything alike.  My father [Andrew L. Harwell] was doing the same thing and we never had any independence and the day we graduated from high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], he went to one college [San Jose State College; San Jose State University, San Jose, California], I went to another [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California].  So, you know.  We were just not that kind of close.
Story_ID: 402852
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your twin brother before we (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, you all are, are different, now, now--
Speaker 2: Really different.
Speaker 1: --even though you're twins, you're identical twins, same height, same--?
Speaker 2: Pretty much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we were growing up, he got, he fell down in a football game and got kicked in the kidney and it really stunted his growth for a while and I was much bigger than him for a few years anyway, and then don't know what happened, but w- he caught back up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: It's funny how that works that he would catch back up the same way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, other than that, we were standing next to each other and it was like, okay, who's who?  My mother [Veronica Rodriguez] would have trouble telling us apart.
Speaker 1: Did you ever, now, this is always old thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Switch girlfriends--yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Can't say girlfriends but, you know, girls we dated we'd always sometimes, we'd try to pull it off and see what we could do.
Speaker 1: Could they tell?
Speaker 2: It didn't work very often, I gotta tell you.
Speaker 1: Really?  It didn't?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they somehow knew the differences in our personalities and our likes and dislikes.
Speaker 1: Did you think that's a trick that, that only male twins would think of, that, more likely--?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  I didn't think females would do that (laughter).
Speaker 1: We'd like to think they wouldn't (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  That's funny.  But, so you all are very much independent kind of twins, even though you dressed alike and--you were dressed alike (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't dress alike by choice.
Speaker 1: Okay, wasn't your choice.
Speaker 2: Trust me.
Speaker 1: So your parents kind of followed the twin--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --convention of dressing people, the two of you alike.
Speaker 2: I think we were second-year college, and my mother would go out and buy us clothes and she'd always buy us everything that looked alike and I think finally, I think it was Ronnie [Ronald Harwell] who said, "Hey," you know, "can we stop this?  You know, I mean, I'm not him and he's not me," so that's when I think we finally brought it to an end but, and in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] we refused.  We just would not dress alike.  So--
Speaker 1: So even if you had the same clothes, you'd wear them on different days.
Speaker 2: We always had the same clothes.  It's just we wore different sets, you know, different clothes on different days.  But that, oh that's the one thing I remember used to just irritate me to death.  I'm not dressing like him.  And, "Oh, it's so cute."  To who?  You know.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get accused of doing something that you didn't do that he did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, all the time.  All the time.  My father [Andrew L. Harwell] just had a rule of one gets his butt whipped, the other one get his butt whipped (laughter).  Then he said I know I've got the right one.  You know.  Oh yeah.  We used to get--
Speaker 1: Such is justice in the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's [U.S.] military justice, you know.  The whole platoon suffers if, if one suffers.
Story_ID: 402853
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory--yep, my, my dad [Andrew L. Harwell] was washing the car out of the backyard and in the house we had then the garage was a separated garage and it was in the back, so he could pull back, turn it on the lawn, and that's where he washed the car, so my brother [Ronald Harwell] and I got our little rain boots out and everything and we, he washed the car and we crawled all over it and we had stuff on our boot- oh we was mad.  'Cause we--he washed it and we dirtied it with the grass and mud that was on the boots.  Oh, he was upset.  "But Dad, we're just trying to help."  "Get off my car."
Speaker 1: Okay so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that's one I can remember because he was really upset.  My mother [Veronica Rodriguez] had to talk him down.
Story_ID: 402854
Speaker 1: Where did you grow up?
Speaker 2: That was in Compton, California.
Speaker 1: Compton, okay.  So, your earliest memories are in Compton?
Speaker 2: The first house we had that I can remember was 1721 East 124th Street.  How can I remember this?  I'm sixty-two years old (laughter).
Speaker 1: East 24th Stre- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 124th Street.
Speaker 1: 124th Street--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Compton.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Di- now, what did your neighborhood look like, you know, for those who had never seen?
Speaker 2: You know what?  If you went to Compton today and see how they've let that place run down, when I lived there it was, there was a pretty nice neighborhood, you know, but there weren't gangs in it either, and there weren't people running away from the cops or trying to hide stuff.  Cops won't even go in there, where I lived.
Speaker 1: When I think of those neighborhoods there, I think of, you know, the little neat, stucco--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) houses.
Speaker 2: Stucco home.
Speaker 1: Is that what--
Speaker 2: That's what we had.
Speaker 1: --the kind of home you had?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I remember.  It was yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, pastel colors, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Now, we always ask this question.  I don't know how long you lived in Compton.  How long did you live there?
Speaker 2: 'Til we came back from Louisiana in 1956, and I think in 1957, we moved to Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were about eleven then?
Speaker 2: Eleven or twelve years old (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 402855
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds of growing up?  Sights, sounds and smells, I'm sorry, of growing up?
Speaker 2: Compton [California] was really quiet in those days.  The sights were, there was some brothers that lived across the street.  They weren't particularly friends because they were way older than we were, but there was always a big group of them over there.  Once in a while they'd call us over and play with us, you know.  If you can call kids and seniors in high school playing, but I can't remember his first, first name, I think it was Donny [ph.].  And that's why I was his buddy, because I was Don [HistoryMaker Donald L. Harwell] too, or Donny.  And, but they, that was in my opinion probably the start of gang activity in there.  We didn't know what they were doing but you got fourteen or fifteen guys hanging around in front of a house, you know, and my dad had to walk over there a couple times because some of the guys would get a little mean with my brother [Ronald Harwell] and I and he just said, "If you guys don't wanna treat him right, then don't bring him over here.  They're not toys."  And my dad was a pretty tough guy.
Speaker 1: You said he was a boxing champion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, when he went over there, you know, everybody straightened up and I don't remember any of those guys ever talking back to him.  So, that's probably one of my earliest memories of my dad is people did not mess with my dad, and they--that week we worked downtown in central market, there was a couple times guys would try to grab the f- free runners, which we were, and make them deliver a load for nothing and this guy, this big Mexican guy I remember had me trapped and he kept telling me, "I need you to take this load over here," and I said, "I can't.  I gotta get back to Shapiro's [Shapiro Produce Company]."  Next thing I know, my dad walked up and this guy said, "Al [Andrew L. Harwell], I'm sorry.  I did not--." This guy was bigger than my dad, but I remember him pleading for forgiveness (laughter) for holding me up, so I had to figure out Dad must have been pretty mean guy, so I just could remember this guy was huge and he wasn't particularly fat.  He was just a big man and when my dad walked up and says, "Don, what are you doing?"  The guy said, "Is this your son, Al?"  He says, "Yeah."  He says, "I'm sorry.  I didn't know it was your son.  I never would have done this."  And, I thought, whoa.  Dad's a bad dude you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: A lot of people around there, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm glad it happened at a young age because as I got older you start thinking you're tough.  I'd never want to test my dad, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what other sights, sounds, and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: When we moved up to Los Angeles [California]--
Speaker 1: Now, where'd you live there in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: Arlington [Avenue] and Vernon [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Now what part of the city is that called?  Does that have a name?
Speaker 2: Crenshaw district [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And, the biggest thing I can remember from where we lived in Compton, there was a lot of white families that lived on both sides of the street.  Arlington is a busy thoroughfare; it's a main, and when we first moved there in '56 [1956] or '57 [1957], I can't remember exactly when, we bought the house from a white lady, I remember that.  The lady to the left was white, the family to the right was white, and then the next one down was a black guy.  It was really fun for us kids, you know.  They always had candy and stuff for us, and by the time I was, I guess by the time I was an eighth grader, the neighborhood was black.  Everybody, I mean, was--white flight.  They just disappeared.  And, that was the biggest changes, watching the black families come in and the white families just moving out, and the white families were gone, you know, a little while before the black families.  There were just houses available and black families were buying them.  That was the biggest thing I can remember from us moving up to Los Angeles, is how quickly it changed after we got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a nice, we had a nice house.  We had a pool in the backyard and you know, like I said, we didn't grow up wanting for much of anything.
Story_ID: 402856
Speaker 1: Now, now wa- was church a big part of growing up there?
Speaker 2: N- we were Ca- my mother [Veronica Rodriguez] was Catholic.  We were baptized Catholic and they always forced us out to go to church on Sunday.  We hardly ever made it into church (laughter).  Didn't like church.  Didn- I really did not like the Catholic church.  I just didn't like it.  I don't know, I couldn't give you a sound reason other than I really don't like nuns, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did your mother go with you, or your father [Andrew L. Harwell] go with you?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So they would send you all--
Speaker 2: But they wouldn't go--
Speaker 1: --but sometimes you wouldn't make it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we'd always find a buddy's house to go over and hang out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you go to Catholic school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the way through a lot of grammar school until finally one day we just said, "Mom, I can't stand these nuns anymore, I've had enough."
Speaker 1: So, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: I cannot remember the name of the school.
Speaker 1: It would have been in Compton [California] though, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  This was in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Oh, Los Angeles, okay.
Speaker 2: This was after we moved to Los Angeles.  Before we moved to Los Angeles, we weren't in school.  Oh, well, that's not true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no because you would have been eleven.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, oh, okay.  I cannot think of the name of that school, but we, I think we were second--first and second grade in Compton and then--
Speaker 1: Those were Catholic schools, though, right?
Speaker 2: No, that's a public school.
Speaker 1: Public school, okay.
Speaker 2: And then when we moved to Arlington [Avenue] and Vernon [Avenue] is when we started going to Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you went there until when, until high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: No.  We went there for a year, maybe two, because I, where I finished grammar school is 42nd Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it called 42nd Street School?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, 42nd Street School in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  Now, as a, did you like school generally, you know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was a place to go during the day.  I don't--can't say as a young kid I really, I don't think I really got into school until I got into college [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California] and I had instructors that weren't teaching because we were a meat market and they had to get us through, but they really were teaching you something and they wanted to know that you learned it.  You know, I think a lot of teachers in high school are just, get 'em up through and get 'em out, and in those days this is like early to mid-'50s [1950s], and most of the teachers in the school were white and they didn't particularly like black kids.  I'm an adult now and I can remember how they talked to us and how they treated us, and we didn't like going back.  I didn't like, you know there was teacher--one teach- particular teacher I had did not like us as black kids, and the school was integrated, so you could kind of watch and see the favoritism.
Story_ID: 402857
Speaker 1: As a youth in, in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], did you have much trouble with the police?
Speaker 2: I wasn't a troubled kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got in trouble a couple times, but you know what?  My godfather was a lieutenant on the LAPD [Los Angeles Police Department], and if we got in trouble, we always, we ended up going over to him.  When I was a s- a fre- not a freshman, a sophomore, early in my sophomore year [at Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], we took a couple of cars off the street and we had a big ring of keys and in those days there was only twenty-seven different keys that Chevrolet made, so we could take any General Motors car we wanted, so we were, you know, we'd start a car, drive where we go and just leave it there, and, I mean clearly, no thought that what we were doing was hurting anybody or how wrong it was.  And, s- one of the kids in our group that got busted blamed it on me and said I was the ringleader and we were stealing cars and taking them to Mexico and I started laughing when the policeman told me that, I said, "Yeah, you don't know my parents [Veronica Rodriguez and Andrew L. Harwell] at all, do you?"  Because we couldn't get away from anything that long.  And, I, I remember being taken downtown and, or not downtown, to the Olympic station [Olympic Community Police Station, Los Angeles, California].  This is where my godfather was, and they took us in there, took me in there to give me a mug shot, and the way this place was, all this took on the ground floor and there were cells on the next level up, and a couple of guys made it kind of clear what was gonna happen once they got me in that cell, and I was the first victim that was scared straight because I immediately became the greatest football lover and track and anything to stay out of trouble.  So I filled my time with sports.
Story_ID: 402858
Speaker 1: Now so you liked football more than any other sport, right coming along and--when did you (unclear) become interested in football?
Speaker 2: My sophomore year.
Speaker 1: In high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I just thought I could do it.  I was fast and I liked being a running back, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any heroes, sports heroes in the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] area (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I was so cocky in those days I didn't think anybody could run a football better than me you know.  Jim Brown, I think I tried to model myself after Bobby Mitchell.  He was running back for the Redskins [Washington Redskins].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was with the Browns [Cleveland Browns] when Jim Brown first got traded to the Redskins.
Speaker 2: Right.  And when they traded him to the Redskins is when I really started following him and I, I mean, that guy was pretty (laughter) there was no such thing as one guy getting a hand on him unless long tackling him and that's who I wanted to be.  But, see, I had heroes and you know what, as an adult now, I think I wish I had had heroes to follow up on or to follow after.  And then, I remember Jim Brown moved to L.A.  And he qui- he was doing the movies then.  He was a butthead.  You know I mean, he, on the field he was a great guy, but in public, he just, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you dislike about his public personality?
Speaker 2: Well, he beat up one of my good friends that I went to high school with, a girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--you remember that when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember him.  He's been, he was accused of that a couple times, in Cleveland [Ohio] and then in Los Angeles, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and in L.A. And the girl in L.A. was a friend--
Speaker 1: He's always said he's never been convicted he said that should silence everybody about--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you're saying you knew the--
Speaker 2: Well, I knew the girl and she looked different afterwards, so, you know--
Speaker 1: Somebody beat her up, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, somebody did it and she called on him, so you know two and two is still four.  But, he kind of killed my thinking that these guys were you know not only good athletes but good people.
Speaker 1: There was, you're aware of Ollie Matson, I guess back in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  Ollie was one, I watched Ollie Matson play the Colts [Baltimore Colts; Indianapolis Colts], and the Colts had--
Speaker 1: Lenny Moore?
Speaker 2: Lenny Moore.  Ollie Matson beat that man to death (laughter).  I mean, he never, I think Lenny had never been hit so often and so hard in his life.  The man was, Ollie Matson was known as a running back and they had him as an outside linebacker, and he ate his lunch.  It was ugly.  I mean, you know, you're watching two, two of the top players but, man, I always dreamed that I could tackle as well as Ollie Matson because I mean he just planted him.  It was like you're sitting there, you're watching this.  I think it was on the, in those days in the coliseum [Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Los Angeles, California] if there were empty seats, you could just go sit in the seats and we were way down, real low, and just perfect shots of what was going on and I remember they put Matson in, I think it was a linebacker, and Baltimore would open holes that you could drive a Mack Truck through and he never made a yard and they were in, they were inside the 20 [yard line], and I remember Lenny Moore could not get past the line of scrimmage and it was always one guy tackling him.  Those were some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I never knew that Matson ever played any defense (unclear).
Speaker 2: I didn't either.  That's, you know, he was a running back, but boy, I mean, he just ate his lunch.  It wasn't pretty.
Speaker 1: So was Woody Strode like a, he was in college I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Woody Strode played at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, UCLA.
Speaker 2: --and he never went any place after that I, that I knew of.
Speaker 1: I thought he played a little pro and then you turned active or--
Speaker 2: He may have.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: He would have been, so with the L.A.--I mean did people in L.A., were they very aware of him as being a--
Speaker 2: Woody Strode?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I remember hearing about him because they did the special on Jackie Robinson, and Jackie Robinson and Woody Strode were the backfield for UCLA in those days.
Speaker 1: That would have been about the time you were born, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or before, right?
Speaker 2: I was a freshman year in high school, so that's the '60s [1960s], 1960.
Speaker 1: That's when you heard about him, but they would have been running in the 1940s.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were way back in the early '40s [1940s] or mid-'40s [1940s] to early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Mid-'40s [1940s], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, we didn't live far from the coliseum, so anything going on over there, we would, you know, just roam over there and see if we could get in.  A lot of times we did.
Story_ID: 402859
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think people don't realize who are not, have not been out to Los Angeles [California] how close the coliseum [Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Los Angeles, California] is to the black community.  It's really right in the black community.
Speaker 2: It's right in the middle of the black community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And the Forum [Inglewood, California] became in the middle of the black community too, right?
Speaker 2: Well, that's because the black community moved out, you know, spread outwards.  Inglewood [California], at one time, was totally white.  In fact, my s- junior year, Inglewood had a gang called the Spook Hunters, and a bunch of bad white boys thought they could, they were bad and they came over to Dorsey [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] and got themselves whipped bad.  I think that was the last anybody ever did call themselves something like that.
Speaker 1: The Spook Hunters.
Speaker 2: Spook Hunters.  (Laughter) Well, you're in the early '60s [1960s] and ignorance is growing by leaps and bounds, and the more strides blacks made, you know, to better themselves and now we're--USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] is, is booming, this is what John McKay had, you know, one Heisman Trophy after another one and all of them being black, the--a lot of the white community was jealous and angry because that was when I remember the real separation going on, because when I s- in 1960, I started Dorsey High School.  The community was really well integrated and we just did not have the kind of race problems that came a little bit later because the community was so well integrated.  Well, my senior year was the last year in '63 [1963].  It was the last year that our school, Dorsey High School, was integrated.  In 1964, it was a predominantly black school.  Even the Orientals [Asian Americans] started going up to Los Angeles High School [Los Angeles, California] because Dorsey was getting a bad reputation.  The gangs were coming in and, you know, but the three years I was there a food fight, or a race riot at Dorsey was a food fight in the cafeteria, and every time they served spaghetti there was a food fight.  We just didn't have those kind of problems and, boy, in 1964 it all went ugly.
Story_ID: 402860
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers in high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California], or mentors in the neighborhood or rec [recreation] centers or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I think those two, those older twin brothers were kind of our mentors, you know, and said you know let's stay out of trouble because if you ever go to jail, you'll, it's not something you want to do and they kind of, you know, told us we were better off playing sports.
Speaker 1: Okay now you were--go ahead--
Speaker 2: My favorite teacher was Mr. Jacobs [ph.].  He was the track coach, track and football coach, and he'd get mad at me enough to get me, if I started acting stupid, to get me straightened out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were back on the team, right?
Speaker 2: Running back, yeah.
Speaker 1: Running back?  Okay.  Did you play halfback or fullback in those days?
Speaker 2: Halfback.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were fast?
Speaker 2: I was fast.  I ran 9.6 [seconds] in the 100 [100 yard dash] in those days.
Speaker 1: That's very fast.
Speaker 2: For those days, I was, yeah, but we had (laughter) the league we were in, 9.6 was fourth place.  I'm serious.  I ran my first 9.6 and I took fourth place.
Speaker 1: Who was faster than you?  Would we know their names?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  Not in the--in the 100, myself, Danny White [ph.], and Mike Sanders [ph.] were the three fastest guys.  My brother [Ronald Harwell] was f- the next fourth fastest and, in those days, we ran the eight-man mile relay; eight guys running 220s [220-yard dash], and we could fly.  But, you know, every once in a while you'd run up against a school like Jeff [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California] and Fremont [John C. Fremont High School, Los Angeles, California].  Jeff had Harvel [ph.] who was running a 9.4, and Fremont had Willie Stevens [ph.], and Stevens was running 9.3s and 9.2s and he had a buddy, I can't remember his name, who was like this far behind him, I mean just inches, and those guys were exciting to watch run.
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming along, when--you were coming along in the era of [HistoryMaker] John Carlos and Tommie Smith, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah--
Speaker 1: They were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) sixty-four [1964] Olympics [sic. 1968 Summer Olympics, Mexico City, Mexico].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But they were older than you--
Speaker 2: Much older--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: About four years older.
Speaker 2: Well, about four years older, but yeah, that's, that was that Olympics (gesture) you know, when they did the black glove fist.
Speaker 1: Right, that's in Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: Right--no, that was in Mexico City [Mexico] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mexico City, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They had the trials in Pomona [sic. Echo Summit, California], I think.
Speaker 2: Pomona.
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Cal Poly Pomona.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did any of you all try out in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: No.  In '64 [1964], I was at East LA [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California] playing football.  I didn't run track after high school, and then in '66 [1966], I got drafted--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the [U.S.] Army.
Story_ID: 402861
Speaker 1: Let me go back to high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] then.  Just, were you involved in clubs and that sort of thing in high school, or any (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, just sports.
Speaker 1: Okay.  None of the social stuff, or--
Speaker 2: Black schools didn't have social clubs like that.  Not there.
Speaker 1: Class president--you didn't run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: I ran away from my vice principal all the time (laughter).  I stayed--I wasn't a real bad kid, but I was mischievous and I'd get myself into situations, so the, no, I never even considered running for class presidents or anything.
Speaker 1: Now was, did you like movies or TV?
Speaker 2: I loved movies.  Yeah, I was a big World War II [WWII] movie fan.
Speaker 1: Okay well did you have a favorite movie from that era?
Speaker 2: Well, there was a couple.  The 'Red Ball Express,' remember that one?
Speaker 1: That was about the brothers--
Speaker 2: That was the first time the brothers integrated--
Speaker 1: The truckers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  That one, and the John Wayne and--'Iwo Jima' ['Sands of Iwo Jima'].  You know, I--you know it was really weird if you're asking me about this.  I can remember watching those World War II movies, and thinking, I could do that, you know.  Why aren't I there?  And, I was, I don't know why, I've always been a real lover of war movies.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you kind of fantasize about joining the [U.S.] Army or the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] or something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I never really thought about joining it but I think I liked the fact of patriotism.  I always thought that this is my country and as, you know, when you start getting into high school, you start hearing things about the country and we were having all the race problems, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is, you know, trying to get us civil rights.  Well, in California, we didn't have the same problems they had in the South, and we didn't, if it was there, I don't know why we just never got involved in it until the '64 [sic. 1965] Watts riots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never really got involved in that because my dad [Andrew L. Harwell] would, just would not hear of it and, but that--actually the '64 [1964] Watts riots was the first time, I think, I was totally understanding of what the thing between the races was.
Story_ID: 402898
Speaker 1: Well tell us about what your recollection of the riot is.
Speaker 2: Well, in '64 [sic. 1965] sheriffs went out to serve a warrant on somebody out to, I can't remember what they call them, the projects, out in Compton [California], and the sheriffs pushed too many people the wrong way and the next thing they knew they were way outnumbered, and they ran 'em out of there and from there, it was just burn, baby, burn.  Everything you heard about.  And then, from that incident, it went from, it spread out of the projects to just black people in the Watts [Los Angeles, California], Compton, and, you know, wherever the black--in fact, in those days they said that Watts went all the way up into Baldwin Hills [Los Angeles, California] and there's no way Baldwin Hills was part of Watts.  I don't know if you know where that's at, but that's a fair to-do area, was predominantly black, but it's where a lot of well-to-do football players, lawyers, you know, lived in that area, and they still said it was Watts because it was black people.  And (laughter) I remember, I know it was '64 [1964], because I was a freshman in college [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California], playing fr- playing my first year of college football and I was coming home from a, from my girlfriend's house--no, she was in the car.  I was taking her home and I got pulled over.  I wasn't speeding and they didn't want to give me a ticket, but we were black, in a car, and I can remember getting out of that car, putting my hands up.  I said, "Officers, I don't have anything."  You know because they were shooting people.  You know, you step out of that car with an attitude, they shot you first and asked you questions later.  And, I just always made sure I was respectful.  "Officer, I don't have anything."  So they took my license, ran it, gave it back to me and said, "Go home, sir."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 402899
Speaker 1: Well, let me go back and try to get the chronology back together.  Now in, when you were a senior--
Speaker 2: In high school [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in high school.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you win any sports awards or any recognition?
Speaker 2: The only thing I was recognized for is the best athlete in the school.  'Cause I could have lettered but you were only allowed in the city to letter in two sports, so I lettered in football and track, but the coach, I would have been a springboard diver on the swim team, and I was fairly unbeatable in tennis.  So I could have played any one of those sports.
Speaker 1: You said your brother [Ronald Harwell] played basketball.  Was he, was he good?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was pretty good.  He went to San Jose State [San Jose State College; San Jose State University, San Jose, California], I think, on a scholarship.  I don't remember what happened.  He went out and tried out to play at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and he didn't make that, but he ended up at San Jose State playing.
Speaker 1: That's pretty good, though--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: He was a good basketball player, but he just never went anywhere.
Speaker 1: So did you all purposefully not play the other sport (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  Well, I think he liked basketball better.  I don't think that part, because he did play Pop Warner little league football when I was playing, when I was in tenth grader--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, but in school he played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were a senior in high school, what were your prospects?  Did you have a basketball scholar- I mean or a football scholarship waiting for you?
Speaker 2: No.  I had a track scholarship to San Jose State.  My coach didn't like San Jose State, so wouldn't--he just told me I had an offer.
Speaker 1: Now that's where, isn't that where [HistoryMaker] John Carlos went to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) that's where Carlos went.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Harry Edwards was the coach I believe?
Speaker 2: Was it Harry Edwards?
Speaker 1: I think, yeah, he became the mentor to a lot of black athletes out there on the West Coast?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes you're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Dr. Harry Edwards, right?
Speaker 2: And, but I didn't have the grades out of high school to go straight into a four-year college, so I went to junior college and played at East LAJC [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for two years.
Story_ID: 402900
Speaker 1: How did that go?  How did you like junior college [East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California]?
Speaker 2: We didn't have, we--the coach was a really older guy and great, he was great to us, but he didn't know how to win college football games, so we didn't do real great, but I had nineteen scholarships out of junior college to play football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I got drafted after my second year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about 1965 or so, or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sixty--yeah, it was late '65 [1965] when the draft came and it was already '66 [1966] when I went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were drafted into the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did they, well, the big question is did they send you to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I died and went to heaven (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds like--
Speaker 2: That was fun.
Speaker 1: --considering the time, yeah.
Speaker 2: Considering the time, yeah, my brother [Ronald Harwell] ended up going to Vietnam.  He got drafted a couple of months after I did, and we were in basic training.  In fact, I was in advanced training when he was in basic training at Fort Ord, California, so I could go down and see him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well, how did you really like the Army, did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, in basic training I was the, the company commander, the you know, recruit commander, and in AIT [Advanced Individual Training] I went to radio school and all the teachers, I was I don't know, I guess I was just one of those Army guys and one of those people they liked.  So, AIT was fairly easy for me too.  And then we got orders to Germany and I loved Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a great time there because I was, I played football, baseball, basketball, taught swimming, and raced cars.
Speaker 1: You were lucky because in Vietnam I don't think they were doing those kind of things.
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  When I got there, this base had a swimming pool and they were looking for lifeguards, well my freshman and sophomore year, I was a lifeguard for the City of Los Angeles [California].  So, I had the experience and so all I did was hang out by the pool and do lifeguard duties all day.  I didn't have any other duties but that.
Speaker 1: Now, had you travelled any before you went to Germany?
Speaker 2: I had been to Mexico, Tijuana, and San Diego State [San Diego State College; San Diego State University, San Diego, California] we went down to see if I wanted to play there, but I hadn't really travelled other than with my mom [Veronica Rodriguez] when we went to New Orleans [Louisiana].  Other than that, I had not travelled.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had never been out of, really been out of the country except with Mexico.
Story_ID: 402901
Speaker 1: Did Germany make a big impression on you then as a, as another place?
Speaker 2: Well, as a kid all you hear about is the Nazis.  You know, the Germans were Nazis and the Germans hated everybody that wasn't white and Aryan.  When I got there, I found something entirely different.  The, if you were a good person, they took to you right away.  You know, if you were a good guy and easy to get along with, they took to you right away.  I got adopted by a German family, not legally adopted, but the two brothers in the family and I were good friends and they took me home and (unclear) and (unclear) just took right to me.  So, I got to live in a German family and see what their culture was really like and I had a great time.  And I could, never could understand how Hitler [Adolf Hitler] got Nazis out of Germans because Germans hated it.  I was there, I think it was '67 [1967], and it was an election year, and the Nazis would put their signs up at about four inches, five inches, you know, eye level for most people, and by, let's say that's nine o'clock, by ten o'clock, they were up at seven inches, and by noon time they were up at ten inches and by the end of the day you couldn't find them.  You couldn't see 'em because they'd either be way at the top of the telephone poles or somebody had taken them down and torn them up, so the Nazis were not popular in Germany.
Speaker 1: But there were still some around.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  The only fight I ever got into, I worked in a bar in Germany as a bartender, and the only fight I ever got into was with a Nazi, who was drunk as a skunk and talking foul to this German girl, and that was the only, you know and he was just totally, totally upset that I would dare talk to him and that I would dare defend a German girl.  That's how stupid they were.  You know, and the girl was a friend, not a girlfriend, but a buddy and I just said, you know what, there's really no need for you to talk to her like that, and that was the start.  We didn't get physical but we got pretty loud and the owner of the bar where I worked with, a bunch of us just threw him out.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever meet any of the brown babies in Germany?  They were, they would have been about your age, I guess, the descendants of the black soldiers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I was in a little town called Schwabisch Hall [Germany], and there weren't a lot of, there weren't any brown babies over there, but when you go to Munich [Germany] or Berlin [Germany] or some of the bigger towns, yeah, there was, you would see 'em.  They wouldn't necessarily want to talk to you, 'cause they had never seen anybody else that looked like them, you know?  So, but I think I saw three or four like that.  The place you would see more black people per capita in any place was Amsterdam, Holland [the Netherlands].  There were a lot of black people, male and female there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you, so were you, did you stay in Germany your entire--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tour?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you were discharged, when you were discharged, what rank were you?
Speaker 2: E4.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, well you came out in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I went in '66 [1966] and came out in '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 402902
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], now did you go back to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wen- I came back home and went up to try out for the football team at Cal State LA [California State College, Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and I made the team.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you play back again?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was running back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we had a lot of people get hurt that season, so I went from running back to midline backer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Remember that was my dream to think I could be Ollie Matson (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you must have been bigger, a little--
Speaker 2: I was, no, actually I was smaller (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About the same (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --I was 192 pounds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm 230 now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but I was quicker and you know in much better shape, so, but we didn't have a choice.  We had enough running backs but we didn't have people that were, would play linebacker, so, I'm dumb, I'll do it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so, what did you major in at Cal LA?
Speaker 2: I was a public administration major.
Speaker 1: You were saying when we started out that you really didn't get serious about school until you got to college, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were serious by this time, about--
Speaker 2: Well, actually I had real problems in my freshman year [at East Los Angeles Junior College; East Los Angeles College, Monterey Park, California] and had to sit, had to sit out a year because of eligibility.  My second ye- or the next year that I came back, I did a lot better, but I really didn't get good in school until I got to Cal State, and that's where I ran into the bunch of teachers that had, you know, they could teach you.  They could get you involved and I had a teacher that taught English and I never was much of a writer, but he had me writing short stories that I guess were pretty good, because you know I got A's and Bs in that class and that's when my GPA [grade point average], I really started to build a GPA and my senior year, I was doing really well except for a philosophy class I had that made zero sense.  I could not make sense of that class.  And, so I dropped it and then some friends of mine and I were certified now as a scuba diver, and we were running around teaching in the high schools in Southern California, and I mean making money hand over fist.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I didn't think I needed to go back, and I left school with nine units to graduate, but I was making more money than I had ever even thought about.
Speaker 1: Teaching scuba diving--
Speaker 2: Teaching scuba diving in the high schools.
Speaker 1: That must have made you a unique--I mean, how many black people were teaching scuba diving then?
Speaker 2: There weren't any.  I was the only one teaching in the high schools, but there was only one other black that was certified, and he was a sheriff and they certified him for search and rescue, so there were two of us in the State of California that were black and teaching diving at the time.
Story_ID: 402903
Speaker 1: Now '68 [1968].  There is another big riot in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] I guess associated with the--
Speaker 2: Where was I?
Speaker 1: --assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Do you remember--?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, no in '68 [1968] when King was shot I was in Germany.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And if you want to know a story about that one, there was, the base I was on [Dolan Barracks, Schwabisch Hall, Germany], the 15th Aviation Battalion, and we were in a helicopter company.  Across the base from us was an artillery company, which was predominantly black, and an MP [military police] company and in '68 [1968], some of the brothers, I ran the gym at the, in the wintertime and some of the brothers came over, in fact most of them came over, and they were gonna, they wanted to riot and break into the armory and take guns and take over the base, and I'm sitting there saying (laughter) I'm laughing at 'em and saying are you that stupid?  I said, this is the [U.S.] Army, you know.  I said, you can't be serious.  Ain't nobody on this base shot Dr. King, okay, that's number one.  Number two, I don't get into losing situations.  I will not walk innocent.  You guys are headed for a bad loss.  I mean, like dead, because they are not gonna take, you know, ask you questions.  You know better and you are government property, man, I mean, let's get serious here.  You guys got any idea what will happen?
Speaker 1: Yeah that is hard to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those of you that don't get killed, they will take you out and hang you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's hard to figure that they would think that way.
Speaker 2: You know, there was this one, particularly one kid doing all this talking and I just said, you know what?  If you guys are gonna talk about that, get out of my gym because I'm not going down for something stupid.  You know, if we could do something, if we could riot and make a point that would be one thing, I said, but that's gonna be a fifteen second riot because I don't care how many guns you get out of that armory, they're gonna bring more people with more guns, bigger guns, I said no.  Let's don't do this.  You know I said, I don't wanna see you guys get hurt over, I don't like Dr. King being killed either, but take it to the people who did it, not just somebody because they're white.  I said he was not shot just because he was black.  He was shot because he was black and making a point that they couldn't argue with.  So, I kind of talked them out of--I always felt like I was the one that made sense and talked them out of it.  So, none of that ever happened.  But I'll never forget them all being in the gym because a lot of them played on the basketball team and it was just like, you guys gotta be crazy, you know.  That is so stupid, you know.  You're just gonna get yourself killed 'cause Dr. King got killed?  "No man, we're gonna take some of them with us."  We?  (Laughter) I said you're not understanding.  I said, there won't be no we.  They might shoot one, but you'll have forty-five other guys shooting at you.  I said, and on the base there were some, especially in some of the military, in the military police and there were some white guys in the artillery company that made it pretty clear that they were not liberal people, so I said, you know, you've got guys in your company alone that would have no problems blowing your heads off.  I said, so you know you're not gon- I'm not gonna do it.
Speaker 1: But it's interesting though that, that those soldiers felt at that time that, almost like America had declared war on black people in a sense, you know that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly.  But, there was one black officer on the base and he was really good guy.  He did not, you know, ignore us or treat us different.  But a lot of the white officers were just rednecks.  You know and if there was a way--you know the undercurrent of racism?  They don't want to bring it to the surface but you know it's there?  That's what was going on in that base, so I knew from coaching the young kids in football, that, how some of the parents felt because of some of the things the kids would say, and that's only, that stuff only comes from the parents.  So, I mean I just knew that if we stuck our foot in it we'd have been dead but it never made sense to me, no matter what, to start a riot or to go out and attack somebody that had absolutely nothing--hadn't we been attacked enough because we were black and somebody else did something somewhere else?  I said, I just can't see doing it, and that makes no sense to me.  So, they didn't do it.  And I was really happy because for a while there, I was really afraid somebody would get drunk and go and do it.  So--
Speaker 1: It's a good thing they didn't, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That would've been a slaughter, you know.  There was no way we could compete.  Even if we got every black on the base and got behind a barricade with guns could we have withstood the numbers that they would have brought in?  It wouldn't have been just our MPs.  They would have brought in a battalion.
Story_ID: 402904
Speaker 1: Now there was some physical violence that erupted on some of the bases after the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember a couple--wasn't it like a year or two and there were riots on some aircraft carriers and such, racially--
Speaker 2: Motivated?
Speaker 1: --charged?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: The two weeks to a month after Dr. King was killed, there was a German girl band that came on base and they were singing all soul music and there was a bunch of us in the enlisted men's club and they were singing to us and these white boys got pissed and (laughter) I said this is gonna last.  This guy, this stupid white boy jumped up and said, "Bitch," you know, called her the name, and said, "Stop singing to those n-s," and I grabbed my little buddy and out the door we went and sure enough, within minutes it was a riot.  You know the brothers were fighting these white guys and I got off base, because I, you know, in those days if they can find a reason to get you in trouble, they'll just get you in trouble you know and it didn't take much and I had grabbed my one friend that went with me and I grabbed another guy who was drunk and got him out of there and he's huge.  He was a big brother from Chicago [Illinois], very, very ill-tempered and kept him out of jail because he would have killed somebody in there.  He was that big.  And thank goodness, we got him out of there, so. But yeah, I wouldn't get in trouble because I had German girlfriends and they were really cute and, but we were pretty much hooked together, we were hanging out together, and some of these guys would just go crazy 'cause these girls were hanging out with me.  So I always try to avoid, I don't think I ever got into a fight, I never got into a fight because I would just avoid that stuff 'cause I wanted to go home.  I didn't want to end up in some stockade in Germany.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) there were some people that did end up like that, I would guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and some of them were from that base.  Schwabisch Hall [Germany], it was Dolan Barracks, Schwabisch Hall, and from that, when that white boy jumped up and said that, it was not pretty, and we didn't have enough MPs [military police] to break it up, so they had to go get other people.  They had to get officers involved to get it broken up.
Story_ID: 402905
Speaker 1: So well back to college [California State College, Los Angeles; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  Now, so, you dropped out of college basically to teach scuba diving.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now that made you unique commodity in Southern California, a black scuba diving instructor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you teach in the black high schools or white high schools?
Speaker 2: All white high schools (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All white high schools?
Speaker 2: --except one. I taught at Inglewood High School [Inglewood, California] and I was surprised.  A bunch of girls came to the class, no guys, all girls, and I got 'em all certified.  But mostly, I taught in Orange County [California], which was predominantly white, Mission Viejo [California] all white--where else did we go--Newport Beach [California], all white, so, Cerritos, California, all white.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now you, were you working for the Pacific Diver Supply [Pacific Divers Supply] at the same time, yeah (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I first got certified, that's where I certified and then from there, they sent me to become instructor.  I went to L.A. County Instructors Course [Los Angeles County Underwater Instructors Certification Course] and after that, I taught at Pacific Diver Supply, oh, for six months and I was still going to school at the same time while I was doing that, and right in the middle of the semester, these friends of mine and I, they started hitting the high schools.  We came up with this idea, and they hit Newport Harbor High School [Newport Beach, California], that was the first one, then Mission Viejo, and I would go as an assistant to those and then I just started going to schools myself and I was really surprised that these white schools would take me in, you know, it's like they were looking for me, and I had a great time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: So, until about 1971 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '69 [1969] to '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so you were making pretty good money doing this--
Speaker 2: Twenty-five bucks [dollars] a head and we averaged a hundred kids per class.  In those days, that was gold.  I lived in a one bedroom apartment on the beach.  I paid $135 for rent.  That included utilities, and I have the biggest bank account I had ever seen.
Speaker 1: That sounds pretty good.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 402906
Speaker 1: Now what did you do between '71 [1971] and '74 [1974].  Now I have here in '74 [1974] that you were the founding president of California Concepts [ph.], but what did you do between--?
Speaker 2: I d- you know what, I don't remember.  That's like a blank page.  I cannot remember what I was doing.
Speaker 1: So the bank account was going down though (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, the bank account was going down (laughter).  What did I do?  You know what?  I think we started, I was teaching private courses, private classes to rich people, one of the things I was doing.  I cannot think of what else I was doing at that time.
Speaker 1: Did you teach any famous rich people?
Speaker 2: What was his name?  He was a pitcher for the Angels [California Angels; Anaheim Angels].  Rudy May.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was teaching him and somebody else on the Angels, went through, I taught private classes to too, then there were a lot of rich people that lived in Huntington Harbour [Huntington Beach, California].  Huntington Harbour is a million, two million dollar homes back then that all of them had boat docks and so somebody wanted to learn how to dive.  I had posters up and stuff like that, and they'd give me a call and pay me five hundred bucks [dollars] to--for about two weeks' worth of work.  It was lucrative, I'm telling you.  It was stealing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were doing all right.  So, how did you get the--now did you take any exciting trips as a scuba diver, or?
Speaker 2: You know what?  I didn't get out of California--I mean, I dove everywhere in California, but I never got to the Caribbean until the first year my wife [Jerri Harwell] and I were married (laughter) and that was '87 [1987].  And we g- I got to go to Freeport, Grand Bahamas [Freeport, Grand Bahama Island], and then I took a diving boat out of there and ten times better than California diving.  You know big parrotfish, blue and green parrotfish, striped lobsters, huge things.  What else did we see down there?  Eels, striped moray eels [zebra moray].  I can't remember, but I can remember going down in the water in my shorts with no wet suit on and at about sixty feet, you could see forever.  I mean forever, literally, just clean and they told us right there when we went that we had come in just behind a storm and everything had finally--so the surface was real choppy, but once you got down in the water everything was just crystal clear.  It was one of the prettiest things I've ever seen, and huge reefs.  You know, we have good sized reefs off of California.  These reefs were huge, like mountains.  Just, you know, (unclear) up and if you could think of something you could see, it was in there, yellow tangs, which is a little angel type fish but it's got these little white tangs as its defense, and black angel fish, striped angel fish, geez, it was a myriad of colors in different sizes and shapes.  It's like something you'd see in a magazine.  So, that was the first time I had ever gotten to the Caribbean.
Story_ID: 402907
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about how you founded California Concepts [ph.].
Speaker 2: You know what, that is 1971.  That's what I did after I was, at the same time I was teaching private classes in diving [scuba diving], a friend of mine came up and says you know what?  He worked for the May Company [May Company California] in Los Angeles [California], building these display stands and he says, you know what?  If we could come together and get ourselves some--a table saw and some tools, we could build these things and sell them to him for a pretty good amount of money, 'cause nobody else is there doing it.  So, I mean if you think about walking through a department store, they have all the displays and the mannequins and stuff, so we started doing that and May Company was buying from us at a pretty good clip, but he turned out to be way over greedy, so the partnership didn't last long but I owned all the tools.  So, I was looking for something else to do because I didn't have a contact at May Company, he did.  So, one day I was looking for some fish.  I had a little aquarium, and I walked into this fish store and I was looking at how ugly wrought iron aquarium stands were, and that was the standard, so I said to him, "If I build some wooden aquarium stands, would you be interested?"  He says, "Yeah, I'd like to see what they look like."  So they were simple.  I just made L shaped legs, put a two by four frame on top of them with two bys, this was all two by four stuff, and I took 'em in to him and the first ones were stained and he liked them.  The next ones, a friend of mine says, you know, what we could do really cheap is burn 'em.  Remember the old burnt wood style?  So we burn 'em, rub 'em down with some furniture oil.  I was selling those things like crazy, and, but I was, I had a route that I drove around Los Angeles to the different fish stores, and we basically put the wrought iron stand business out and people were buying those things.  Then, I had people have me building the f- the big tank displays, how they would set up, I was building those out of two by fours, and they were working really well.  And, I went after that for about a year and then all of a sudden, the fish tank people started coming to me, the guys that actually built the tanks, and I got a couple of them going and then one of them was a crook.  He stole all my ideas because I wasn't hiding anything.  It was no big deal, and so I lost more than half of my business.  And then I had a couple of people buy big orders from me and then they never paid me, and my business finally went down for lack of funds.  And--too many people owed me.  So, at that point, I basically shut it down.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went from displays to fish tank stands.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then, and finally, you know just--
Speaker 2: Poor business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dishonest people didn't pay me, so I got so far behind on my materials that I had to get out of the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, you get out of it about 1978?
Speaker 2: No, not that long--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972].  You know what?  I got out of it in '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we went for four years, three, four years.
Story_ID: 402908
Speaker 1: What did you do next?
Speaker 2: Started doing odd sales jobs, selling this, selling that, and then I was reading in the paper and this company called Rotron [Rotron Manufacturing Company, Inc.; AMETEK Rotron] had an ad in there for a sales engineer, so I called the guy and said, "What's a sales engineer?"  And (laughter) I did.
Speaker 1: That is a good question, though, what is it?
Speaker 2: What is a sales engineer, and he explained it to me.  A sales engineer is somebody that goes into a company and designs-in their equipment for the company to use to build their stuff.  So, I said, he said, "Why?"  I said, "You got an ad in the paper.  I'm a good salesman."  And he says, "Do you know anything about electronics?"  I said, "No."  I said, "But you can teach me, can't you?"  And he said, "Yeah."  So, I went over there and convinced him to hire me.  And they hired me, stuck me in the office for six months and trained me how to do the engineering.  And what it was in those days was the big electronic cabinets.  The computers were the size of this room, and a lot of the cabinets needed to be c- cool, so I'd go in, take the temperature, figure out the math, and tell them what size fan they needed, install the fans and move on to the next one, and we got pretty good.  A fr- this kid, (unclear) and I, the first year we were there, sold $3 million worth of cooling fans in Southern California and we had broken the record, and he was an engineer and he had helped teach me and I was a salesman, so I taught him sales techniques, and we rock and rolled, and we set the world on fire and I stayed there for, 'til '78 [1978], and something missing, I'm missing something somewhere in there, and, boy I cannot think.
Speaker 1: So something else is in here that you did before 1978?
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  You said you're missing something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm missing something.  There's something missing there.  I cannot remember what I did.
Speaker 1: Oh, what about, it has something to do with SR-71 Blackbird?
Speaker 2: That was Rotron.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Rotron--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: I, David [ph.] asked me, and I said the thing I remember the most was going to the Skunk Works at Lockheed Martin [Martin Marietta Corporation; Lockheed Martin].  The Skunk Works were top secret.  You had to have, not a top secret clearance, but you had to have clearance to even get into the place, and that's when the SR-71 was the high altitude, very, very fast plane that took all the pictures.  If there was a country they wanted to see what was going on in, they'd send the Blackbird in there, you know, like at a hundred thousand feet.  They couldn't be seen and they were moving so fast they were shooting pictures the whole way, so a lot of the intelligence that was going on at that time was, was done by the SR-71.  And I'll never forget (laughter) the guys after it became unclassified that it was the ricketiest thing in the world it got up to Mach 1 and then everything just tightened down and they were just saying how easy it was to fly at such, you know, tremendous speeds.  There's one out here at the Hill Air Force Base airplane museum [Hill Aerospace Museum, Utah], quite a plane.  But that was my claim to fame with Rotron.  I was a hero because it was our fan that was cooling the gyros (laughter).
Speaker 1: That is, that is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so in--that's 1980 it says here (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Moving up to '80 [1980], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 402909
Speaker 1: Then in 1980, Howard Fans [ph.], which was a competitor.  We had t- basically what we had done, (unclear) and I had total control of that industry in Southern California and their competitors were always trying to find out why we could do it.  Well, it was a combination of two things.  We knew what we were doing, but we also had the best fans.  Rotron [Rotron Manufacturing Company, Inc.; AMETEK Rotron] was at the top of the line.  So, a competitor came along, Howard Fans, and offered me double the salary if I'd move to Colorado and, yeah, okay (laughter).  So I did, I took the job, moved to Colorado, and I worked for them for one year, and--
Speaker 2: Now, why?  I mean, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because they were idiots.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did they pay you double--
Speaker 1: When somebody hires you in a technical business that they're not doing well in, and you tell them how to technically improve their products and they won't, you know, I went from you know the top of the line to something that was trying to catch up, and all they really had to do was put in ball bearings in their fans instead of sleeve bearings, and you know bring the quality up and I said we could take the market just as well as Rotron did.  But Rotron was really high quality; Howard was junk.  And you can only sell junk for so long.  So I worked for them for a year, and then I took six months off because I just wanted to get out of Corporate America for a while.  I was tired of the garbage that goes on there and a friend of mine introduced me to this gentleman, Carl Cummings, and he was a rep.  He had a rep company called Cummings and Associates.  So I went to work for them and, again, I had to really good experience because he had good quality products and it wasn't a fight, you know to try and convince somebody to try it.  The reputation of the parts was great, so we did pretty well there and then I could sell more over here in one week than I could see four weeks in Denver [Colorado], and so I--one weekend I just said, hey, I'm doing better in Salt Lake City [Utah] than I can over here in Denver.  I said, so I wanna move over there and just, you know, start working over there full-time so I did, and it went well for quite a while, and then he and his partners got into a fight and then they got into a fight with one of the bigger companies they had so Cummings and Associates in a week went totally down.  So, I took some of the lines that they had and started Component-Well [Component-Well Inc., Salt Lake City, Utah].
Story_ID: 402910
Speaker 1: So you started that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I started Component-Well [Component-Well Inc., Salt Lake City, Utah] while I was living here [Salt Lake City, Utah] and the two things that I had to do was round up more lines and some lines that made some good money, so there was a (unclear) up in Logan [Utah] called Lundahl Astro Circuits, and when I started with them, they were what you call a bucket shop.  They had no quality, no nothing.  But the president of the company told me we're going to turn this place around.  He says, and I need somebody to really help me.  So, they hired me and I sold for them for fourteen years.  We built that company from a bucket shop, like I said, 'til it sold to Tyco [Tyco International], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now, what was the name of this company?
Speaker 2: Lundahl Astro Circuits?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Lundahl, how do you spell it?
Speaker 2: L-U-N-D-H-A-L [sic.].
Speaker 1: Astro Circuits?
Speaker 2: Circuits, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you started there in--
Speaker 2: Oh, geez, let's see, '83 [1983]?  Eighty-four [1984]?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: You worked there until--okay--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You worked there until--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I didn't work there.  They hired my company, Component-Well--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to be their representatives.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, we had--
Speaker 1: So they were your top client then.
Speaker 2: They were the biggest client.  Yeah, I built them basically zero to where I was, I made over fifty thousand dollars a year for like six years, seven years with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, with the other little things I had going on, we were averaging over a hundred thousand a year, you know, doing that, so we were doing fairly well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's, so, you--they were with you, you're talking about 1995?
Speaker 2: Ninety-six [1996].
Speaker 1: Ninety-six [1996], okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 402911
Speaker 1: In 1983, I guess you became involved with--
Speaker 2: The LDS church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) LDS, okay.
Speaker 2: I was baptized in July of 1983.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened, there aren't many pe- well historically there hadn't been that many black people involved in LDS.
Speaker 2: There were a lot more than people knew about--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Okay.
Speaker 2: --a lot more.  But it was a s- a well-kept secret too.  People did not talk much about it because of the priesthood bans.
Speaker 1: And that's significant because--
Speaker 2: Very significant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think--yeah, just kind of explain, I think most people think it has to do with some hierarchy, some hierarchy priesthood like the Catholic church or something, but--
Speaker 2: It is.  It's a priesthood.  It's a priest of God, and--
Speaker 1: But isn't it also like every male member--
Speaker 2: Every worth male--
Speaker 1: --pretty much--
Speaker 2: --in 1978 was given--
Speaker 1: The head of the household is a priest, right?  Becomes one--it's like a manhood rite.
Speaker 2: Actually my sons are both--my oldest son [Bronson Harwell] is twenty-one.  He's a Melchizedek priesthood holder.  I mean, he's an elder and I'm a high priest.  The highest position in the church is a high priest.  It doesn't matter if you're the president of the church or just a high priest.  That's the highest priesthood you can hold.
Speaker 1: But that's, it's been a--I guess it's--I heard it explained like it was a, like bar mitzvah or something.  If you're a man, an adult man, you probably should, you know, aspire to be a priest (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to be worthy.  It's not just a matter of being an adult man.  You have to follow the precepts and teachings of the church.
Speaker 1: So then would you say that most of, or what percentage or portion of the LDS men are priests?
Speaker 2: If they're active, all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was--
Speaker 2: Not priests, but elders or high priests.  If you're under forty-five you're more than likely an elder, unless you're called into a position of authority.  At forty-five, they automatically put you in the high priest group.  So, but you have to be worthy to go to the temple and you have to be honoring all the teachings, and you have to go through an interview.  The thing that's different about this church is you are held accountable for what you say you do, and in most churches, the Baptist church, the Catholic church, they don't have any accountability as far as I've been able to see.  So, that's the major difference.
Story_ID: 402912
Speaker 1: Well, how did you first get involved in LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints]?  What happened 'cause you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the truth of the matter was Denver [Colorado] is racist.  Denver was very racist.  Too many urban cowboys, and those were the only guys, so far, that I've ever been to where if a white girl is dating a black guy, they sit there and shake their head at her.  They won't do it to you, but they'll do it to her, and I got a little sick of that.  The girls would say why are they doing that?  I said, because they don't think you should be with me.  You don't have any freedom of choice, you know.  You have to do what they say.  And, I really was getting sick of it over there, and it was angering me.  It was the, the very lowest base type of racism you could run into, and what can you say if somebody is shaking his head?  I mean, you can't just go over and punch his lights out because he's shaking his head.  But, it scared a lot of girls.  It was, it would really scare them and I just thought, you know this is very, very low mentality and, like I said, I couldn't sell that well over there, but I was making a living off of what I did over here for a week, so I thought to myself well, if I can do this much in a week, what could I do if I was there full-time, so that was my decision to move.  While I was making that decision, I came over here [Salt Lake City, Utah] to work and I met this girl at a restaurant.  My roommate's girlfriend was over here selling, doing the same thing I was, and so we met for dinner (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  I just wanna just jump in for a second and ask you, what year did you move to Utah?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: And, this girl was sitting in a booth right behind me and they started playing music.  At first, it was like from 6 to 7 there was a dinner hour, and then at 7, 7:30, they started playing music, so I was looking and I asked her to dance, and we did and we became friends.  And she was LDS and she invited me to go to church.  Well, she's kind of good looking.  I could stay here an extra couple of days.  And, I had been, you know, I was a partier, and I think I was thirty-six years old at the time, and I was getting tired of it.  So she invited me to church and so I said yes (laughter).  When I went into the church, I sat as far in the back as I could next to a door because I just knew the Lord was going to bring thunder and lightning, me being in a church.  So, she was speaking so she was way up in the front of the church and they passed around the sacrament, and the sacrament is bread and water.  So, they passed around the bread first and I'm looking at it, boy it's a (unclear) snack and I took it.  I was not supposed to take it.  I was not a member of the church.  I had not, you know, been interviewed or anything to see if I was worthy and I passed it on and then they brought around the water in little cups and I'm going, now this is ridiculous.  I took it, passed it on.  When church was over, this one white guy ran up to me and says, "You're a Mormon, aren't you?"  He stuck his hand and I said, "No, I'm a heathen."  And (laughter) you know, and he stepped back for a second and looked at me because I, you know, I wasn't Mormon and I didn't know.  I had heard they were really prejudiced people so, you know, I was really just protecting myself in my own mind, and he stepped forward, you know, after I said that, he stepped forward, stuck his hand out again, shook my hand, and says, "I don't care what you are, you're welcome."  You could have pushed me over with a feather.  And this is much different than the stories you hear about the Mormons.
Story_ID: 402913
Speaker 1: So, she comes running up and I'm looking at--this guy's name was Gary Walton.  This is twenty-four years ago and I still remember his name.  And, he just touched me really, you know, and I felt more welcome there than I was feeling in the bars, and so the next class was Sunday school and she had to go do something, so she pointed to a Sunday school class I could go into.  So, I walk into this class.  Now you gotta picture this, and there's five rows, right?  The four rows behind the first row filled.  In the very front row was one guy, and his wife is the teacher, so she's standing up in front of that front row.  So I looked in there.  I went and sat down next to him.  I was sitting there about two minutes and he feel asleep on my shoulder.  He had narcolepsy.  And, so I just caught him and held him, and he woke up and he sat up and he was just fine for five minutes, and so I played catch with him the whole first, my whole first Sunday school.  His wife was so happy that somebody would sit there and, you know, just take care of him so she stepped back and really got into teaching the class.  I didn't understand anything 'cause I didn't know anything.  At the end of the class, everybody's walking by, patting me on the shoulder, you know boy, "You're a really good guy.  That was really good of you to take care of him."  I'm like, why didn't you guys take care of him?  But they had been at it for so long, I think most of them were just tired of it, but it didn't bother me.  So, I really felt welcomed there and I was thinking about, you know, if I feel this wel- this good here now, what would it be like if I started going regular?  And so, I did.  When I went back home to Colorado, I started attending church there, but I wasn't baptized yet.  And then I called over and asked to have the missionaries come because before you can be baptized, you have to go through some lessons.  So the missionaries came over and we became good buddies and I'm gonna tell you something; I'm not sure you're gonna understand this, but I'll give it a little explanation if I can: if the church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] is true for you, the Lord will give you a burning in your heart.  I had no experience, but I had been told that.  So, on the third lesson, they couldn't come out to the house, so I said well I'll come in to see you, and their office was over the gymnasium at the University of Colorado in Boulder [University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, Colorado].  So, I went in.  We were doing the third lesson, and then they got called out for something.  I walked up to this window and I said, okay, talking to the Lord, I said okay, is this the true church?  And I got such a burning that I dare not ask again.  I mean, it was really strong.  And I thought if I ask again, I'll be a crispy critter because the second one--if it was any stronger, it would just cook me.
Speaker 2: Your heart actually felt like it was burning?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I had a burning, it was not, not a bad burning but a real warm, sincere answer to a question.  You know, this, I asked the question and I got the answer immediately.  So then, I knew this was where I was supposed to be.  And they came back in.  I told them what happened, they did the next few lessons and then called to see if the mission president would give permission for me to be baptized, and he did and I had a friend over here, so the next time I came over here to work, I called Mike [ph.] and had him baptize me and I was baptized up at the Ensign Stake [Salt Lake City, Utah].  But people always ask, "How do you know if this church is true?"  Well, that's how I knew.
Story_ID: 402914
Speaker 1: And I had another opportunity working with the missionaries with another black family and we came to this point where in those days you got down on your knees and you asked the Lord if the church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] is true.  You had one of the prospective members ask that question and, this time, with the missionaries in there the Holy Ghost came through there like freight train.  It took us five minutes to get our breath to talk again, and we believe the woman received it, but the guy didn't feel a thing.  I want to slap him.  There was no way you could not feel that, but his heart wasn't in the right place.  And I, and we--I suspected that he was doing things he shouldn't have been doing and the Lord's not gonna touch anything like that.  So, but it was a great thing for me because, you know, now I had real strong verification that the church was true and once you get into this, and you start studying the scriptures on a regular basis and you can ask questions and you go to priesthood and Sunday school, almost all your questions are answered.  There's no guesswork.  And the other thing that really, really was the, what's the word, the binding point for me, was you are held accountable.  You can do whatever you want.  You know, there's nobody looking over your shoulder who says you have to pay your tithing and you have to attend church and you have to do this.  If you're not gonna do it, you're not gonna be a member very long.  So, by me following what they're teaching, it just grew on me and it's grown even more and it still grows on me.  I'm still surprised at some of the things I learned, and it's--this is a lifestyle.  This is not go to church on Sunday and do whatever you want for the rest of the week, you--because you're accountable.  You are held accountable for what you do.
Speaker 2: When you say held accountable, I mean how, how are you held accountable?
Speaker 1: Well, we don't drink coffee, we don't smoke or drink, these kind of things.  You know, they're just precepts to church, it's part of our word of wisdom.  Smoking's obviously not good for you.  Coffee's not good for you.  Drugs, you know, it's common sense stuff, but you're held to a standard that you don't do that kind of stuff.  If you do, it's up to you to go to the bishop, in this case, and report what you've done.  And then they have a court (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Supo- okay, suppose you don't.
Speaker 1: Then you're lying to the Lord and you're lying to yourself and, see, that's the greatest part to me is I can lie to myself, I can even lie to the bishop, but I can't lie to the Lord and if I really want the blessings that come along with this, then I have to be held accountable, and, you know, if I do something like that, I have to go report it.  I shouldn't say I have to, I get to.  Because if I want to live a lie, I don't have to do anything.  But if I want to have the blessings that come along with being a priesthood holder and being honest, then you have to be an honest person.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you take it to someone if you, when you--it's like cabinet confession or something?
Speaker 1: No, because you're not in a box that separates you.  You're sitting across the desk from each other and you're talking man to man.  And, most of the people that belong to this church, I'd say a good 98 percent of them all understand this and we all choose to live this and, you know, I, the biggest thing for me that I really enjoy about this church is tithing.  You pay 10 percent of whatever you earn, and you know, everybody goes, well how can you do that, man?  That's a lot of money sometimes.  For me, because of my job it is.  But, you know what?  I always say to people, it's trading dimes for dollars.  Because the Lord will make sure you have everything you need if you pay an honest tithing, and I've watched it over and over and over, and I've also watched it where people think they cannot pay it and get the blessings.  Anybody that pays a fair and honest tithing, the Lord will make sure you have what you need.  And there's been times when I've been out of work, but the Lord always made sure I had what I needed.
Story_ID: 402915
Speaker 1: One thing that I know is almost indisputable with the Mormon church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], whether people believe in Mormonism or God or whatever, is that their church is highly organized--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and takes care of its members.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, I mean if something happens to one of your members, people do rally and take care of them.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I moved here in 1983, and 1983 was the year of the big floods here.  When I first moved here, everywhere you went was sandbags because the mountains had so much snow that year and they were unprepared and it just (makes sound) came--State Street [Salt Lake City, Utah] was a fishing pond.  You know, you could not drive down State Street, and to watch the rally of people, and it wasn't paid, you know, anybody, nobody was paid.  These are people that, from the church and neighbors, put up these sandbags and built rivers and directed the water out of the neighborhoods.  It was an amazing thing to watch, and the church is highly organized.  We're the only church I know of that has the amount of real estate--we're probably the largest single real estate holder in the United States, and we have no debt.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's unusual (laughter).
Speaker 2: I wish, I just with the United States government, if they got 10 percent from everybody, an honest 10 percent off of everybody's income, we wouldn't have these problems we have.  You know, just think how simple the tax code would be.  You either paid your 10 percent or you didn't, you know, and anybody could afford to pay 10 percent, and with that ten percent, the church is abundantly wealthy and able to pay--we've got 125 temples around the world and getting ready to go to 130 by the end of this year, and we're, we don't have any debt.
Story_ID: 402889
Speaker 1: We were talking about the--yeah, the flood, and the--how the people in the Mormon church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] take care of each other.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I guess it's a community aspect of it, the organizational aspect of it that--
Speaker 2: It's what we're taught (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) nobody can dispute is very, very highly organized and high- and strong.
Speaker 2: Right.  Like I said, like, unlike any other church, you know, the church is designed to help itself and others.  You know, the things people, one thing people really don't know?  That in Guatemala when they had their big mudslides and everything?  LDS church was the first one there with food, clothes, and all kinds of things to help people get back on their feet.  There's a movie--at the time, President Hinckley [Gordon B. Hinckley] was the president of the church and he was in Guatemala shoveling mud out of a church building at ninety, let's see, he was ninety-two, ninety-three then.  And everybody here is a worker.  You can't join the church and just sit.  And you know, we're really a proactive organization and, you know, like any other facility or any other group, we have those that don't live up to what they should, but I would say a good 85 percent do, which is more than enough to make sure this organization continues to move.
Story_ID: 402890
Speaker 1: Are the black members of the church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] in any way organized around being black members?  I know there are Black Catholics in Action, there's a Union of Black Episcopalians, there's a group of black Lutherans organized.  Is there any such thing in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just the Genesis Group.
Speaker 1: And what is that?
Speaker 2: The Genesis Group is a support organization for black members and white members that have adopted African American children, so on the first Sunday of every month, we meet in this building [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' chapel, Cottonwood Heights, Utah] and we can have anything from 60 to 106 kids in our primary, and most of them never see another black except that one weekend a month.
Speaker 1: Now, why is it called the Genesis Group?  Is there a reason?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--the beginning.  In 1978, was the year of the revelation [1978 Revelation on Priesthood], where all worthy males could receive the priesthood.  Before that, Africans, or, and people of African descent could not hold the priesthood.  The Lord never said it, but it was something that was put into the church, so blacks were not priesthood holders, but there were a lot of faithful members in those days that held onto the desire to hold the priesthood, and 1978 it was granted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a long, maybe over a hundred years after the founding of the church, huh?
Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty [1920], or 1820 was the founding of the church.  Well actually the, in 1820 is when we--no it's 1830 is when the church was founded and not long after that 'The Book of Mormon' ['The Book of Mormon: An Account Written by the Hand of Mormon upon Plates Taken from the Plates of Nephi,' Joseph Smith] was printed.
Speaker 1: So it took them 148 years--
Speaker 2: One hundred forty-eight years.
Speaker 1: --of church life before black people were--
Speaker 2: Right.  But you have to understand when the church started, it was slavery and a lot of the church, early church members had slaves.  A lot of them freedom, gave them their freedom because of the teachings of the church.  Things like people don't know that Joseph Smith ran for president of the United States on the abolitionist ticket, and one of the reasons--
Speaker 1: Oh the--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: --well--what--I mean the Liberty Party, or--?
Speaker 2: No, just as an abolitionist against slavery.
Speaker 1: Well, as a ticket though, I mean you run on a party ticket.  I know there was a Liberty Party that was run by abolitionists and I don't, so I don't--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't hear that, but that's one story.  The other story is he told while he was out stumping for president, he told a group of white men in Illinois that if they freed the slaves and gave them the same education, the same opportunities, they'd outwork 'em.  That's one of the we- one of the reasons I believe he was killed.  Because you couldn't have, you know, people walking around saying that.  And, you know, just wasn't a good thing to do.  In my opinion, it wasn't a smart thing to do, for him to do, but that's how he was.  He always said, said what was in his heart and he told the truth.
Story_ID: 402891
Speaker 1: I know people, I know religion requires a lot of belief, but do you think that, I mean you look back at the history of that, do you think that, you know, how do you separate what is inspired by God and what is the work of man, in terms of the attitude about blacks?
Speaker 2: In the early 1800s, we were nothing more than chattel.  The slave owners put us in the same books as they did the cows and the horses, so there was a really deep disrespect, and I think part of that disrespect, and this is just strictly my opinion, anytime you can be captured and forced into slavery, you know, there's not much respect.  They don't know how many people fought to stay out of slavery in Africa, but, you know, usually it was the groups that went to get the slaves were twice the size and could take out a whole village, you know, by themselves.  One-on-one, I would put an African warrior up against anybody, but it was never one-on-one.  So, there was disrespect and then you got over here on these boats and more than 50 percent of them died.  I don't--there was just a lack of respect, and since you were not educated to the same level as the people that had taken you, again, lack of respect and they just never gave us the opportunity.  They didn't want us to have the opportunity to get educated because education is the biggest freeing thing in the world and so they wanted you to stay stupid, so they didn't let you get educated even though we did.  A lot of us did get educated.  It's an attitude.  Some white people just think 'cause they're white, they're better.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, no, the LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] has taken a lot of flak for you know having come out you know--
Speaker 2: Utah?
Speaker 1: Fi- finally, well, for finally saying black people, finally, they--we recognize they have souls and then they can be priests in the church, where a lot of the other churches necessarily haven't operated very differently, they just don't have a demarcation line when they say, it's not only with the Southern Baptists, or if they ever will say black people are equal (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's been a, there's been an apology from the Baptists--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because of their teachings, but in 18-  f- where were they moving, 1830s, 1840s, when they left Nauvoo [Illinois] and were trying to cross the country, they had to go through slave states, Missouri--
Speaker 1: Nauvoo (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Kansas--
Speaker 1: --Illinois, right?
Speaker 2: --and Illinois, but the governor of Illinois [Thomas Ford] put out a extermination order against them, and it was because of the teachings of the religion.  Now people don't generally understand this, but polygamy was one of the biggest things that caused the church problems, but we were being killed at such a rate, we had more widows hanging around without husbands to support them.  Polygamy was originally set up as a way for these women's--to get support because their husbands had died or whatever, and they had nobody else to marry or, you know, there was not enough of a line for them to pick to marry.  Of course it was abused.  Anything like that's gonna be abused.  It's still abused today.  But, the original rules, like less than 3 percent of the males were required to take extra wives just to make sure they had somebody to take care of them.  It was not, you know, because they needed seventy-one virgins or anything like that.  It was to just, you know, take care of each other and these women needed husbands to do that.  And, you know, they were in no way gonna let that happen without legal marriages.  So, that's how that whole thing got started and, when you really think about what was going on in those days I mean, you got an extermination order in Illinois; I think we had one in Missouri, and I believe what happened was, again, this is just my reading and my understanding of what happened, but when Brigham Young was crossing the, crossing Missouri [Missouri River] and he had all these people and there were slaves that were with him, they wanted to make sure that those slaves--the Missourians wanted to make sure that the slaves were never given any position of authority because, at that time, there were blacks who had the priesthood, Elijah Abel for one.  There are two other guys at the same time, and you know we're talking about two members, maybe three members and all of them have the priesthood.  Joseph Smith gave it to most of them, but while they were trying to get out of Dodge, or out of Illinois and Missouri--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well that almost seems like a universal black usage--getting out of Dodge, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The, they had to make certain concessions and I really believe that's where it started--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and then it just became----because it's never been a commandment from the Lord.  There's nowhere in the history of this church you can find that.  So, it was something man did, and they believed they had to have a revelation to change it and Spencer W- W. Kimball [Spencer W. Kimball] had the revelation.
Story_ID: 402892
Speaker 1: Now you met your wife [Jerri Harwell] here in the church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], right?
Speaker 2: In Utah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In '83 [1983], right?
Speaker 2: We met in, actually '84 [1984] I think, and we dated for a little while and then she went back to school at Harvard and the women's school that was--used to be next door--
Speaker 1: Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: --Radcliffe, she went to Radcliffe and then she came back a couple years later and we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so that--you know, so, since that time, now this is, now you're firmly ensconced in Salt Lake City [Utah] in the area here, and now did you, did you form another business (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Component-Well [Component-Well Inc., Salt Lake City, Utah] was where I form- was my original business when I was here--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --and I moved from Colorado over here with Component-Well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is the Genesis Group, now, when was that formed?
Speaker 2: Genesis was formed in 1971.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's not even.  That's the church group.
Speaker 2: That's the church group.
Speaker 1: All right, now, okay.  Well, I guess I'm talking about PowerStream [PowerStream Technology, Orem, Utah], in terms of the business.
Speaker 2: Oh, PowerStream was 1983, '84 [1984].  I can't remember exactly.
Speaker 1: Now, what did PowerStream do that the other business didn't do?
Speaker 2: PowerStream, oh, excuse me.  PowerStream is much later.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: PowerStream was started by an Italian guy named Daniele Reni.  And it's an electroni- he's an engineer and he needed some sales, so I was selling him stuff from Component-Well and he asked me if I would see if I could find him business, so he basically hired me and that was '84 [1984], '85 [1985], like that.  So he was another line, another company that I was selling for.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were selling for your own company, then with--
Speaker 2: And him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for PowerStream.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in 19- I want to say '96 [1996], is when I lost my big line, when I lost Lundahl [Lundahl Astro Circuits] and Daniele offered me a full-time job.  (Unclear) it wasn't really full-time, but a good deal of the time I was working for him and he would, he and I would go to California and other places to visit companies that he was trying to get business from.
Speaker 1: Okay, so about 1990, is that when you became vice president of sales?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I started out as just a sales rep [representative]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and two years, or a year la- a year later I was the regional sales manager.  In 1999, Mark Lund [Mark W. Lund] bought the company and he left me in the position of regional sales manager and I guess a year or two later I was the national sales manager and I believe, it was 2003, 2005 I became the vice president of sales for the company.
Story_ID: 402893
Speaker 1: So you're saying it's been fairly smooth going here in, in Utah, for--you haven't run into the kind of resistance or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) racial problems that you had in Colorado, or--?
Speaker 2: Not the same kind, but you still have people that think 'cause they're white they're better than you, or that you're cursed, you know.
Speaker 1: Even within the church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], they still think that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  I just had to really take one of my members, this white lady that adopted a black kid, who was livid because these quote unquote Mormons have made her s- they took her son off and told him that his new sister has a curse of Cain on her.  I keep trying to say okay, show me where the curse of Cain came from because they wanna say when Cain was--when the Lord cursed Cain he gave him a skin of blackness, but that's not anywhere in the scriptures.  But these people still wanna hang on to it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's something that's said over and over again, but it's not in the scriptures.
Speaker 2: It's not in the scriptures.
Speaker 1: I once heard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a mark.
Speaker 1: I once heard David Duke back Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] down on that point and it----
Speaker 2: How?
Speaker 1: --revealed--he just said that, he just said it just like you, you just said it and Jesse Jackson had no reply.  He said well, you know, Cain was cursing, why don't--you know and Jesse he had--you could see him searching in the back of his head, is that really in there?  He's thinking--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's not really in there, it's not really in (unclear).
Speaker 2: If you go to Genesis and go to what the Lord said to Cain, I believe Cain's statement was, you curse me and I cannot bear it.  It would be more than I can bear.  And the Lord said, "I will put a mark on you."  It does not say a mark of dark skin.  It says nothing whatsoever.  I will put a mark on you so people will know not to bother you.  So what was the mark?  And everybody just assume- I shouldn't say everybody.  But those that want to be racially stupid come up with the statement that it was black skin.  Oh, there's all kinds of things (laughter) that are said.
Speaker 1: Well there are black people who are of various denominations that actually believe that themselves and have never read the--
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  Here's the thing.  We have what's called the--accountability, is the thirteen Articles of Faith.  The second article of faith says the Lord will judge you for what you have done, not for what anybody else has done.  So, if that's true, what if I am a descendant of Cain?  You know, the Lord's gonna judge me for what I did while I was here on the earth, not what Cain did.
Speaker 1: Yeah so the, so, another scripture would have rendered that moot, even if the other part said that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That particular part of church teaching and every priest and laurel, or the young women and young men before they become eligible for the Melchizedek priesthood are taught that.  But yet and still, you still have people that run around trying to say these things.  And I think the church has, I'm trying to remember who said it but somebody in the church had made the statement, also there's nowhere they can find the curse of Cain where it says it was black skin.  So, this poor woman, I had to calm her down and just tell her that no matter where you go, no matter how good you are, no matter what you try to do, there's always somebody that wants to drag you down, you know, and you made a mistake adopting a child.  I said, you know what?  I don't care what black people say.  I don't care what white people say.  A child with a parent regardless of color is better off than a child in the system.  The system is a deadly place, and so I am really grateful and I thank you for having the courage to adopt a black child.  She looked at me and said, "It was no courage.  He's a cutie."  You know.  She just doesn't think in terms of race like some people do.  So, I get, when I hear that kind of stuff I do get upset because it seems so rude and so cruel, you know, and you're a member of my church saying that?  Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is my church.  I love it here.
Story_ID: 402894
Speaker 1: Professionally what are your, what are your plans?  You're vice president of PowerStream [PowerStream Technology, Orem, Utah] right now?
Speaker 2: Well, as long as, well, you know, we built PowerStream from zero, because in 2001, after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], everything stopped.  The economy went dead and we were able to fight through that.  We did a lot of suffering personally to get ourselves through this and now we're in a position where we're doing fairly well on an everyday basis.  We were making money again and the company's growing and unless we sell it, I'm not going anywhere for a while.  If somebody offers me a job for 150,000 [dollars] a year, yeah, I'll probably take it, you know, but that's a lot more than I would ever be able to ask PowerStream for.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of L- LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], is, how far can you, I mean is there, you're in the priesthood.  Is there, are there different levels that you achieve, or--?
Speaker 2: I'm at the highest level I can go (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're the highest level.  Okay.  All right.  So are you, would you be the, or how many other black folks are in your position?
Speaker 2: In the pri- at the high--
Speaker 1: Or in the rank that you're--
Speaker 2: The church doesn't keep numbers, but I personally know of about six hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay, at that level, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all right.  So you're not an anomaly or anything.
Speaker 2: Oh, not at all.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: No, I'm more the rule than the exception.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've got my two counselors and my executive secretary.  We're all high priests.
Story_ID: 402895
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My first real hope is that we can get along and pull ourselves together as a group of adults needing to make some changes.  Fifty percent of the prisons, you know, 50 percent of our young black men are in prison.  We need to take back our streets and our kids.  I have four, three adopted sons and two daughters [Lauren Harwell Godfrey and Rene Harwell] and a son that are not adopted.  I have six kids.  I have made it not just a rule, I made it a pledge my kids are not gonna be part of those statistics.  You know, they will graduate from high school.  I can't force them to go to college, but I hope they do, and they're gonna be honest people, or I'll turn them in, but I'm not, I'm not raising thugs and I'm not raising people that are, that have less value for themselves than they do for others, so I believe the black community really needs to take their kids back.  We need to stop thinking that we're too, we can't adopt somebody else's child.  Every child born in the world to me belongs to us all; especially black kids.  Because they're either gonna be straight and do the right thing or they're not.  I don't see any gray area there, and I'm determined for what I can do to make sure the kids are straight and most every adult I know, black adult I know has that same attitude, but I don't know that they're willing to go stick their necks out to do something about it.  My hero and person that I really appreciate is Reverend Davis [HistoryMaker Reverend France A. Davis] over at Calvary Baptist [Calvary Baptist Church, Salt Lake City, Utah], because he has the time, takes the time, and talks to his kids and I don't mean his own personal kids, but I mean the kids in his congregation.
Speaker 1: That's Reverend France Davis.
Speaker 2: Davis--France Davis.  And, from what I've seen from some other black churches, we as a Genesis [Genesis Group] presidency try to visit different black churches so we can learn what they're doing and you know let them see we haven't forgotten we're black.   A lot of people have said to me that, you know, you joined the Mormon church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] and you gave up your blackness.  I said I joined the Mormon church and I think I became blacker because there's enough people in the Mormon church that wouldn't let me forget that I'm black.  Not that I wanted to, but I mean, you know, there's everything is a constant reminder.  And, I'm proud of being black.
Story_ID: 402896
Speaker 1: We as a people have come so far with the li- with the beginnings of so little, you know?  They cannot take Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] from us.  They can't take, who did the peanuts, I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: George Washington Carver.
Speaker 1: George Washington Carver.  And all of the other people, you know.  I'm a real Condoleezza Rice fan because the black community has basically turned their back on her because she's a Republican.  And I'm I want to look at them and say what do you have against somebody who can stand up for what they really believe?  What do you have against them?  She's never been on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], which I find you know just disgusting.
Speaker 2: You mean the fact that she's never been on 'Oprah' is disgusting (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] never invited her.  She is the highest ranking woman in the United States, bar none.  There's nobody that holds a higher rank in this government in the United States than Condoleezza Rice.  Well, why don't we hear her, about her on 'Oprah'?  I mean 'Oprah' is the--she's the thing.  You know, I mean everybody goes, if you're on 'Oprah,' you got it made.  Donny [Donny Osmond] and Marie Osmond are on 'Oprah.'  Condoleezza Rice is not.  I find that angering.  I mean, I just don't think that's right because she could stand up for herself.  Same thing with Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].  You know ever seen him on 'Oprah'?  I mean, you'd think, I'm sorry but socially 'Oprah' is the thing, black and white.  Everybody watches 'Oprah,' but the two people that have held the two highest positions in the United States are not invited on 'Oprah.'
Speaker 2: Now, do you like Oprah's show?  Are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 402897
Speaker 1: Can you see where the values of Condoleezza Ri- Rice [Condoleezza Rice] might be different form Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Obviously.  But, the values of her as an individual who has stood up, got herself educated, and has made it to that high in the government, and especially in the Republican [Republican Party]?  I mean, the Republicans quote unquote are the bigots.  I'm finding there's more bigots in the Democratic Party than there are in the Republican Party.
Speaker 1: They have their share (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  So, to me, an independent person who knows what their values are and stands up for those values is a valuable person to me.  That's a valuable example.  You know Oprah herself is a role model, an example of what's, what can be and what you can do, and to me it's just a shame that they let their politics separate them and Condoleezza Rice's politics are I'm independent, I can choose for me what I want to be, and then I can go work for it, and that's what she did, and to me, that's the example all people, white and black, need to understand, that this is somebody who stood up for what she believed and went for it and got it.
Speaker 1: But do you think it's really, I mean does she, do you think she really believes in the, well the, say the war in Iraq [Iraq War], do you think she really believed that, that, that Iraq was a mortal threat to the U.S. government when (unclear)--
Speaker 2: You know what I think is gonna happen one day and it's gonna be years down the line?  They're gonna find those WMDs [weapons of mass destruction] and then I'm wondering what anybody's gonna say.  And they might not find them, they might find them in Syria or some other country, but me personally, and I'm sticking my neck out, I believe they existed.  I don't believe, I don't wanna believe, that we're that stupid.  You know, we may have gotten bad intelligence, but I think it was the right thing to do.  If, for noth- no other reason, we as black people should understand that freedom is not free and the Iraqis were living under a tyrant.  I mean they had rape rooms going and Uday [Uday Hussein] and Qusay [Qusay Hussein] were, were just brutal to people.  I've got personal friends that are Iraqis and they will tell you the United States probably should not have gone in there, but they needed to take Hussein [Saddam Hussein] out.  They needed to stop their sons.  We have now a kid from Iraq born and raised Muslim, who's now LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] and the stories he will tell you will curl your hair, but nobody wants to talk to him, you know.  It seems to me his story should be the one that's told on 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] if you wanna hear what's going on, what was going on over there.  I've got just up the street here, we've got a family that the husband is Iraqi and we help him, send money back over there so that his family can survive.  He's a twin brother.  He's got a twin brother that is alive in Iraq and I believe human beings need to help human beings out when things are wrong.
Story_ID: 402844
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so, 'cause at the time I did anything is what I believed at the moment you know.  I may have learned better later, but at the time I did these things, it's what I thought was okay to do.  I'm just a firm believer don't force yourself down other people's throats and don't go out of your way to hurt anybody.  So, I've tried to live that way and I've never done anything that I would consider a bad thing, you know.  I was (laughter) typical African American male before I joined the church [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], quality over quantity, but I've learned better as far as women go you know.  I got lucky and married that lady [Jerri Harwell] twenty, it'll be twenty-one years this July and I have not looked back, I've not thought of anything.  You know, we have a great relationship.  We're friends.
Speaker 1: For the record, your wife is black--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which is some people watching this might wonder if, if she was or not depending on you know because of other things you've said, but--
Speaker 2: I've had, I've dated my share of white women, okay?  But when you get down to the nitty-gritty, it's who your soul mate is, if you're lucky enough to even meet them, and she's my soul mate.  She's my friend, she's my confidante, you know, and I can't tell you how many times I was headed down that way and she says, "Don [HistoryMaker Donald L. Harwell], I think you better make that left turn and get it right."  So, you know--she's, I'm just lucky.  I really believe that.  I think luck is what you make it, but we've been, and don't get me wrong, I mean, we have our disagreements, but overall I don't think I'd want to be around somebody else other than her.
Story_ID: 402845
Speaker 1: When you look back again over everything you've done to this point in your life, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I'm the director of adult probation and parole citizen review board.  I've spent, I spent six years in the prison as an assistant chaplain and a Sunday school teacher.  I spent nine years on the advisory council for corrections, and I think my legacy was I made them accountable, made the officers at the prison accountable for their behavior as well as the guards, and it's made a big difference out there.  When the advisory board was shut down in 2001, they asked me to start this com- community accountability board, and I'm the director of adult probation and parole of community accountability board, and we've been at it for almost six years now, and we have a 60 percent success rate of taking guys and girls that have broken their parole, and getting them back on line and doing the things they need to do.  If I have a legacy as far as a church member [of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], I'm no different than any other priesthood holder, but in that one particular line, I've given over twenty years to trying to help people get their lives straightened out again.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just for the record, now, now you were chairman of the adult probation and review board?
Speaker 2: I'm the director--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of adult probation and parole.  It could be citizen or community accountability board.
Speaker 1: And you started that in 2002?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right after 2001, yes sir, right there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Two thousand one [2001], and then--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you've been serving ever since?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 402846
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  You talked about your wife [Jerri Harwell] to some extent, but you have some children, right?
Speaker 2: I have a daughter [Laren Harwell Godfrey] that's thirty-three years old, that's a advertising mogul in San Francisco [California].  I have a, she's thirty-four, he's thirty-two, my oldest son, Dustin [Dustin Harwell] is a entertainment and facilities manager for bars and entertainment groups.  I don't really know his title, but he's, I'm pretty proud of him because he's worked himself up into what he wants to do.  It's important to me people be happy.  If you didn't like doing this, you wouldn't be here.  Okay?  They might get you to go a few times, but if you really didn't enjoy it you wouldn't do it.
Speaker 1: No, not eight hundred times (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Exactly.  So, it's important to me that I get people to understand you've got to do something you like, because then you're not going to work, you're just going to do what you like to do and that makes a big difference.  My two oldest children have done that and they're successful, and (laughter) Du- Du- Dustin went to Long Beach State [California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California] and he's going there still, but he dropped out for golf.  He was going to become the next Tiger Woods.  Well, that obviously didn't work out, and he went and found out he couldn't get the jobs he wanted without the education, so now, he's gotten himself back in.  He's on the dean's list, you know and he's a prime example of somebody that had to fall off the building before he realized how much he had going for him, but he stepped up.  My oldest son, Bronson [Bronson Harwell], who is adopted, is, the poor kid was born fetal alcohol syndrome, so he has not had the same ability as most people do, but he's doing the best that he can with what he's got, and I'm proud of him because he's serving an LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints] mission up at the church headquarters [Salt Lake City, Utah], and he's doing well and he's having fun.  The thing I like about Bronson is he's having fun with what he's doing.  They gave him some lemons and he learned to make lemonade, and I'm really proud of him.  My next one is Richard [Richard Harwell].  He's nineteen, and Richard didn't have a great time in school, so it's hard.  I can't get him to go to college right now, but he's got himself a really good job and he's learning, and he's willing to learn different things to improve himself.  He may be one of those people who has to do manual labor his whole life, but that's what he likes to do.  My next one is Morgan [Morgan Harwell].  Morgan's my problem child.  (Laughter) The doctor said to us, it's definitely not environment because he's a troubled kid, and, but he's worked his way out of it.  He's going to school now.  He's a junior in high school and he's finally found a place where he goes every day, will not let himself miss, and is doing his work.  For Morgan, that's a huge, huge step because he couldn't make it in any high school.  He's gone to more high schools than there are around here, and back to some twice, but now he's found a, found a home and he's doing what he needs to do to get himself, you know, to have a life because they cannot live in my house and not get a high school diploma.  I'm not gonna kill them to go to college because not everybody's meant for college.
Story_ID: 402847
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you if, if the LDS [The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints], I guess the community, I think most people know, there is a very strong community created around the church.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But like everybody else, LDS members are in popular culture to a certain degree, affected by it, and the children, you know.  Is there--what, to what extent does LDS teachings and culture affect that development of children and families?  Are they shielded more than other children?  Are they just as vulnerable as other children, or how do you (unclear) it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just as vulnerable, maybe more because they live in such a tight bubble.  You know, everybody that belongs to this ward that I belong to, we all live in that neighborhood or around here, so it is a closed community.  Sometimes, my kids being black, grew up in some of these high schools and were not treated very well and they became overly aware that they were black.  So now, they watch BET [Black Entertainment Television] and everything that has to do with being black.  Majority of their friends are white, but they are very conscious that they're black.
Speaker 1: In terms of the popular culture--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --expression.
Speaker 2: And, sometimes I don't like it because my wife [Jerri Harwell] and I kind of have a rule, a good friend is a good friend, color be whatever it may be.  Majority--because of where we live, my three best friends are probably my counselors in the Genesis Group, but I also have a ton of other friends that are white.  My boss and I are really good friends.  I was surprised one day, I walked into work and he had the sign of a black baby and a white baby and says no butts about it, we're the best together.  And, we were the team that actually pulled PowerStream [PowerStream Technology, Orem, Utah] together.  And, so I don't like the consciousness of white people about blacks, I don't like the consciousness of black people about white because we're just people and I think if we get to a point where we are just people together, we could do so much more and there's always somebody, there always seems to be somebody out there that wants to make sure you know that you're black and that you're less and that's what happened to my two--my nineteen [Richard Harwell] and seventeen year old [Morgan Harwell], and that part I don't like but, as they said to me, I have to respect them because they dropped away from the church and hopefully one day they'll come back, just for their own spiritual growth, but right now they don't want to have anything to do with it.
Speaker 1: Now does LDS, or do you, do you feel that if they're not in the church--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --I mean it's horrible damnation--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or something that's going to--
Speaker 2: It's sad, but that's the end of it, you know.  There, there is other life without the LDS church.  For me, it's the life I've chosen and the life I really do love, you know.  There's always things you wanna change about any organization.  Racism is one of them I'd love to see eradicated from the church, but it's, there's still people here that think that their white skin makes them better than mine, makes them better than me, and you know, so what, that's their problem.  It is what it is.  And, you could take lemons and make lemonade, or you could take lemons and walk around with a sour face all day.  So, I'd just as soon make the lemonade because I know in my heart what the Lord believes because I'm like everybody else.  I'm open to revelation and the Lord tells me things or says things that, you know, if I wasn't in this church I don't think I would hear 'em.  That's just my opinion.  That's how I look at it.
Story_ID: 402848
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I need to ask you?
Speaker 2: I got one more thing. Okay.
Speaker 1: My, my, my fif- or sixteen year old daughter.  She is not having those same situations that the boys had.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  I almost cut one of the children off.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Her name is Rene [Rene Harwell].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: R-E-N-E.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, she's already got her first, she's sixteen and she has her first college certificate for a college class.  She's running track.  She's doing, you know, she's just my socialite and her experience is just totally different from what the boys experienced.  So you know life is life.  I imagine I could go back to Dorsey High School [Susan Miller Dorsey High School, Los Angeles, California] and run into the same things.
Story_ID: 402849
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything else we need to talk about or anything I need to ask you before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: The only thing I would really want people to know is I was born of goodly parents [Veronica Rodriguez and Andrew L. Harwell].  They did their best to make sure that I had every opportunity they didn't.  In the '60s [1960s], that was a lot different than it is today and I appreciated it.  I wish, you know it's interesting the old story is the older I get the smarter they get.  And I'm really seeing that, because my dad tried to tell us a lot of things that we just weren't smart enough to receive, and I think it's not, it was us and our inability to understand what he was trying to tell us, and not that he was saying anything wrong, but I just think it was over our head and, because everything he said has really worked out and turned out to be true.
Story_ID: 402850
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As an African American who did the best he could to help other people, to care about other people.  Anything other than that, I don't think is important.  I was honest.  I helped, I helped other people and I cared about other people.  Outside of that, you know I'm nobody different than you are, or the cameraman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.  Thanks for asking me.
Story_ID: 402851
Speaker 1: Okay, in--starting at the top left, that's Richard [Richard Harwell], and Richard is four years old at that point.  And then me, I'm twenty years old, no (laughter).  I think when we got them I was like forty-five or forty-six.  Hanging on my arm there is Rene [Rene Harwell] and she is less than a year.  My wi- Rene is leaning on my wife [Jerri Harwell], and oh, I'd be guessing because she hasn't got any white hair, well Morgan [Morgan Harwell] is seventeen, and that's Morgan in her arms, he is probably a little under two years old.
Speaker 2: About 1988, '89 [1989] (unclear) '88 [1988]?
Speaker 1: I think so.  He's seventeen years old now so whatever minus seventeen.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988] I would think.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then with his back to us so we can't see his mug is Bronson [Bronson Harwell].
