Story_ID: 39194
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're going to start off by slating the interview.  My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm in the interview and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Rose is observing.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Charles Hobson, Charles Blagrove Hobson.  That's C-H-A-R-L-E-S, B-L-A-G-R-O-V-E.  We might have to do that again, right?
Speaker 1: That's okay.  This is just the slating.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Hobson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Hobson.
Speaker 2: H-O-B as in boy, S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And your--the date--your birth date.  The date of your birth.
Speaker 2: I was born at 10:00 a.m., June 23rd, 1936.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 24th, 2013.
Speaker 1: Is it the 24th or 23rd?  Okay, I think it's the 23rd.
Speaker 2: October 23rd, 2013.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and your occupation.  No, our location.
Speaker 2: Our location is a home in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, downtown Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that, cause people aren't--
Speaker 2: B-O-E-R-U-M, and then hill, H-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: Television producer, writer, producer, lecturer.
Story_ID: 39195
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five people magazine-ish questions, they're short answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Early Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Paris [France].
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Soon come.
Story_ID: 39196
Speaker 1: So I want actually, why don't I ask you about your middle name first.  Where does that come from?
Speaker 2: My middle name, it's an English name.  My parents are from the Caribbean and Blagrove I guess is an English, English name.  I've never in my life you know I'm 77 years old, I've never met another person with that name.  I've seen it in--when I was working in Jamaica, I saw it on a painting and I think there was a sea captain, British captain with that name.  But I again never, never met anyone with--I know it exists, you know, but just through Google search you can find everything.  And but people never call me Blagrove, except if they were mad at me.  They shortened it to Blagey or Blakey.  So most people, you know, but people I've known many, many years.  But otherwise you know of course it's Charles.
Speaker 1: So your, your, your nickname was--or Blakey?
Speaker 2: Blakey or Blake.  These are again, people who I've known over 50 years.
Story_ID: 39197
Speaker 1: So let's start out--you say your parents are Caribbean are Cari--you know from--you have Caribbean background.  You mentioned Jamaica, is it Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Both parents were born in Jamaica and came to the United Sates as I guess teenagers.  And different--my, my father is from Browns, Brownstown [Jamaica], Saint Anne's [Jamaica] is actually where Marcus Garvey and Bob Marley from Saint Anne's, Jamaica.  That part--it's a country.  And my mother from Kingston [Jamaica].
Speaker 1: Okay, why don't we talk about your father first?  Can you give his name?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father, I proudly give his name, Charles Samuel Hobson.  I was in--I never, you know, used the junior, but Charles Samuel Hobson.  A country boy, hard working guy.  Came over here in, in the 30's [1930's], and you know where he was actually, you know he worked--never, never went to college.  He worked as--he was a Teamster in the last many years of his life.  And worked for I think a housing--it was in the sort of Maintenance Department of, of a housing--you know sort of a--they, they called them engineers.  You know those kinds of people.  And was involved in the church a lot, Episcopalian.  Both parents were Episcopalian, or Church of England.
Speaker 1: So did he, did you know your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I never met them, yeah.
Story_ID: 39198
Speaker 1: Did your father talk at all about growing up in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course.  Yeah, they talked about--
Speaker 1: Okay, what stories did he share?
Speaker 2: Well actually you know like as the case with many men, he talked less about it than, than my mother.  But I did get to go to Kingston when I was 11 years old and, and, and Jamaica.  So I got to experience that.  It's kind of an interesting story.  My par--I went to a school in Brooklyn PS3 [Public School].  And I was like you know, an A, I was beyond A, you know.  It was so boring you know and many of the young people were not really there to learn.  And my parents kind of figured out you know, this is ridiculous for him.  He's got to get challenged.  So they, they wanted me--and they were England followers.  We had a--we always had a picture of the queen in our house you know and they were always proud of being British subjects even though they became citizens.  So they sent me at age 11, they wanted me to go to Jamaica to experience a British education.  I was very unhappy about that.  I mean I didn't want to leave you know, Brooklyn, the Dodgers you know and, and all--but--and it made--my mother took us over with my sister and, and little brother.  And--but then my dad somewhere along the road I guess a few months we were there.  And I got to meet my relatives and so on.  Said bring 'em back, bring 'em back.  And then, and then we somehow managed to use an address of a cousin to put us in a, another district where there was a good, better school, white school, right.  And then of course I, I was out of school for a year.  I went over there and of course I was a lost sheep, you know, cause this was a very challenging school and--
Speaker 1: So you went to school actually and they took you back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't go to school in Jamai--they looked for the right school, but then my dad--we realized how unhappy I was, so they brought me back.
Speaker 1: Did you do any schooling for that year/
Speaker 2: That year I did not.  I learned a lot about the culture and the people, but no I didn't do any schooling.  Not at, not at--you know, I, I think it was better that I did leave PS3, but the rest of it I'm not so sure about.
Speaker 1: You mean being out for the year.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39199
Speaker 1: So what--how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: My father--interesting thing about my dad.  My dad was--he died in '84 [1984] and he had a serious stroke at about '74 [1974], but managed, you know, but hung in there.  But he had never lost his accent, you know.  He had--he was in this country for, I don't know, 70, 65, 70 years.  And I remember when I was hanging out with you know, in the jazz circle and sometimes my white friend--I'd bring a, a white friend over to Brooklyn for dinner and they would meet my parents.  And they would say what language is he speaking?  And it was, you know heavy Jamai--Jamaican accent.  He had a hearty laugh, and we didn't, we didn't really have much of a relationship.  I mean it was just, you know, benign.  It was--until actually after my mother died.  I got to see how loving he was.  He wasn't an articulate man, quite inarticulate man, but had lots of friends, though.  And was--seemed to be the life of the party among his, his friends.  A side I didn't see, you know, maybe I'm that way with my daughters, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Was he stern?
Speaker 2: Yes, very strict, yeah, yeah very strict and he's, you know he used the--there was the use--it was about the rod and sparing the child.
Speaker 1: Spare the rod, spoil the child?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he didn't--that wasn't a problem for him.  I mean he wasn't brutal.  I mean he--you know I got spankings and all.  But you know and he had a--he would--you know he would get angry and he would you know, yell, he was a yeller.  And but you know what he--he was going through a lot of stuff, you know.  During the war he did work at the Navy yard.  I think he had a deferment.  I forgot what it was for, but--
Story_ID: 39200
Speaker 1: So what about your mother?  Can you give her name?
Speaker 2: Yes, Cordelia Victoria Spencer.  And she was born as I said in Kingston, proud family.  Her--my cousins, you know are--my first cous--you know her--my first cousins had quite remarkable achievements, many of them.  And my mother largely worked as a domestic and then later on she got to be like a nurse's aide, you know which was a big jump up.  And great cook, you know.  And took care of us.  And I was the eldest son, so I got the push, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: As the older children do.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did she tell you, was she a talker at all?  Did she--
Speaker 2: Yes, big talker, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did she tell you anything about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  My grand, my grandfather--
Speaker 1: On your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My, my--her father, my grandfather who lived to 104, you know was quite remark--and he became--he was a brick mason and worked in Cuba.  And so my mother actually grew up in--well you know when, when he was there working, she lived in Cuba and learned Spanish, you know.  I guess he was also doing cane as well.  So--cause they used a lot of Jamaican laborers.  I guess some of them, many of them stayed in Cuba.  So my grandfather was one of those laborers.  He had a little--he had a farm in Kingston [Jamaica] and--I mean it was in the city, but it was--it looked like a farm when you're, you know, eleven years old.  And but you know he had cane and bananas and you know, that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: How many kids on her side of the family?
Speaker 2: She had a brother and a sister.
Speaker 1: So small family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her brother was in real estate, Uncle Carl, and her mother was a beautician--her sister was a beautician.
Speaker 1: And where did she fit in the birth order?
Speaker 2: Good question, I think she was the eldest to my recollection.
Speaker 1: So you knew--so did your grandfather tell any stories about his time in Cuba or growing up, or you know anything that would give me a sense of you know, how far you know the family history.  And some people know lots, some people don't.
Speaker 2: Well he didn't, no he didn't--you know I was eleven years old, so he wasn't gonna talk to me like a, you know like a peer.  But I do remember something with him.  It was--there was a special event, a special dinner, special celebra--I think it was for Easter.  And there was this goat, you know around the house and you know I got somewhat attached.  But on Easter, I guess the day before Easter, that goat, they you know, cut his head off with a machete right in front of us.  And I didn't feel like dinner but I guess I ate it, you know.
Speaker 1: For a city kid.  Is this--was this in--this is when you were visiting Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was visit, yeah.
Speaker 1: So for a city kid, that was pretty like, you know, brutal.
Speaker 2: Pretty brutal.
Story_ID: 39201
Speaker 1: So you also said that when you were there you learned a lot, or you [unclear], so what did you learn?
Speaker 2: Well I, you know I felt, I felt like--they called me sometime a J'American, you know Jamaica/American.  And then--and what was very unusual was that people would say they couldn't understand me.  And you know yeah boy you have a strange accent.  Man you can't--and you know I was like wait, wait, wait, wait.  What's going on here?  Cause I thought--are you speaking English?  Anyway there--so that was--so I felt--there I felt like I wasn't, I wasn't quite Jamaican and I wasn't quite American, you know.  And you know but the food I remember really wonderful food and mangos and you know the fish.  And my mother, you know was--made a lot of fish and you know, food was good.  There was something very important in Jamaica.  My, on my father's side--my mother and my father would kid and my father--my mother would call my dad you know a country bumpkin cause she was from the city and all.  And but I remember when I first got to Jamaica, my uncle, my father's eldest brother, had a business and he had a truck.  Not only did he have a truck, but he had a helper driving the truck, you know.  I couldn't, you know, I couldn't believe this.  And then they had at the house they had servants, you know.  So that was--I'd never dreamed that black people could--you know I was eleven years old.  I never dreamed that black people could live--it wasn't elab--later on when I went back to visit, you know it was pretty modest.  They had a furniture store as well and up--and they lived upstairs.  And--but that was qui--that was quite, that was quite remarkable for me, on my father's side.  And you know and the servants would--you know it must have been--
Speaker 1: It was on your father's side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the country, yeah, yeah.  That was his--you know that was his brother had a successful business.  And on my mother's side, my--her--my first cousins, her, her nephews, two of her nephews, one of her nephews became the first heart surgeon in Jamaica, you know, open heart surgery, the first one.  And another, Ken became a very successful business person.  In fact later on I, I went back professionally many years later to Jamaica.  But the kick in all this is that I didn't really--I wasn't really proud--I wanted to be American.  I didn't--these people, you know, these--my relatives, you know, older people.  I mean I didn't identify with them.  I wouldn't even tell people for many, many years that I was Jamaican, if they knew me socially, you know, because I wanted to be an, I wanted to be an American.
Story_ID: 39202
Speaker 1: So then I've got to ask you this because a lot of people of Caribbean descent, you know, are in--within their household, sometimes the parents are saying that they're better, you know, than, than black Americans and that they have to behave in a certain way and you know, it--was there any of that message?  It didn't seem like going on in your house, but was that message going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, they were--my parents were sort of as I recall Republicans.  And they were--they couldn't understand, you know they'd come over from the islands you know and they, they brought a brownstone.  It's still--when I was written up in the New York Times, it was like you know, it was a big picture of it and you know and they had--and what they did was, you know they wrote, they divided the rooms, you know and they made many rooms and you know and they tenants, you know, who would--people would pay.  And better off than the people were you know it wasn't, it was a nice, nice brownstone, nice neighborhood.  It wasn't luxury.  But no, they very much thought--southern blacks, they were you know, they looked down on.  Even though my mother was a domestic, my father, you know was--you know didn't have great jobs, but they, they really thought you know, the [unclear] were superior and of course I went the other way.  I couldn't wait to--my first wife was a Creole.  You know I didn't want anything to do with that heritage or that attitude.  And, and yet actually when I started getting into blues and jazz and going to blues clubs, very, very few blacks were in, were, were into that.  I mean I remember when I was in my--I became a Q, Omega, I remember people commenting.  Came to my house, I was playing some blue--even Ray Charles, early Ray Charles.  And they said man, that's slave music.  You know that--so I, you know, so I got--so when I started getting really into the blues and going to, going to Chicago [Illinois] and hearing blues you know, more white people, you know in that environment.  You know so, so I--that's--I'm trying to say that's how I was really drawn to African American culture because I didn't see anything about Jamaica that--until, okay made me want to not be what I am, Ameri--you know, a black American.
Story_ID: 39203
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I remember when--I don't know how old I was, but I remember my mother went to the store and somehow told me you know as she probably had done before, you know, a--you know a couple of blocks away to Fulton Street to get some groceries.  And I remember that I followed her, you know.  And I remember, I remember and I, I was about three years old.  But I remember being in the police station you know and they were--until my mother came, you know.  I remember that like it happened you know, yesterday.  So that's an early memory of--
Speaker 1: So you followed her but got lost?
Speaker 2: Got lost, you know as I follow--yeah, cause some saw this little kid you know walking by himself you know and I guess they called the cop and, and I got--I remember that part.  I do remember leaving the house.  I remember being in the, you know in the police station and people--and my mother coming when she saw me.
Speaker 1: Bet she was either happy and upset.  So you decided to walk, walk right after her, to follow her?
Speaker 2: Emm. Emm.
Story_ID: 39204
Speaker 1: So you, you said you're the oldest.  How many, how many siblings?
Speaker 2: One of each.  My sister is two years younger and my brother, seven years younger.
Speaker 1: Their names?
Speaker 2: George Hobson, George Owen, O-W-E-N Hobson, and my sister Delvita, what's Del's middle name?  Delvita, that's weird I'm forgetting her middle name.  I, I'm forgetting my sister's middle name, yeah.  I haven't seen her in 30 years.
Speaker 1: What's the story there?
Speaker 2: Well she lives in--near Boulder, Colorado and she hasn't, you know, she's had some interesting stories.
Story_ID: 39205
Speaker 1: Where do you, you're born where?  You're born in New York where?
Speaker 2: Big story.  I was born, yeah Jewish Hospital, but I lived at Number Ten Downing Street in Brooklyn.  And in fact the reporter for the Brooklyn Eagle had an idea, it was somehow [unclear] and he wanted to do a story on who lived in Ten Downing Street in Brooklyn [New York].  And he sure enough found my parents and of course they were anglophiles and all, so that was a little story.  I don't know where--we had the clipping for many years in one of our family scrapbooks, you know.
Speaker 1: That's a famous address, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the Prime Minister in England, yeah. Ten Downing Street, yeah.
Speaker 1: You lived, that's where you were--say that again now.  I, okay you were born there.  You were raised there, you were what?
Speaker 2: Well when I was, I was born in a Jewish hospital.  A lot of people were born in hospitals, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, and you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we lived at that time at Ten Downing Street in Brooklyn.  There's a Downing Street in Brooklyn [New York], yeah.  And of course Ten Downing Street is a famous name because that's where the-[Prime Minister] Winston Churchill, yeah that's where the Prime Minister's, you know in, in London [England].
Speaker 1: So do you--I--so I want to ask you about family life and you know, what was family life like?
Speaker 2: Well my parents were--did I have a happy childhood?  I'm not sure.  But you know my parents, you know, they worked hard and I remember many Christmases--
Speaker 1: I wasn't asking about happy childhood.  I just said to describe it.  Was it, was it--I mean just describe what the, the home life--is your mother, you know your mother and father are both working, or are they, or is your mother at home?
Speaker 2: They're both working.
Speaker 1: They're both working.  And you're the oldest.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember--you remember the address, but can you describe the street?
Speaker 2: Sure, we--it's still, you know it's a--even today--the New York Times again did a story on me which, which you can find.  And they, they went back--the reporter went to Downing Street, he went back, you know to--its somebody's house, nice brownstone.  We lived, at one time we lived in a house ourselves, you know.  But then when times got bad, we, we took in people, you know, we had tenants.  My mother cooked dinner and my father--when my mother was sick for a disease, I'm not sure, what, what she had.
Speaker 1: You know how old you were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I must have been about--my brother was born, so I must have been about 13 or so.  My mother got sick and my dad took care--Dad was taking care of us.  And my dad cooked, you know.  My dad helped out you know when he could.  You know he did wash the dishes and again when my mother was--my mother mostly cooked.  She made wonderful meals and-
Story_ID: 39206
Speaker 1: So what, what are some of her favorite dishes?
Speaker 2: Rice and peas, you know, curry goat, you know standard--but because of the Cuban residence, she also made, you know, plant--what most Jamaicans would eat anyway, plantains and a roast [unclear], you know the chicken and the rice and yams and okra and awkie [ph.].  You know all this Caribbean dishes.  Well the interesting thing though is we, we ate with our knives and fork, you know and I didn't even realize that that was unusual until I got my first job.  One of my first jobs was actually going out to nice places in Manhattan for dinner, lunch.  And people would--these European guys would say hey man you, you eat like us.  I didn't--there was another part of this discrimination thing I want to talk about quickly.  About inter/intra discrimination, interracial discrimination.  White people--every once in a while I'd have a--it used to happen a number of times, would say Hobson.  There's something different about--where were you, where was your parents, where are you from?  I was from Brooklyn [New York].  But where, where--well my parents were born in Jamaica.  I understand, yeah I get it, I thought so.  You know later on in years, I would, I did tend to identify with immigrants.  You know like even when the Koreans were being you know, I mean they are good people and bad people everywhere, but you know I identify and these people came, you know, I identified with, you know, these people who were immigrants and came over and, and I realized that the--and the immigrants, like even with the West Indians, you're kind of claiming because the pe--when I went to live in Jamaica, every--imagine the problem.  Every imaginable--and violence, you know the whole thing that they don't, they didn't talk about, the West Indians here, you know.  You saw there and they had a lot of problems, a lot of problems.  But the people who come over, you know with very little money and establish in another country, are unusual people, you know.  It's sort of the cream in a way among the, you know working class group.
Speaker 1: Because it takes effort to get up out of their own country and then go and establish yourself.
Speaker 2: Totally, yeah.
Speaker 1: Often--maybe not even speaking the language.
Story_ID: 39207
Speaker 1: But I, I want, I'm trying to get a sense of your family life if you can partner with me on this.  So what are you--do you have chores, you know, what is an average day like in the Hobson household?
Speaker 2: Okay, my chores were--I wasn't--my dad could do everything.  You know he had a brownstone you know, so he had to be able to do electrical stuff and all.  I never learned any of that stuff.  I'm totally useless you know in that.  But my chores were to clean the halls and stairs, you know, like four--everything of course was beautiful wood.  So I had to, you know, whatever kind of oil we used, you know and I, so that was my job.  I did the--well I did the first two floors.  I think he did the others and you know, and all the floors were hardwood floors and having to do that, that, that was a chore.  Looking after my brother when, you know, when he was born.  And let's see, what were household chores?  I didn't--well I--well this is not household, but I was, you know we went to church.  You know I was in a, I was in a choir, boys' choir, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay and the, and the, and the denomination?
Speaker 2: Episcopalian.  Angelica Episcopalian, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But it was interesting because the church was pretty far away.  About ten, 12 blocks.  As I recall.  So they wanted us to go to church.  So in the meantime until we got older to go by ourselves, we went to Concord, a Baptist Church by one of the famous Baptist churches, Concord Baptist.  And so I heard, you know, then of course that music was--you know the, the whole church service was very different from anything I'd ever seen, you know and the people shouting and all.  It was, you know, middle class church but still you know that was unusual for, for me, you know.
Speaker 1: Because yours is very straight lace.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the high Epis--I mean it's almost, it's almost like being Catholic, yeah.  And we were--I was in a boy's choir, you know we were--one of the few black boys choir at that time you know and we sang you know, the little concerts.  I was em--I mean I was the second tenor.  I wasn't very good, but it was, you know you're reading music and you're doing stuff.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever play the role of altar boy?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 39208
Speaker 1: One of the things I felt about the household was that I thought, I thought it was kind of formal and we didn't have many like friends, you know.  We were kind of insular, you know most of our--Dad [Charles Hobson, Sr.], my parents' friends were all West Indian.  I mean practically all of them.  And I thought--one of the things that attracted me to black Americans, especially southern blacks is the warmth, you know and, and the, the kind of interaction that many of them seem to have, you know, in the household.  And I didn't feel, I didn't feel any of that.  I didn't think we had, you know, I mean they--my parents [Charles Hobson, Sr.][Victoria Spencer] did other things, but I, I didn't feel that warmth and I, I really didn't feel it.  I mean you know my parents worked hard and did lots of things, but didn't, didn't feel that.  I, I miss that.
Speaker 2: So with--are the fa--are there other family members coming in and out?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And celebrations and holidays.
Speaker 1: Celebrations, yes.  We had a large--they had a network of friends who had, you know, West Indian, not all Jamaican, but mostly.  And yeah, so they were--Easter service, I loved Eas--I liked the service, the Easter service.  You know this--I liked the--some of the hymns, the Easter and you know.  So yeah, we had friends, aunts and uncles, lots of aunts and uncles and they had parties and birthdays.  Yeah so that, that was all there.  Yeah we had, we had, you know--
Story_ID: 39209
Speaker 1: Can, can you talk about what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I can think of you know, ginger, cooking.  They used, you know ginger as a flavor.  Lime I think, you know and they made--my parents [Charles Hobson, Sr.][Victoria Spencer], they would, I think their drink was rum.  I didn't of course drink.  I think of a--there was a wonderful candy, paradise plums, they were little, little--one side was lemon, the other side was like a cherry thing.  Coconut--one of my favorite things, coconut bread.  Which actually wasn't a Jamaican dish.  But some Probasion [ph.] friends would make it.  It was like a wonderful like hard bread but with coconut.  I love coconut, you know.  And what else?  Music, you know, calypso, you know hearing that.  I liked that, calypso.  But it wasn't until--well this is skipping ahead, but it really wasn't until Bob Marley when I became, I, I felt proud of being Jamaican.  It really took--but it was shocking to me that here are all these people dancing to this music and they, you know and it was considered hip.  And this is, it sounded like my--the same stuff I'm trying to get away from you know the--with the West Indian accent.  But I, I couldn't understand.  You know even deep, you know dance hall, you know because I could--cause my father in a way talked like that.  I could understand you know those, that music.  So--and of course later on I became--I understood more about the Jamaican influence.  I ran track in, in college and in high school, so they were great tradition in track and field and music and, and other things.
Story_ID: 39210
Speaker 1: So you, you liked baseball, you ran track, you know you said you were a Yankee?
Speaker 2: No Dodger.
Speaker 1: Dodger's fan.
Speaker 2: Dodger, yeah.  You know and Jackie Robinson the first black player, you know he was my all time hero, idol, you know.  And that was--I was too young, I never went to--my parents, my parents, my dad [Charles Hobson, Sr.] wasn't really--he was working too, too hard maybe.  He wasn't into sports in earlier in his life, you know and they would follow cricket more, you know cricket was--but later on he became a Met fan and but we never really shared that-
Story_ID: 39211
Speaker 1: So where, where you--you go to PS13 [Public School]--
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three, sorry, PS3 [Public School].  And then you go away for--is PS3 [Public School] from the time you go to school?  Okay until, and then you, then you come--you have that year off and you come back and where are you going?
Speaker 2: Well I think I went for a short time to--I think it was PS41 [Public School].  And I remember one of the very important life--
Speaker 1: Is that a junior high school?
Speaker 2: No, no it was like, yeah it was like the middle school, you know, yeah.  And then I remember it was very interesting that they--we--they made us--we had to subscribe to the New York Times, you know a kind of a school subscription.  And I somehow loved it, you know.  And I wasn't a great student.  I mean you know--so, so that--from that I guess I'm trying to think of what grade it was probably the fifth or sixth.  I would--I got introduced to the New York Times and you know there were very few days, you know, the rest of my life but not read it.  Even my traveling, you know I get it or get it online.  But anyway, then we went to the seventh and eighth year was at a school we were integrating.  So I remember actually being bused.  I mean we were, we were--they were sort of taking a group of black kids and sending them to a white school, largely Jewish, Jewish and Italian.  That was PS138 [Public School].  I remember being, I remember, I remember the hostility we faced, you know and--but I, I get along with everybody.  So of course the Irish race, two racist Irish guys were my best buddies, you know.  Also because of sports and mine--and I was very fast and a little bit.  But I didn't do well in school.  I was totally lost, especially math, you know it was like--
Speaker 1: No, but, but see this is what I thought.  Because when you told--you said that they were taking you to Jamaica, I--you said you were doing--I thought you said you were ahead and they couldn't, they couldn't really keep up with you or whatever.  Or your--what you were saying they couldn't keep your attention.  What are you saying?  Cause remember you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember exactly what I said, yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you, let me explain it, okay.  I went to a black school, you know a ghetto school, PS3 [Public School], you know on Hancock Street.  And I don't know, but I was--and then when I--
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then when they sent me--I went to Jamaica and missed a year of school.  And then, and then I went to--then my parents got us out of the ghetto school by using my cousin's address in another part of, you know more integrated part of town.  And then I went to the white public school, a good, white public school.  Mostly white--at that time it was white.  An advanced public school.  Classes--I was lost.  The--so I mean I think that's what I said.
Story_ID: 39212
Speaker 1: So you were lost and that's in middle school.  So what happens by the time you are in high school?
Speaker 2: Still lost.  I, but I did--I mean I was always--I had very--I always got A's in conduct which meant a lot.  But I, I, I got through high school, you know I graduated--academic--but I wasn't very good--I was sort of daydreaming.  I wasn't--I had an insomnia problem, you know, sleep problem.  I was always tired, you know.  And, but I did run track.  It, it was actually interesting.  There was field day and I was totally non-athletic nerd, you know.  I mean--something that's very important that I didn't mention.  When I was a--when I was pretty young, I, I liked to go to the library, which was about three blocks away from my house.  And I would--any book I could find on black people, on black--I, I read.  I just love--I read about, you know a lot about the south, Langston Hughes, totally on my own you know.  I read anything I could gobble, I just enjoyed reading stuff about--which again I, I didn't have any friend I could talk to about it.  And later on I got into--when I got into other areas and I was able to get into television, I was able to--cause people said you know [Charles Hobson] knows a lot about black culture and black history.  So, so anyway it also helped me in college in a way too because you know you're proposing, you know, these liberal teachers, you're proposing to do a essay on some person like they never heard of, you know, except Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver, you know.  But no, so I--so that helped, that interest.  I mean it saved my life, really, that interest in culture.  And what I'm trying to show is my interest was motivated in part because of my parents ambivalence about the, you know towards being--the culture, which propelled me into wanting to know everything I could know about it.  I mean I got really interested in gospel.  I used to, you know the gospel concerts and I became an expert, writing articles about the, the stuff that, you know, was totally outside of my realm, cultural realm.
Speaker 1: So was there conflict with you and your parents because--I mean you really rejecting their, your background in many ways and attracted to another background.  That's all I'm observing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 39213
Speaker 1: No, I--on my block, I mean there were guy--you know there were some, a few West Indians on the--all the homeowners were West Indian, or white you know, on the black.
Speaker 2: On the block.
Speaker 1: Pretty much all, I mean not pretty much all.  And--but they were the, they were the guys, the block--I, I was, I liked to play football, speed football and stuff.  I played stickball.  You know I was very fast.  I was--so I had friends you know, they never came to my house, you know, on the street, who were you know, regular Brooklyn guys.  Many of whom were--died--then there was like a drug epi--epidemic and a lot of the guys who I knew well, died you know.  I mean I can tell story after story.  But so, so I--my--I remember at, you know I don't know, 5:15 the gate would rattle and you know, it was time for me to go in, which was usually an hour before the guys were cause I did my homework, whatever, yeah.  So yeah, I, I had--and also there was a gang, it was a gang.  A couple times I was, you know, held up, you know.
Speaker 2: Do you know what the--did the gangs have names?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the gangs were the Robins and the Bishops and the Jolly Stompers were, were one of the, the--those were some of the gangs.  So that was gang time Brooklyn [New York], you know.  So it was no chance of me getting into a gang.  But certainly you were aware of, you know, the dangers.  And that's fine of course.
Speaker 2: {unclear] at this point.  Can I ask you to describe your book?  I mean who is on it--I know you say that you and other white families were homeowners.  But who's living next door, who's living across the street?  Do you remember any of the personalities, the people?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember all of it.
Speaker 2: Okay, well you got to--why you gone make this so difficult?
Speaker 1: Well because--I remember as I said, I didn't say, wait.  There were other West Indians.
Speaker 2: West In--you said West Indians and you said the, the only homeowners were other West Indians and I thought you said white.  You said West Indians and, but you didn't--they were not black Americans who owned the other homes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the owners were, I remember what I said.  The home--the owners were largely West Indian, some of whom I'm still in touch with.  I mean the kids, you know my peers.  And, and a few southern, like I remember there was a family who was really my best friend in, in this time.  Rick, Dickey Rose.  His father, they were very sort of light skinned blacks, and his wife's mother looked totally white.  His father was--could pass too.  He was an elevator operator at Abraham and Straus, the father.  And in some of those fancy department stores they used light skinned, light skinned elevator operators who were black, you know but very light skinned.
Story_ID: 39214
Speaker 1: And Dickey and I were really good--he had blond hair, curly blond hair.  I don't think he looked white, his features looked black.  But he was like a real dude, you know he's a--I don't know what--I think he worked in the post office.  But all the women liked him, you know.  He had all the girls you know, and I was just too shy to do anything.  But yes, I had many crushes and you know, I was very shy, socially, you know shy.  So yah, I, I thought about women and of course Jamaica, meeting some of those mulatto and otherwise, you know cause they looked white to me, you know.  And I remember the first time I interacted--I was young and so this fits the time period.
Speaker 2: What, what age?
Speaker 1: I was about 15, 16.  I remember I went to a, a part--my cousin--well not really, you know, yeah let's say cousin gave, family gave.  And I ran--there were white women there, you know.  And I couldn't, you know I couldn't believe it.  What was this, you know at a party, social--cause people don't realize how segregated New York [City], I mean the Y[MCA] was segregated.  You know in those, in those days.  And I met this woman who I found--she was a softball player, you know.  I remember there were a couple of white women.  And the other thing interesting about these women, they were, they were athletes, athletes and they were--I don't know how they got there or what.  But they knew all the songs because culturally the radio, the black radio stations played black music and the white radio stations played white music.  It was extremely rare you know that white people--the doo wops and all that stop.  And these girls knew, you know had knew, known all the stuff, I'm not sure why.
Speaker 2: They were hanging around blacks.
Speaker 1: They were hanging around the brothers or something, yeah.  So--but I remembered a lot of that music, because again I was introspective, I was shy, I wasn't a very good dancer, but I listened to the music.  I listened to lyrics and I had a pretty good memory for the, you know the, the performers.
Story_ID: 39215
Speaker 1: But you were very good athletically is what you're saying?
Speaker 2: I would say, I mean I wasn't a very good basketball player--I have this story.  So we had--they had field day, you know I was in the sixth grade I think.  And field day is you know when you run--you know you run--and it was the first field day I'd taken part in.  And all of a sudden--was this was--I'm trying to think of--yeah, so you run and then I'm running and then they were looking behind me.  And everybody you know, was behind--I was so fast.  And then later on--and I then I realized that god, I--and then I--I went to the best athletic boys high, it was like even today a brilliant athletic, you know the athletic power of New York [City] also was--by black folks.  And I ran--I was on the track team.  I wasn't a star cause I didn't really work hard enough, but--
Speaker 1: So but you, you said you were on the track team in high school and in college.  Did you say college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, college too, Brooklyn College, I was on the track team.  I had a letter, you know a major letter, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39216
Speaker 1: So that's what--can you just tell me about who you are in your teens, or about to go off to college.  Can you tell me what you're thinking, who your friends are?
Speaker 2: My friends are--that's a good story, Kenny Standard was one of my friends at that time, who went on to Harvard.  And there was another guy, George Finnell [ph.], who went to Annapolis, he was part of that group.  And we weren't close friends, but he was the first black to go, one of the first blacks to go to the Naval Academy and he was a pilot.  And, and he died, unfortunately he died in pilot training.  I think he was West Indian, he might have been Barbadian, and Kenny at Harvard and Harvard Law and you know--and then, but my other friends were more the, you know, regular guys, you know.  Not--one of my closest friends was Ronald Butcher, who was not West Indian, you know.  And but Ronald Whitaker was another good friend, we're still good friends and I caught up with Butcher after 30 years, so through the Web.  So I was shy.
Speaker 1: Very introspective.
Speaker 2: Introspective.
Speaker 1: Not performing at your top ability.
Speaker 2: Not, absolutely not performing at my top abilities and, and then my first job I remember in high--it was this--well high school was one of my first jobs was being like a stock boy at a, at a pipe factory.  I worked at Macy's.  I worked at--well this was is in college part time.  And what I would do is I sold rugs on the ground floor, you know they, like they, you know they have the, the base--no it was the ground floor when you come in.  And they were rug remnants, you know and I--you know you wore a little jacket.  One thing I didn't say was I very interested in like Brooks Brothers clothing.  So I always had my you know, Brooks--even though I didn't have any money.  But still I would save my nickels and I had a couple of friends who were like that, you know to work--cause that was the only interesting way to dress.  So that helped me to get the job, little job at Macy's.  But at that time, Macy's--the only department that I Think they were black people, and they were all light skinned.  What depart--it was in a department, I'm forgetting now.  On the, on the--one of the floors.  But they didn't have black salespeople.  You know if you were black at my age, you were a stock boy.  So it was quite a shock that I was allowed to you know, to sell these little rug, rug remnants, big deal you know.  So--
Speaker 1: So you had a preppy look to you.
Speaker 2: Yea.
Story_ID: 39217
Speaker 1: Well as I Reflect on my life and [unclear] at the time, you know from the ages zero to 18 let's say.  It was certainly not an all black experience.  I mean my two neighbors, two homeowners right--were white.  I mean the, the--on the right hand side was at 178 Hancock Street was Dr. Blade, who was a dentist, white dentist and his wife.  I'm not sure who they--whether--yeah, I think they just lived there by themselves and he was a dentist.  As far as I know he didn't take any black--I don't know what the--I certainly wasn't--I didn't know anyone who went to him.  I assumed that he had white patients.  On the other side was a really more interesting story.  Mr. Cochran [ph.], who was this guy, Irish guy who had--he never combed his hair, he wore an old pea coat and scruffy and he looked like he, you know, yelled all the time.  And, and his house was--the garden was totally overgrown, you know it was like a junk yard, you know.  And yet this guy was extremely wealthy.  When he died, he left millions to the Episcopal church and there was no interaction, you know he'd yell at you, that was about all.  So--and the, the, the Blades, Blades next door, they were polite, you know and they were--you know say hello, you know that way.  You know, but there was certainly no social interaction that I, that I recall.  So that was--I remember also in this school I went to, there were--PS3--I, I wonder about some of these whites were in places that were 98 percent black.
Story_ID: 39218
Speaker 1: There was a guy who later on went on to become quite well known in New York [City], Lenny Lopate [ph.], who went to--he lived in the black area on Fulton Street.  I guess it was a Jewish family, older, Jewish family.  And he's like a major, major figure in radio with book--he does a book show and interviews people and is very important, encyclopedic memory and wonderful, wonderful history.  We actually were in [Brooklyn] college together.  So yeah, so there were whites around.  One of the great experiences for me, interesting experiences, was even though I was socially shy, you know, I'd thought, thought about women, girls all the time.  I, I was--I became an Omega.  You know it was, it was a local, you know a New York City chapter you know cause I, you know I didn't go away to college.  And so that, that was something.  And, and then of course social recognition because you're in a frat.  You know and I wasn't a typical Omega.
Story_ID: 39219
Speaker 1: But when I was in college and here I was now I had my 20 pearls, I had the, the Q, I was an Omega.  And yet when I got really awoken was the jazz club, I'd joined the jazz cause I liked jazz, I love jazz.  And there were all these--there were--I can't think of another black person in the jazz club.  There may have been, but I can't think of him.  And that--we would--it was a very important--Lenny--we, we--people who were very knowledgeable about jazz, serious about jazz.  And we would bring in sometimes famous jazz musicians.  I remember Kenny Dorham, the trumpet player came to speak.  So I found--and, and then, and then I started later on as I started to, to date and I had a girlfriend, black American girl of course.  I, I found this hip--the, you know the beatnik, you know the, the--I mean I never did--didn't like drugs, didn't do drugs.  But I felt a cultural hip era--liberal, you know sort of leftist, Greenwich Village, that, that was far more interesting to me than the black bourgeoisie.  More than, you know, who you know as I said a couple of times, [ph.] hear Ray Charles.  I mean Nat Hentoff once said that BB King would be on the cover of Business Week before he'd be on the cover of Ebony, you know.  So I, you know and I, I grew--really appreciated this, you know, this, this, this culture.  So I was, I--one way, reason that it might be hard to get a sense of me, because I was into so many things.  You know like classical music, I liked, loved jazz and knew a lot about it, you know.  And when I get into these things, I'd really get interested.  Loved doo wop, you know the Orioles, the Ravens, the Vocaleers, the, the Swallows.  You know these were the groups--these groups aren't even, you know they--some of them were important in the '50s [1950s], and some of them didn't make the cut because most people still don't know of, of these groups although they made some, you know, interesting music.  So I--so that's--and as far as the neighborhood was concerned, you know it was a pretty well kept block.  I guess ultimately pretty safe.  And you know, that--see I, I think sort of left somewhat of a legacy in--on that Bed-Sty [Bedford-Stuyvesant] because of having produced 52 programs of Inside Bed-Sty [Bedford-Stuyvesant].  It's the only black community in the country that had that kind--you know and, and 26 of the programs were restored.  And I was a writer.  You know I, I came out, out of that.  You know I was still active because of my knowledge, people knew about my interest in black, black history and culture.
Story_ID: 39220
Speaker 1: One of the things, one of the main things I was interested in was magic.  And I liked--you know and I'd read about magic and I actually did--you know I learned, you know ten or 12 magic tricks.  You know I read books and all that.  I could still do some of them.  I never went, it never went beyond that.  But, but I, I did love--did magic, the idea of being able to you know, to mystify people.  You know I'd get--you know I could buy these, you know at the five and ten, you know, two dollar magic kit.  Somebody's phone is vibrating.  And--so that was an interest of mine, magic.  And then later on and about ten years ago, actually about six years ago I got re--got re-interested, got interested and became friends with a real magician and learned a lot of--Filipino woman, beautiful woman and a great magician
Story_ID: 39221
Speaker 1: So you go into the service for a year, right?  When does that 1962 to '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Yes, 1962, yeah.  What happened was--
Speaker 1: You got drafted?
Speaker 2: No, I was not, I, I wouldn't, you know I was too left wing to, to want to be in the mili--you know I wanted to--I wasn't going to go in the Army.  I thought that was completely idiotic.  But what I did was joined the National Guard, you know you could do six months, so you do like six months active duty and then you know, and then about seven years of, you know, weekend, evening meetings, or once a week meetings and, and I guess you go away for two weeks in, in the summer.  But my experience was interesting because we had a sergeant, was a guy, sergeant, I'm forgetting his name, though.  Who was like typi--like you know the tough sergeant, you know the black sergeant.  You know just like somebody out of Hollywood central casting.  And scared everybody and everybody [unclear] more afraid of than this guy.  And it was integrated unit.  In fact our unit, Tommy Tresh who later on went to star for the Yankees, what was the Yankee--was, was in our, our unit.  There were black guys and white guys, you know, southern, you know a range of people.  You know it was, I don't know, I don't remember what the percentage was.  But my two closest friends went in with me, Ronny Butcher and Ronny, Ronny Whitaker.  But I was very good on the athletic stuff, you know.  So chin--I could do chin, you know chinning, you know pushups.  But I, I didn't--cause also I ran track, so I had that kind of training.  But I didn't like the military and so he knew, the sergeant, that he was, he didn't, he didn't like me cause some of the, no offense, some of the white boys couldn't do two pushups, you know.  And I could do 20 without--a breeze, but I wouldn't do 25, you know.  I said well you can't yell at me cause I've done, you know, I did more than, more than you know many of the other guys, you know.  So and now even with the shooting, you know.  I, you know I was fine, I got a marksman, you know.  This, this is a little interesting.  As we go back, my father, something my father believed in, I'm remembering.  He didn't want us to have guns.  I didn't, you know a toy guns.  I could not have a toy gun in the house, you know, never.  He said you don't--shouldn't have guns, you know.  And I was disappointed cause I was a boy and I wanted, I wanted to be able to go bang, bang with a cap pistol, you know.  But as soon as I got old enough--well it was more, more in the military.  When I had my own rifle, I hated it.  You had to clean the sucker you know, whatever.  And all so I lost kind of all interest in gun--I think it was a brilliant idea of his not to, to allow us, you know--I'm not sure where that came from, but you know that was certainly unusual, you know at the time.
Story_ID: 39222
Speaker 1: Tell me when you began at WBA, BAI, specific--WBAI.
Speaker 2: Yeah, BAI.  Yeah, I think it was probably--trying to think of the year, it was probably 1964.
Speaker 1: So '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Around '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a radio show.  Well what it was--
Speaker 1: How did that happen, though?
Speaker 2: Well this has been, yeah this has been written up in articles.  But yeah, I was--also I was, I had, I, I was interested in--I've had four Porsches in my life, you know.  So I was very--so my first Porsche was kind of a beat up, old used ones, you know.  My first one, I remember driving around in my car and I was listening to WBAI had a, had great black music and they were playing gospel.  And I said, God what's--this is interesting, this--so hip and why, why such crappy gospel?  So I wrote a letter to the general manager complaining.  So he called me up, very famous Chris Albertson, writer, Danish guy, big jazz expert, and said if you want--do the show.  Do, do a audition for us.  So they gave me the tape.  So I did an audition and they, they didn't tell me not to come back the next week, so I kept coming back.  So it was about a year later--and I just assumed that my girlfriend at the time, you know, was the only--and I were the only people listening to it.  And maybe my parents lis--my mother knew I was doing it.  And what I did was I played gospel quartets cause most people knew Magalia Jackson, but I liked the quartet sound.  Calypso, which people still don't know about cause of the literary and the brilliance of that.  And blue, and not was blues--and doo wop, rare doo wop, you know.  And these were all--had the--all from my own collection cause I collected, you know, records and stuff.  And then one day at BAI a friend says man, did you see Variety?  I said what's Variety?  He said you don't know what Variety--it's a, it's a newspaper that lists--it talks about show business.  They did like a two, a huge article on me.  On, on my show, and they called it Hobson's Black Christmas.  What I did was I played Christmas songs and holiday songs by--in honor of R and B [Rhythm and Blues], you know like Charles Brown, you know happy, you know 'Merry Christmas', the Orioles, 'What Are You Doing New Year's Eve' and all sorts of stuff.  And the writer, Bill Gurley who was one of their top writers, loved, you know loved, loved it.  And I--and that was the first time I realized that--cause I'm just doing it, you know.  I realized that people, you know listen, that--I had an audience, you know.  And then like years later I go to Bloomingdale's or something to buy something and the sales girl said are you Charles Hobson from--and this is after--meanwhile I'm doing TV, I'm doing TV stuff.  So anyway that's, that's, that's story.  So that tells you a little bit about me.  I, I had my head in doing stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: But had you decided that you wanted to be in media?  Cause--or you just landed in radio and then that led to TV?
Speaker 2: Radio and then the, the Kennedys--and actually because of my knowledge--there's a program on CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] national program called 'Camera Three'.  And it, it's not--it's a forerunner to 'Sunday Morning'.  And they were--and they wanted to do a segment with--on a calypso song and there was a guy called the Duke of Iron.  And I don't remember how this happened, but they had a host who was a regular CBS--it was Charles Karudno [ph.], somebody like that.  And they had me host this special, it was a half hour on calypso.  And I intro--you know I, I did the--and I was that actually a little after I'd turned the job down at Chicago, at the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: So when did that job come up?
Speaker 2: That must have been 1966, '67 [1967].
Story_ID: 39223
Speaker 1: Okay, 1967 is when you went to work for ABC [American Broadcasting Corporation], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, six, yeah.
Speaker 1: Cause you, you worked--I have you as a producer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first black producer.
Speaker 1: But you just don't walk in and be a producer, so that's what I'm trying to understand.
Speaker 2: Okay how I got the job at ABC--well there was a program called 'Black Journal', you know with national black--and I was one of the producers.  I actually--my beat was to produce the, the, the stuff on the Black Press.  When I was at WBAI, I did a show called 'Review of the Black Press'.  And every week I would get about 25 of the top black newspapers, 20 of them maybe.  And I would read them and then pick out stories that were not being covered, you know, they were interesting stories that weren't be covered in the white press.  And because of that, they wanted me, Black Journal, wanted me to do a segment on the black press.  Every, you know, for every of their--the TV shows.  And then you know, and so that was--then they wanted me to be on camera, they wanted me to do it on camera.  But I, I didn't think--I was too shy.  I didn't want to be on camera.  I said well I thought producers were really behind the scenes.  So anyway I did that and the program--and then out of that, there was a strike at Black Journal, the black staff went on strike.  It was a huge story.  Black [unclear] about black.
Speaker 1: Now who, who, who was--it was the, the picketing?
Speaker 2: Well we--you know the, the--we were, there were, there was several black producers on the show.  The others had--
Speaker 1: So who were they?
Speaker 2: Well Kent Garret who's still alive and, and maybe still active.  Tony Benton, St. Clair Borne.
Speaker 1: All on--
Speaker 2: Lewis, Louie, what's Lewis's last name?
Speaker 1: Louie, he's out of--
Speaker 2: Potter, Lewis Potter.  And Bill Grieves.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And they had, and they were--
Speaker 1: Had you guys known each other before?  That's, that's--
Speaker 2: Well we sort of knew each other, yeah.  So I was the press segment.  So there, there was a strike.  And this has been written, this has been written--my role in this--there are books and stuff.  I mean you know the media.
Speaker 1: Now wait, you know what?  You're going to stop saying that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: This has been written.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I, so there was a strike and for some reason they appointed me the spokesman.  I don't--I didn't think I was the most vocal.  So there was some TV clips, which I haven't really seen, it still exists, of me talking to the press about why we wanted, why we were on strike.  Because we were hired as producers and yet we weren't doing any segments.  They, they had some very brilliant white producers on the staff like Al Promwetter [ph.] was the Executive Producer.  Phil, what's--anyway the point was that there was a strike.  And then during the strike, an old friend of mine, older guy, Hal Jackson the DJ said you know I have a friend at ABC and they're, they're looking for a, a black producer cause, cause they need to have a black producer producing 'Like It Is'.  So it was during the strike.  So they called me over for a meeting.  And at the end of the interview I--the guy says you're hired.  And he was--so all this stuff was happening so fast, I didn't know it was going to--anyway, and then it, it appeared that I had, I had no intention to leave Black Journal.  But what happened was this thing had come up and you know I was offered this great job.  So--and that's how I got to 'Like It Is'.  And I certainly did all this eclectic magazine program--you can name the person, black person who I had who was on 'Like It Is'.  It was a magazine show, won an Emmy, blah, blah, blah.  So-
Story_ID: 39224
Speaker 1: So understanding--that group of you went on to do some amazing things.  You know, the producers, a lot of them.  And Bill Greaves, he's ill right now.
Speaker 2: He's, he's, he's at least ten years older than I am.  Is he still--he's been ill for a while.
Speaker 1: You know I'm wondering about the, the archives of those things, cause they could end up getting thrown, you know just tossed and preserved.
Speaker 2: I don't think Bill's archives are going to get tossed.  His wife is very on, on top of things with that, yeah.  But no, who knows?  I mean yes, absolutely you should worry about it, yeah.  I don't have any archives.  So I mean except what's--but 'Inside Bed-Sty' is that museum of the City of New York.  Not of the city--Broadcast Museum and UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], you know.
Speaker 1: Good, good.
Speaker 2: Those places, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so but talk about tele--
Speaker 2: 'Like It Is'.
Speaker 1: 'Like It Is', 'Like It Is'.  Talk about then who the host was, what your role was, what you did.  Can you--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The host was--actually when I took over, there was a guy--they had a--actually they called the program 'As It Is' because the producers didn't, didn't, didn't think that was grammatically correct, so they--I mean, no, yeah.  So when I came in, the first thing I did was change the name to 'Like It Is'.  And Gil Noble, you know Gil was, was there.  Gil was the reporter on ABC [American Broadcasting Company], Channel Seven News.  And Gil was totally you know, devoted, you know, and smart, and another Jamaican, you know, even more of a Jamaican.  Identified more than I did.  But Gil was, Gil Noble who went on to be monumental in broadcasting.  I must admit that through it all, Gil and I did not get along; we were not friends because I wrote the show.  I was--it was written and produced by Charles Hobson, which gave the impression that everything that Gil said, I wrote.  I mean I certainly wrote the on-camera stuff.  But Gil, Gil was so adventurous, you know.  Gil had--was political, you know.  So a lot of political stuff that we did came from Gil, you know I mean cause Gil--and Gil was remarkable that way.  I was really into the art, you know the jazz, the arts, you know, whatever, classical, whatever.  But we, we combined to do it and then the Emmys came up that year and what they did was they gave--I got the first Emmy, you know, they called me first for producer of 'Like It Is', blah, blah.  And then Gil got an Emmy too.  I was so happy cause they recognized both of us.  And then later on they were trying to get Gil I think and they brought on Geraldo Rivera as the, as the co-host.  And I actually got along with, with, with Geraldo.  And, and then I decided to leave.  I decided I really would not live a long life if I stayed, cause I--all these things I dreamed about.  You know, having--going out with certain kinds of women, the sports, you know, sports car.  I was on my--the second or third Porsche.  Living in a garden apartment on the west end.  You know, unlimited expense account.  And then I got married, I'm engaged to a sister who was the first black editor at Doubleday, and she had an expense--so all these things were happening that I just couldn't handle.  They were just fly--you know I mean I didn't--I mean I--when I say I couldn't handle, I wanted to reflect more and, and the idea of Atlanta sounded like a good thing to me.
Speaker 1: Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what everybody said.
Story_ID: 39225
Speaker 1: You left--but of course my wife--my wife-to-be was, was from Atlanta, she went to Harvard and blah, blah, blah.  And, and--
Speaker 2: And so what was her name?
Speaker 1: Cheryl Chisholm, and she's, she's active, has done things.  And we divorced many, many years ago, almost 40 years ago, but we still, you know, have civil, you know--I don't see her much, but we, you know it's not a lot of bitterness towards her.  Her family--unbelievable, they treat me like--the ones who are alive, that kind of--part of the family still, you know.
Speaker 2: But what I'm trying to understand, you, you didn't get along with Gil Noble, and I didn't quite understand something about you were--was it the focus?  Did you want more arts and he wanted more politics?
Speaker 1: It was never that.  I think it was more Gil, Gil was more strongly political and I was too.  I mean it wasn't that I wasn't.  Later on I did many things.  And there was a show that was done on Malcolm X, and the show--
Speaker 2: You, the two--you--this is a show you're producing.
Speaker 1: 'Like It Is' produced, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Like It Is' produced.
Speaker 1: Gil hosted, Gil did some of the film interviews, yeah.  And the credits read produced and dir--produced and written by Charles Hobson.  That was not a fair reflection of what happened.  I mean Gil, Gil a lot of it--and I was--easy to acknowledge you know.  So a lot of it was Gil, Gil did, you know Gil--it was Gil's idea.  Gil, Gil was--but it wouldn't have never gotten on the air you know.  Cause when I left all those--a lot of those ideas and all--well there were different periods when Gil would--Gil was brilliant.  But when I left, Gil acknowledged--this is what I want to say.  When I left to go to Atlanta, they were shocked cause I walked away.  The station wouldn't let me leave.  They said you know you have to take time to think about this.  So I took a week in Puerto Rico and on the beach.  And said no, I think, I could, I could always come back.  But Gil at the end of the day, one of the bosses at Channel 13 said--at, at Channel Seven said if you want--I don't think I've talked about this publicly.  If you want us to get rid of Gil, you know, we will because you know we know your role in this.  I said are you kidding?  No, of course not, you know.  And Gil and I really--we--he really respected me and I really respected him, you know.  Cause when we started the--yeah, and in fact when I left long after I left and came back visiting from Atlanta, he put me on the show.  He didn't have to do that, to talk about my accomplishments, you know.
Speaker 2: I see.
Story_ID: 39226
Speaker 1: What I'm trying to understand is he was--politically he put your name is as the producer and the writer because he was--maybe it was things that would be more controver--you, you have to--if you--
Speaker 2: Yes you're right, you're right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's something called a Writer's Guild of America, right.  And I was a member of the Writer's Guild, and it's ABC [American Broadcasting Company] which is union.  So therefore, Gil--I don't think at the time Gil was a member of the Writer's Guild.  He was a member of--so therefore all the, all the shows had to be written by--if you use that term writer, you had to be Writer's Guild.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there, so that was--so if it was up to me, I would have recognized Gil's--that was just one show.  But maybe there were 100 others where Gil was the host and blah, blah, blah, which were 100 percent me, you know.  So that--we really did this thing together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that show, let's talk about the significance of that show and him because that show went on for god knows how long.  And I--we actually now that's a person that it's not clear where his tapes went.
Speaker 2: Well he had his own archive, Gil.
Speaker 1: I know, but the--it's not clear where the archives--
Speaker 2: I, I don't know.  I know that Gil very jealously protected his archive.
Speaker 1: That's fine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So but what, what are you--I mean you know it's--there's a relationship between a host and producer.  You know and there can be creative tension.
Speaker 2: Gil wrote a book and he talked about that.  I didn't agree with what he said, but he wrote--
Speaker 1: So what is your version?
Speaker 2: My version is Gil was a brilliant man who, you know, lived into his '80s and produced wonderful stuff long after I left 'Like It Is', you know he was still there.  The one difference I will say is that after I left 'Like It Is' became more of a, of a talk show.  They did, you know there--I mean I was able to get them to do--you know they--we had--I was doing ma--I was interviewing Aretha Franklin, I'm interviewing Willie Mays, whatever.
Speaker 1: So you had--
Speaker 2: Jesse Jackson--
Speaker 1: You had different parts.  It wasn't just the straight talk show like with Gil.
Speaker 2: I had a much bigger budget and I had film crews, and I had--it was more of a--
Speaker 1: So you would go out and do remote.
Speaker 2: I wasn't hardly to go out cause I, I was never on camera.  Gil would do that.  But I was able to work the political stuff to get the resources for whatever reason for that show, which never--when I left, they never, ever had again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I think that's fair to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But did Gil do important things?  Yeah, he did this Attica thing.  Yeah, he would, he would--not that I had an unlimited budget, but I was good at sort of you know, being trusted.
Story_ID: 39227
Speaker 1: How did you get with the Writer's Guild?
Speaker 2: Because if you're writing for--when I got hired by ABC--
Speaker 1: Then you have to join the Guild.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay immediately, okay.  Okay so what does--I want to take you back though, to that time period because this is--blacks are just getting in TV.  I mean I don't care if it's in--you know, running the camera or producing or on air, this is relatively new.
Speaker 2: If I say something and then I--didn't I say I was the first black producer at Channel 7?
Speaker 1: I know that you--but I just--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I--when you--I mean so you were the first, who was the second?  How long were you the first?  I mean after you came home, who came after you?
Speaker 2: Well there was a guy named Mal Goode who was the first black correspondent on the network, you know he was with ABC news.  I forgot which segments Mal did, but Mal was, but that was on, he was on the network.  I was at the local--I was loc--you know at the--I mean I did some of the national things, but I was--but Mal--so but as far as you know, I've been around for a long time and I've never unearthed another person who had been a producer.  Yeah, remember I--a couple years after I produced the first black program, produced program in the country.  You know black--you know which have been many articles and books and New York Times articles and so on about 'Inside Bed-Sty', you know, the legacy of that.  So therefore all I--everything--so all this is pioneer time, right, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Story_ID: 39228
Speaker 1: So, so why don't you talk about 'Inside Bed-Stuy', can you do that for me?  And not, not do it in reference to the articles, the many articles that have been written.
Speaker 2: 'Inside Bed-Stuy' was a tactic started by the Kennedys, Bobby Kennedy was going to run for President, and part of his machinery was to have a good reputation in--he had a--there was a--the Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation was a kind of poverty a--poverty agency that was inspired or you know by, by Kennedy.  And Kennedy ran, really, he had his people.  You know I got to meet, you know people, Kennedy people.  So and they wanted to start the first black television program and in America, right.  And they ended up with--they had put a team together and they had a producer, a guy named--well he was a writer, a very--Leslie Lacy, he's written several books.  A brilliant guy.  I don't know where--what he's doing now.  And he was a friend, you know, brilliant--he wrote about being, living in Africa and all.  And I remember we had a drink and he said Charles [Hobson], you know, I can't work with these guys, you know you, you can work with white people, I can't, you know.  He said I'm going to, I'm going to tell them to hire you.  He didn't have any TV experience either, he was a--and I came out of radio.  But I knew Bed-Sty and he knew--so I went and they hired me.  He gave me the job, you know, Leslie.  So then I became the writer.  So I can see--so again we did things like the Persuasions, I remember we had--it was very eclectic, which I sort of like as you can guess.  So we had like we had one of the high school, boy's high basketball star cause they'd won the championship that year.  And--or a, you know the Persuasions, who I discovered, the group called the Persuasions, doo wop group.  The guys went to the projects to interview them and they sang for me, you know and in one of their apartments and I thought this is amazing.  So I booked them on the first show.  And so we did everything--I'll tell you a story.  We were talking about an old man that lived in the neighborhood, he had retired from entertainment world and you might want to put him on the show, you know this is about Bed-Sty.  We put him on the show, it was Eubie Blake.  You know he was about 79 at the time and because of that, he ended up having a--he lived to 100 and performed to 100, so that was a little--that was some of the--Bedford-Sty was a--was such a rich community, you know this was larger than, you know, 400,000, I think it was at the time 400,000 people.  So this show looked at--we had no budget, you know we, we would put a camera in the middle of a house, a park and if it rained, we would--the guests had to use umbrellas.  But we captured, you know, an amazing part of, of Brooklyn, you know.  Of, of, of a black community.  It's never done, never been done.  So that, that was 'Inside Bed-Sty'.  I was--I was honored at Lincoln Center, Morgan Meade Festival as a producer.  And some of the--a couple of the people are still alive.  So but most of them aren't, you know.
Speaker 1: So you--what's the--that was hosted--was Roxie Roker--
Speaker 2: Roxie Roker and Jim Lawry.
Speaker 1: Which is, you know he talks about that.  I know him from Chicago and--
Speaker 2: He worked for McKenzie, right?
Speaker 1: Right, he worked for McKenzie, that's right.
Story_ID: 39229
Speaker 1: And the other, the other thing about that is I--well other question I had for you was is that when you--is it around that time that you met Earl Graves, or did you know Earl Graves before, cause he worked for Bobby Kennedy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, yeah.  I remember when Bobby Kennedy was assassinated, it must have been the day after I shared a cab with Earl, you know and he was really down, you know cause apparently he was like really--I knew Earl because my cousin, Robert Murray who's a former first cousin, former president or vice president of Freedom National Bank and they went to Morgan State [University] together, and they were good friends.  And Bob was in Scarsdale [Arizona] as well as Earl.  And I knew Barbara from the choir, you know, days.  She wasn't in the boys choir, but she was in the junior choir.  And, and I knew her sister Jane too, the kids, and she died a couple of--the next year I think, yeah.  So I'm sorry, I missed your question.
Speaker 1: No, I was just wondering if, if that's when you met him.  But you said--now you--when did you meet Earl Graves?  You said you shared the cab--
Speaker 2: Because my cousin, I met him through someone through my cousin.
Speaker 1: Cousin [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, both cousins, yeah my, my--his brother went to Morgan as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: How many episodes of 'Inside Bed-Sty' did you produce?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I, I think I--there was a year when I didn't--I produced about 40 of them.  There were 52.  I think only 26 exists.
Speaker 1: Now 'Soul' had the, had 'Soul'--who was producing 'Soul'?
Speaker 2: Ellis Hazel.
Speaker 1: Ellis Hazel.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay.
Story_ID: 39230
Speaker 1: How did (unclear) come to host that show, though, that's what I'm wondering.  He was out of Yale.
Speaker 2: Somehow through the Kennedys.
Speaker 1: Through the Kennedys, okay and what about Roxie Roker?  Isn't that, that--her, her son is--isn't that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Roxie Roker was married to a vice president at NBC [National Broadcasting Company], his last name was Kravitz, I'm forgetting his name.  He started--actually he came to one of my screenings.  Nice, wonderful, wonderful woman, I loved Roxie [Roxer].  And, and then yeah, and Lenny Kravitz used to come to the tapings, a little kid you know.  So--and Jim, Jim was--had some connections to the Kennedys.  So that's how Jim got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got married, you went to Atlanta [Georgia] with your wife.
Speaker 2: No, I got married before that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you ended up going to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: My second wife.
Speaker 1: Your sec--okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: See it's complicated, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you first get married?
Speaker 2: My first--I was about 22 and I married a woman, a wonderful woman and we're still bud--you know I still see her every once in a while.  We're not romantically engaged.  Two young people, Creole--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: New Orleans'[Louisiana] background.  You know she was born in--yeah.  And she did--was a graphic designer, she had her own business in the Village and you know wonderful, brilliant woman.  Just--and so anyway we were--the marriage was annulled because it was like clearly we didn't, you know this wasn't really--you know didn't want to--it didn't make sense.  We couldn't get a divorce you know, cause it was harder to get a divorce.  So it wasn't working and we decided to not, you know to end it, break it off.  And it was complicated stuff going on.  And so she--and I went--and then we--and then I went back home.  She was like I thought much smart--you know she was, she was way ahead of me, you know in many ways you know.  But I remember though this was--we'd go to--I was still very Brooks Brothers then.  I remember going, being at Lincoln--was it Lincoln Center or the equivalent, or Carnegie Hall somewhere in there.  And people would come up to us--you know lovely darling negro couple, you know, you really are, you know.  So I was exploit--I was going you know--one of--there was a Korean restaurant, I wanted to have Korean food.  So I was--and she would stop--we would get a lot of stuff, a lot of unusual stuff like that.  And she went on to, you know, continued to do that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: And you explored, so your second wife, her name?
Speaker 2: My second wife was Cheryl Chisholm--who--at our wedding in drop--name dropping here.  Andy Young was there, Vernon Jordan was--Maynard Jack--you know so it was a power circle of Atlanta, you know.  I, I married into a--my--Cheryl was a fourth generation college graduate.  So I had--
Speaker 1: From Spelman [College] maybe.
Speaker 2: Har--Harvard.
Speaker 1: From Harvard.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Her mother went to Spelman.  So going back, you know at that--you know and my daughter, our daughter, Hallie [Hobson]--she went to--graduated from Yale [University].  So--and here was a southern, black family you know, so I--and that was to me--my parents went, my mother, my parents--they were--I think the proudest moment they ever were of me was at that wedding at the Marriot Hotel.  I don't know if another black family had gotten married at the Marriot at the time.  So they were, you know--so that was--so that was a--but ultimately Atlanta, I--the people were wonderful in Atlanta [Georgia], but I, I--and I made frie--I still have friends from Atlanta.  But I--you know, New York [City] was where I wanted to be.
Story_ID: 39231
Speaker 1: Your father [Charles Hobson] had a stroke, that's when he had--he--did he have a stroke or a--
Speaker 2: Stroke, yeah.
Speaker 1: While you, while you were there, right?  Around that time cause I said--I thought you said 1974.  Cause I have you attending Emory [University] or taking some classes at Emory while you're there? [OF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: So that doesn't strike--that doesn't--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, 1974 I, I joined--I went to grad school--I--the American Studies Program, program at Emory [University].
Speaker 2: Now what made you decide to do that?
Speaker 1: Well we were in Atlanta [Georgia], cause remember I went and I left ABC to go to Atlanta.  I was the Executive Director, the Director of the Mass Communications Center, which went on to be, you know a major film and televi--Spike Lee went to school at Morehouse [College], but he studied film at that Center.  All about a year or so before--after I left.  So that, that's what I did, I went to you know, I was in Atlanta and then while doing that, I was kind of--I wouldn't say bored, but I wanted more things, more challenging things to do as well.  So then I decided to go back to school, which was always something I wanted to do.  So here I went--and they accepted me and Emory's [University] a good school.  But you know I wasn't right for school cause I, you know I was too hard to--I'd be in, you know we'd--a lecture.  I remember a interesting thing.  I remember we were studying the English teacher was saying--well the English professor, we're going to study a very important writer and, and one of the finest you know, African American writers, one of the finest American writers.  And, and then the assignments were handed out, and it was Ishmael Reed who was my friend.  You know Ishmael and I, remember when Dr. [Martin Luther] King spoke, his famous speech in New York [City] at the UN [United Nations], Ishmael [Reed] and I hung out you know, and saw that speech, you know.  I saw it--you know, so and I--it was interesting.  You know I'm studying these people who I know, who I know, you know.  Anyway, I then decided--ultimately I left Emory because I got a job.  I was trying to get to CBS, but I got a job in Atlanta, in New York [City], in Washin--
Story_ID: 39232
Speaker 1: Yeah, the place, yeah it was radio, it was general manager of the public radio station, the classical music station there, yeah.
Speaker 2: And you had that job--you had that--is that the job you worked 12 years?  No, cause I have you at WETA [Wingnut Entertainment Technical Allusions] as Senior Vice President.
Speaker 1: No WETA is radio, radio and TV.
Speaker 2: TV.
Speaker 1: So I was General Manager of the radio station for a number of years, and then I became--produced--and Vice President and Senior Vice President where I put together a lot of co-productions, including the 'Afternoons with [unclear]'.  So I was working there, I was living in London cause I was doing co-productions, you know.  I had an--you know they got me an apartment.  I was very good at raising money.  I mean and with my political background, you know and supporting, you know, getting stuff produced.  The only reason I survived--well two reasons I survived, also as we look back at is one because you know the interest in black history, you know that's not what I want to say--because I raise money.  You know because I know I have access to money.
Speaker 2: Let me ask you what made you good at raising money?  Usually people are not afraid to ask.
Speaker 1: I--you know I also, I also worked, worked with good people, smart, who have what I don't have, you know.  And the other thing was technology.  In other words, if I didn't--you know I worked for dot coms, you know I worked in, in, you know the high tech area here for a couple of--I worked for three dot coms, you know and before I--right after my Fulbright in Germany.
Story_ID: 39233
Speaker 1: How would you interview you?
Speaker 2: About the history of black music.  We had everybody you could think of from Dizzy Gillespie to the Dells, to Oscar Brown, Jr. was a host.  So, so we took, you know, took the money and we were able to form a--do a 13 part series which ran for years and years at Dunn Street.
Speaker 1: Now had you--first of all this is something, this is a subject matter that you've been preparing almost--not your whole life, but that you have been well versed in cause you've been looking at all this music.  This is you, you know.  So you're very well suited for this.  Have you know Oscar Brown, Jr. at that point?  Did you know him, were you friends?  How did he end up becoming the host?
Speaker 2: Well that's a very interesting story.  We wanted to have--we wanted the host to be Quincy, Quincy Jones.  And Quincy didn't say no and he kept us hanging for months, you know.  And it was always, you know--and then finally we were under a lot of pressure and we had to find out.  And he said look, I'll tell you what.  I'm not going to do, I can't cause I'm in the middle of doing stuff.  But when you get the show on, I'll come in the--I'll be in the show for you.  I'll do something, you know so I'll do, I'll do a segment, I'll do one.  So we were mad cause you know he kept us hanging.  Then we approached my friends Nick, Nick and Valerie about the hosting--actually before that it was George Benson, and George was hot then.  And through his manager, I think his name was Ken Fritz.  So George Benson, and we were flying out to LA [Los Angeles].  Can you imagine for me doing--hanging out in LA, flying--these fancy restaurants, hanging out with movie stars and all that.  And George--everything, we thought everything was all set and then George's management wanted major control over the program.  Well we had--we thought we had everything set.  And my lawyer went to negotiations and said you got a problem because this manager, these managers want to control the program.  And you know, they said you can have--but if you don't, if you don't have their backing, you could get George, George wants to do it, but you know they'll--they can screw you up.  So walked away from it, we and George.  And then we went to Nick and Valerie and there was a problem with schedule-wise.  I forgot what the problem was, cause they were friends later on.  But--so then we ended up finding Oscar.  I knew Oscar Brown Jr.'s music.  I didn't know him personally.  And then we thought he was--he was going through this--and it was, you know, he was going through some issues at the time.  He was drinking hard and you know and all, but--and--but he was the sweetest guy and he gave it his best.  And then we, you know--
Speaker 1: I guess he was difficult to work with during that time cause--
Speaker 2: Well I had--there was a woman working on my staff who was a real charmer, just sort of wealthy, Houston, Texas background woman.  And he really liked her.  So we would assign, you know like so he would get the, the girls--he would, you know.  I, I, I, I don't--he was difficult, but he was a loving guy, you know and so I wouldn't, I wouldn't say he, you know--I was glad to work with him.  Glad to have known him, you know.
Speaker 1: Now would--the other people involved Bob Kaiser, was he involved--
Speaker 2: Bob was the, Bob was the director.
Speaker 1: He was the director, and then you had an advisor, James Standifer.
Speaker 2: Jim Standifer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then Dada [ph.] Butcher, I've heard that name.
Speaker 2: Dada Butcher was the Chairman of the Music Department at Howard University.
Speaker 1: And, and so what--were there a lot of discussions about what approach you were going to take, you know with, with the series and what the order was going to be, and what was covered and what wasn't?  I mean as with anything.
Speaker 2: The funder, the National Endowment for Human--was that Humanities?
Speaker 1: I think that's the National Endowment for--
Speaker 2: NEA, NEA [National Endowment for the Arts].  No the Institute of Education, Education--
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: No it was not, that was education.
Speaker 1: National Education--
Speaker 2: It was the Department of Education.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Had--and as soon as Ronald Reagan got into power, he cut that.  Cause I had gotten three, two or three grants from that, that program.  So we had--we brought in scholars who knew, the best people who knew.  And so that's, that's kind of how you know--so we, and we had a curriculum.  We thought we had really se--we had a real--and I, I'm good at that.  I work very well with academics cause they fill in the holes and give it more depth.  So we're able to do that.
Story_ID: 39234
Speaker 1: Now was this first major documentary series that you had done up to that point, right?  This is I think.  No?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, because it's a di--you had done a lot of talk shows up to that point and I'm not sure what else.
Speaker 2: I remember I can, I can tell you hundreds of stories from when we're trying to do--from 'Jump Street'.  You know like I remember when we were booking--we had Al Green, you know.  And we were--and I was very excited to get Al Green.  I saw Al Green at the, at the Apollo when he first came to New York [City] and I had a column in Black Stars magazine, Johnson Publications.  So I'd cover--I was doing all this stuff and I also had a column in [unclear] News writing about the same music and culture that my parents didn't like, right.  So it's Al Green.  So the band is, you know I get there, you know that early call and all.  Al Green ain't there.  So all his music and they played it perfectly, right.  And then I got on the phone.  Somebody said let me call and called.  And he said--basically he was having problems with doing the R and B [Rhythm and Blues].  He said I can't do--I said Mr. Green, you know, just think of all the money we've spent.  Flew in your people, you know, and, and I didn't--you know so he did--basically didn't do it.  James Brown did the same thing to us, but we ended up getting wise before you know, the shows, we didn't lose any money on it, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: Because Al Green had gotten into the church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He left all us women just upset.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he didn't want to--he wasn't sure--he had promised.  I remember another story.  We were going to do--who did Pippen, Ben, Ben Vereen.  We're in--we're at his--Ben's house in L--in California, in Malibu.  You know and this guy, the manager who'd been talking to--and about booking him.  We flew out to meet with this guy, went to Ben Vereen's house.  And Vereen wasn't, wasn't around.  So finally late in the afternoon a guy comes and he says--I said well we got Mr. Vereen.  We was talking to his manager.  That guy is a chauffeur.  So we had the chauffeur.  We ended up not getting him, you know, because--well we did get a good, we did get, get very good people anyway.
Speaker 1: Now what did you learn?  You had a sizable budget on that, I think $1.6 million.
Speaker 2: In those days, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's, well that's a large--even now, even today.
Speaker 2: Well I remember it was almost $3 million just for 90 minutes for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] you know cause we're shooting in Paris, we're doing all this stuff.
Speaker 1: But what, what are you learning?  What do you learn about producing a documentary style series?  And, and is that--because your role as a producer, you're the organization part, you're the raising the money part, you're--are you the timeline part?  Keeping everything on, or--
Speaker 2: No, you have a production manager, yeah.  One of the problems now I've, I've--that's like because of the funding, it's hard to get money now; very hard.  That you don't have--you have people--I had--usually I've worked--I've had 25 people you know when we did 'Porgy and Bess', you know the first time.  You know we had--and you do, you know and you play your role, you do.  But now with the funding, you kind of have to do more, everything, you know, kind of thing.  And you know lucky to raise the money.  And you raise the money for something and they want you--now you raise the money for the program, but you want--they want you to contribute to their overhead, you know.  So it's, it's, it's hard you know.
Speaker 1: It's hard.  So this was really in many ways this is a very vibrant time that we're talking about to produce some of the things that came out of this.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Time period.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But I never--I should say this.  I never kind of stopped to look--I looked at the programs that I produced, you know when they were finished.  But I'm around busy working on the next-
Story_ID: 39235
Speaker 1: So you're telling me that 'The Africans'--you had started to work on that, yeah.  You were working--the work as sort of going on that while 'Jump Street' is--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No it isn't?  Nineteen eighty six [1986] is what I'm trying to see.  Nineteen--no, 1980, 1986.  How long did 'The Africans' take though?
Speaker 2: Five years.
Speaker 1: Well I mean I was wondering because '80 [1980] is when 'Jump Street' aired.  Eighty six [1986] is when 'The Africans' aired.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they weren't--
Speaker 2: Followed some, more or less, yeah.  I remember when I was doing 'The Africans', in the early part, yeah.  I remember--and it's hard to believe still, but a fri--actually a woman I had been going out with, actually sis--Bebe Moore Campbell, the writer, you know.  Bebe and I dated.  And she had broken up with her husband and they, they--and she was writing a, a New York Times Sunday Magazine piece on black, successful blacks, you know.  And, and she was--ultimately I was the featured person.  I didn't get the--wasn't the cover, but they had a huge article, you know pictures, other pictures and--so that was like, that was pretty shocking.  To open up the centerfold of the New York Times Magazine section and see me sitting at a, a desk.  Well anyway we, you know we went and we did it.  We made the film, you know.
Story_ID: 39236
Speaker 1: So what did--how does this--how does it come about?  Tell, tell us about not only what you did, but how you did it.  We know that the BBC's [British Broadcasting Corporation] involved and you're saying that this was the legitimate co-production with the BBC.  So as opposed to you were saying, you know, where BBC does it and you just are happy to slap your name on it as the co-producer.  So tell, tell me about--cause I, I, I really think in terms of the, the, the subject matter and the research that went into it, and the information.  You know as a viewer, you know who wasn't--I was viewing it.  I'm not in production, really, I [unclear].  You know I was, I was struck.  I mean I was learning all kinds of new things.  And so my question is how did this--was it the, was it the BBC that first approached you, or vice versa, or who is doing what with this?
Speaker 2: I can tell you the story.  They're, they're two very distinguished filmmakers, Albert, and I forgot his brother's name, Maysles, and they were, they were working with developing this with the, with the BBC.  And then one of the brothers--German guys.  One died, I forgot which one, but I said--they told PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], you know you really have to find a black producer, you know.  Cause you know we, cause we, we want to do it but you know, it's Africa, everything.  So they ended up recommending me and Susan Wild who is the Vice Pres--so that's how I got into 'The Africans'.  Again, I, I've had some of the greatest things I've ever gotten into when someone said, you know, handed it to me, basically.  You know like 'Like It Is' [unclear].  I, I, there was so many people involved with, with 'The Africans', and I couldn't say it's me, it's not me.  It's David Harrison who was the BBC, British equivalent, Executive Producer.  Brilliant, brilliant producer.  He was about ten years older than me and he was very--and we--when it's a whole bunch of people, you know, it was--we did a book, we had various producers.  You know we had three or four film crews.  Two crews going at the same time in different parts of Africa, the world, yeah.  So it was--they were different.  And Ally Mesruley [ph.], you know.  Oxford educated, Ally had, you know Ally--so a lot of people were involved.  But you have to kind of keep as an Executive Producer, keep your eyes on the ball.  Keep, keep the goal in sight, you know as things, you know as things move, move forward.  So I think, I think we did that fairly well.  So Ally--so it's, it's--film is a cooperative thing.  You know like a big--like a documentary, a big thing.  There's so many people involved.  So yes, it wouldn't happen without me and--but there were a lot of people who, you know who I'd say even played greater roles doing execution of it.  So--I like to look for things that were never done and, and even--like we're doing a much smaller--a smaller film crew for PBS on the Flat Iron, which is a wonderful building, Chicago [Illinois] influence.  But no one's ever made it.  Building on the most photographed--perhaps the most photographed building in New York [City], or in the world.  One of the--you know, and with a great history.  So we got the opportunity to do--and not even necessary--there was black stories in it, you know which you'll see.  So that's kind of my motive.
Story_ID: 39237
Speaker 1: So 'Porgy and Bess' or--then we had talked about the [unclear].  'Porgy and Bess' and the Paris, Paris--
Speaker 2: And 'Harlem in Montmartre'.
Speaker 1: Right, 'Harlem in Montmartre', right.
Speaker 2: Was a book written by William H. Shack who is actually an uncle on my wife's side, my ex-wife.  He, he was the Chairman of the Anthropology Department at Berkeley [University] and he died, you know after he wrote the book.  And then about a couple years later, his--had a very long divorce from my wife, from Cheryl, but Cheryl's aunt, his widow came to me, Dorothy Shack and said, you know African American, you know I want--can you make this into a documentary?  And I ended up--she gave me, I don't know, some seed money, $5,000, $10,000 to, to get it started.  And I took it to PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and then--but luckily if you have, you know if you've done this stuff in the past, you know you do get, get in the door.  I had--we had to raise all the money.  They were very helpful, raised almost $3 million for that, yeah.  While, while, while [President] Ronald Reagan, while [President] George [H.W.] Bush was President.
Speaker 1: Well that says a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and NEH [National Endowment for Humanities] was totally was totally captured by the Republicans and yet they--well I, well 'The Africans' you know was a major, major story because the head of the Endowment for the Humanities, Lynn Chaney who you know, [Vice President] Dick Chaney's wife, would not--threatened to--took the NEH logo off the program because they didn't--they thought it was anti-American and it was a lot, it was a huge story.  I mean it was like, I don't know, five articles in the New York Times during that, during that period.  And there were--Pappy Cannon, you know, can you imagine being a target?  You know I, I was almost afraid for my life.  But I, you know, I still do these things.  But we survived it, and, and then after that, the NEH staff felt so bad that, you know they--we, you know I was able to get other money from them to fund other projects, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the--
Speaker 2: But one thing I want to say about myself, I think you want more insight.  I don't--I learned, no one sat me down and said this is how you produce, this is how you raise money, this is how you build a career.  I kind of just sort of made it up, you know, on the fly, you know.  So and I'm still making it, making it up.
Story_ID: 39238
Speaker 1: But what approach--like how do you decide what projects you're going to take on and how are you, you know--and what projects do you still have in you that you haven't done?  And the reason I'm asking that is you're saying, you know, no one, you know, you know I'm sort of making it up.  But you still have your approach, you know, and you have your vetting process and all of that.  Because, you know all of these projects, they take a lot of, you know, logistics, working, funding, negotiating.
Speaker 2: I'm proud to say that my eldest daughter, Hallie [Hobson], just left her job at MOMA [Museum of Modern Art] you know--development, raising money, working with billing, you know, very wealthy people.  And is now at Museum, Metropolitan Museum of Art in a wonderful job, you know, that they created, you know.  I didn't notice--I never sat down with Hallie [unclear].  Hallie got a degree in theater, and then UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] in theater.  But--and we hadn't talked about development, but--well she is more classically educated, you know.  But I was saying I'm lot--I make a lot of mistakes too, and a lot of things I don't, you know, my on days and my off, especially getting old.  You have your on days, your off days, but there's so much that interests me, you know.  I have so many interests that--and including the, the Web, you know, and all the stuff you can learn and connections you have and friends and living in Germany and, you know, working in Paris and doing all, all of these things.  And I look forward to doing more things.  I'd love to work with you on, on your treasure of, of-
Speaker 1: I would, I would love that too.
Story_ID: 39239
Speaker 1: So let-'Porgy and Bess', can you talk about that because when you were doing--that was a project you did un--under your own company at this point, right?
Speaker 2: 'Porgy and Bess' was the brainchild of Jim Standifer who really was the expert on, on Por--on--and he wanted to get the TV project.  So you know, of course with my relationship with [unclear] you know, and PBS, so we brought it in.  But the content--and I brought in the director, you know, cause Jim an academic, brilliant, but we needed a creative guy.  Brought this English guy in, Nigel Nobel who did a, I think a very good job on it, yeah.  So a lot of what--you figure how to bring like, how to bring the right chemistry together.  How to bring the right scholar and, and the right scholar means also the right temperament.  You know the right--and how to get the right--and who to--how to get the right funding by getting it to the attention of the right person.  You know that's all--and, and I, I had--yeah so let me--some of its intuitive, you know being intuition, so--so what, so why, why do I--you know again, I--you know there have been failures too.  There've been flops, you know.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Well there's something that actually I'm starting--when I got my Fulbright, you know in 19, 1996, actually my wife who, you know getting a, divorcing, but she also--we both had Fulbrights.  It's unusually, see hers is in photography and history.  And I wanted to do a project on black Germans.  I think, I think it's a--so, but I got a--my project was really--with the Fulbright was a year in Germany to connect with European producers interested in, you know in working with the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] system, you know.
Speaker 1: That was the nature of the Fulbright.
Speaker 2: Yeah, [unclear], you know how to, you know how to, how to connect, get your projects to--and I did, I was all--I was in Munich, but I was in Berlin, East Germany.  I'd go all over cause they wanted to see my films and met people and stuff.  And you know, still have connections there.  So I'm now not with the black German, which wasn't the case before.  Now starting the pro--trying to see if we can do--get a film off the ground on this evolving story of black Germans.
Speaker 1: So you found--you're working with a black German.
Speaker 2: We just started.  Yeah, a very distinguished German producer, not black, in, in Cologne.  He's connected me with a black German woman who's got a great story.  I, I've met other black Germans over the years, but she, she might--it might work.  So we're exploring that.
Speaker 1: So you're trying to build things around her story, or her story lead to other stories?
Speaker 2: Well, there have been a number of books and TV programs there, in German, you know.  So--but nothing here.  As far as--nothing here.  And there's a story about the--we want to do a more positive story because there's some fascinating, you know, they're fascinating stories.  It, it's--and of course the stuff during the war is unbelievable, you know about blacks being in the concentration camps and the work camps.  And, and the musician, the jazz and the fact that one great story was that the, the Commandant for I think it was the SS [Schutzstaffel] and in Paris [France] liked--that's a different thing--liked jazz and I'm going off topic, yeah.  But they're very interesting stories, side stories here.
Story_ID: 39240
Speaker 1: What makes you good at what you do?  Why you as opposed to someone else?  What makes you good?  And if you could say that.  And if not, if not, you know we could go on to something else.
Speaker 2: Well, you know there are disappointments.  I mean I'm still--you know I still have to work for a living.  So that's, you know, I thought you know many years ago I thought I'd be, you know, sitting on a beach somewhere.  But I, I do have to work, I have to, have to work, you know.  I'm not rich.  I, you know, at all.  But I do have rich experiences and you know and I'm proud of my daughters and have, you know some good friends and you know I get to enjoy some things.  What makes me good?  I think I, I get lucky.  I mean look, I had cancer you know five years ago that--six years ago, that they thought it spread and I would--metastasized, you know, that I was a goner, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: What kind of cancer did you have?
Speaker 2: Sarcoma, you know.
Speaker 1: And it was found in your, your--
Speaker 2: Was, was--I was negligent about getting it treated and all, but it was unusual, it was huge.  That's why they took [unclear].
Speaker 1: You knew you had it?
Speaker 2: Well I knew, I didn't know it was cancer.  I knew I had this--they thought it was like kind of a blood thing.
Speaker 1: What were your symptoms?
Speaker 2: It was like a football--a big thing on my leg.  It look--they thought it was blood.  I was actually--this Chinese acupuncturist was--I'm not going to blame him.  I, I shouldn't even done--but anyway my doctor, when she found out what it was, my internist.  I mean she got me--[unclear] took me in because it was so unusual, it was huge, yeah.  And they had to cut my leg off above the knee, which is--and but anyway, you know a cou--couple years go by and they--years--she stops chemo cause she's I don't know--we'll take a chance and so I've been fine, you know.  I--producing since, travel you know through, through you know--and thank God, you know, you know, great--anything could happen of course, you know.  But it's a good marker, you know, five or six years and no treatment, haven't had treatment in, you know, four or five years.
Story_ID: 39241
Speaker 1: I think I'm good at identifying--getting to the--getting--reading--like when you showed me--well this is--when you showed me what you're working with and I--you know what you have there, and I'm thinking how to, how to get this--how to peel this off and get to--cause you're not going to produce, you know, 20 reality shows.  I--what--it's only I think a PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] thing cause it's bas--basically talking heads.  But it needs to be given context.  I think it's incredibly fundable, you know, incredibly fundable.  I think it's a rich--and how you put the, the stories makes sense.  I think it would be a big editing--you know, make it really work, editing, effects, music, you know, celebrity host.  And I think you, you're onto something incredibly important, you know, important to this country.  You know it's one of the most interesting archives, you know, I've heard about, you know.  And I've done archivable stuff, but you know on, on--so but I think this deserves a wider audience and I'd love to, you know, you know you do what you need to do.  But I think I could work well with you and your, and your team to get it out there.  So one of the--I think to, to find the idea, clearly define it.  No, understand the, the marketplace, understand where you're going with it, understand and define the idea in a way that addresses that marketplace.  And then come up with a concept that tells a story, you know, and it's kind of a new kook you know, and make it a fresh, new look at it.  And you know, that's, that's part of it.  You know, but you have a lot of advantages, you know, here.  And then, and then the funding, and then--then put the funding plan together for whatever you want to do, you know.  There's, there's the target audience is, is important you know, too in this--and I think it's limited because you know, PBS is you know, dying on the vine in a way.  You know, and they have to change their whole--they're doing, they're doing good stuff still, but you know they have to change their whole approach cause their--the attention span, you know, those iPhones that we love, you know.  That you know, people don't--and they're aren't home looking at TV you know.  Like you know--and the iPads or whatever, you know.  So anyway, so I think I'm good at understanding all of those things.  I don't think I'm a particularly good writer, so I always have a very good, very smart, often young, really smart writer or, or just somebody raw but very smart, very organized, you know, that I can collaborate with you know, and that person, you know.  I mean I, I pull the picture together.  And then what else?  I'm also good at marketing, you know, getting, getting the--how to get the word out.  You know and getting the word out in certain circles.  But so, so that's what I think I've done well, well.  I mean and this is off the top of my head, but gen-generally, you know.
Story_ID: 39242
Speaker 1: What do you want your--what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well I want to--for being a--yeah I've gotten one--let's see--being a, a, a black pioneer, you know I got the award from MacDonald's and you know several people didn't, didn't--all deserving.  I want to be remembered for bringing aspects of the African American culture to a wider audience.  Aspects that were taken for granted by many black people, you know, or not cared about, you know and bringing, bringing the--putting those ideas you know, on the screen, you know together, you know.  Things that were important but not, you know people kind of overlooked, you know.  And we didn't, as I said, didn't care about.  And it's also true of other things that, that, that aren't necessarily about the African American experience.  But important ideas, important cultural monuments and to, you know, bringing those to a broader audience, getting them out there and, and producing them, you know.  And pioneering and, you know, various firsts.  And then being able to do it--being able to move around in Ger--in Europe and you know with Asians and with you know and black people you know and--so that's, so I, I, I'm proud of 'Inside Bed-Stuy', you know.  It's a, a--you know what we were looking at them and what we were able to do and I'll tell you a story.  When I was in Germany and they were teaching in the U.S. in Munich, this was in 1997, and I had these really energetic, really smart, they spoke really good English, these German students, cause of grad school.  And I was bringing some exploitation films cause I was talking about black film.  And I sure enough picked up the wrong disc and I had 'Inside Bed-Stuy', two, two episodes, they looked the same.  So I was saying what the hell am I going to do with you know, these young people who want action or you know--so then I said well, there's nothing else--so I had to show it.  So I showed one episode and at the end of the screen they were like, you know like what was--I showed the half, an hour, half hour of each program.  They were like--their eyes were like, you know they were un--they were just mesmerized.  So I said wow, I think this is going over well.  I was shocked.  So then I asked them in the stu--why did you feel that way?  Well, because it looked like what was going on, you know I would--there's no way--how else would I have known what Bed-Stuy was like?  And we had--we were--we had the guy who organized the draft dodging against, you know, you know pacifists.  We had Sonny Carson, you know the activist.  We had Leon Jones from the Nets.  You know it was that whole tapestry, you know, and they were saying oh, my God, what an experience.  And then about a week later I got a call from the Margaret Meade Festival that they wanted to use--show it in Lincoln Center, 'Inside Bed-Stuy', and they wanted me to bring that.  And that's when the New York Times thing came up.  But--another thing I did which got some attention, and it fits into the scenario of--I laid out earlier.  It was a program about Paul Robeson with WBAI.  This is when I was producing at WBAI, before the TV days.  And it was amazing when I try to get people to talk about it, because you know it was a communist thing.  So very few people would say, you know, I mean I, I had the cooperation of his family, his son.  And we finally did it, you know, and it was a good hour.  It's still--it's in their archive, was made in the '60s [1960s] and you know, they still run it.  So there's some things that I've done that continue to be, you know played, you know.  And all--and I'm not just saying I'm the only--yes, anyway.  So that, that's important to me and I feel good about that.  I would like to do, you know, I'm getting up there, but I'd like to do one more major piece, you know.  One or two more, yeah.  So-
Story_ID: 39243
Speaker 1: My question is what hopes and concerns do you have about the black community?
Speaker 2: Well I, I have not--when, when jazz was--when, when Motown was booming, you might go to parties and stuff.  But I was really into jazz and classical music, I didn't really--but then later on I got back to here with my music, and it's great, you know, right.  So I'm not--I'm not a part of the hip hop thing, though I'm not ready to condemn it.  But I remember doing a, a--because that's so much of what they're--what's going on.  I remember doing a project for Court TV, and I filmed--and I had a, an assistant.  This sort of [unclear] girl, woman who, you know, had, had just left The New Yorker magazine.  And she--and then we were trying to do a soundtrack for the piece and she said, Tupac.  And I said you mean Tupac?  And, and then--so we tried some Tupac.  And I, I said my God, this guy's brilliant.  You know, unbelievable, you know, unbelievable.  I mean he's like the great blues, you know all that, and the lyrics, the person you know.  So--and I'm glad that didn't slip, slip by.  You know I mean I--originally I got introduced to Drake who's not the most--you know who's certainly interesting to himself decided--but and I, course I liked Public Enemy, you know.  But that's a whole different thing.  So anyway I think somehow I hope the, the younger generation gets exposed to a variety of things, you know, and, and I'm worried about in a way with technology which I support and cater to and you know, helps to motivate me in many ways, could take--has taken over, you know.  Look at Amazon is on the Washington Post now and some of the dot coms during the years and are play a major role so that we're in a world that will soon be dominated by technology giants and, and technology thinking.  And I hope that that does well, especially for black, young black people.  And it, it's, it's also you know, just one more thing about learning and getting excited and learning and then going beyond that.  And I hope that pop culture, you know, presents that.  I mean I can look at new and better BBC programs or you know, 'Downton Abbey' and etc., you know Sherlock Holmes, whatever it is.  But I, I do think back that when I was in the Civil Rights Move--Movement getting arrested and demonstrations.  Not just in Brooklyn [New York City], it wasn't anything dangerous.  But still I thought these problems are going to be solved, you know, with class problems, you know the caste, you know the haves/have nots within, within our own community.  And they've gotten worse, you know, and that's a real disappointment, you know.  And I know the Civil Rights Movement and--has helped and, you know and advanced the people and so.  But the all the problems, you know are, are huge.  I read about Chicago and the gun violence.  You know we had gangs in Brooklyn when I grew up, but nothing like, nothing like that.  So there's a lot to worry about, you know, there's a lot to worry about.  I think your project, you know, is, is there, is there for people, is there for them.  You know if it could be put in the right, you know, vehicle.  But it's already important, you know.  So I hope that there are more opportunities for young people to learn from--black, you know, minority young people, to learn from other, other generations past.  But we're also moving into an era now where there is more in the multi-cultural, you know there's people identifying in different ways, you know.  They're certain people who are mixed raced who--you know it's a different, it's a different world than I experienced growing up and I hope it moves forward in the right way.
Story_ID: 39244
Speaker 1: Can I ask you what do you think is the essence, or what would you describe is the essence of, of the black experience?
Speaker 2: I think it's about a certain style.  It's about a certain enthusiasm, a certain connection to the south.  I don't use the black experience in the north too but, I don't know.  I'm not--you know I, I don't know that much about hip hop ultimately, I mean except what I read in the New York Times.  And you know I, I don't know if I can answer that question.
Speaker 1: Well let's say the black experience, like--or what would you say the contributions of black people have been to the world?
Speaker 2: Wow, monumental you know.  Across in art, you know I, I'm very involved with the Museum of Modern Art, Committee at Museum of Modern Art and certainly I have artist friends and, and there have been certainly major black contributions there.  Sports, I'm a huge sports, you know, love my sports as well.  In business there's been some--not enough, you know.  Also speaking of black things, I also worry about, still worry about Africa, you know.  I've gotten the chance to travel, you know travel to a number of countries, in, in west, east and southern Africa.  Never been to north Africa.  So that's--I hope that we can help them in, in more ways.  And of course the monumental thing for me was [President] Obama being--even though I'm disappointed in some ways with him, and now, but that's something that you know the one event that I never thought I'd see and I'm glad you know, proud to be a part of it.  With his, his being elected and what that means.  And I think that means--ultimately it will mean more for black people, young black people than anything else that's gone on and the fact that he--even if there's another--not another black President in a while.  That's, you know that was--that's extremely important.  I remember being in a--was shooting in the studio in Paris [unclear] about two or three years ago, and the election night I, I was in Paris, you know.  And I would, you know and so I stayed up late to try to--it was too late--to try to figure out who won.  And this older leftist French lady was in the bar and she said [President Barack] Obama not's going to win, you know.  A black lady--she was like screaming you know, Obama, a black man is not going to be--so I said look I have more reason to be skeptical than you, but he--there's no question about it, he's going to be win, going to win.  I never took her name or anything.  But that, that was kind of a--
Speaker 1: So she was a French, French leftist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and she said there's no way.  America's not going to have a black President, you know.  I said but he's going to win, I mean all the polls--there's no--they're not going to--for--and McCain, there's no way [Senator John] McCain's going to win.  So--I actually, I remember being in South Africa, this is a--and we were, we had--we were filming and I was getting the Harald-Tribune cause I, you know--and there was an article in the Harald-Tribune, a little snippet about Miss America, Vanessa Williams winning Miss America.  So I read the article and I put the paper away and then I said there's a black Miss Am--even though I read the article, it didn't sink in.  So I picked the--up, up again, you know and it was on, it was on the wire services, cause while I was at the BBC we were getting ticker services.  And I said a black woman winning, you know--so that was one of those things that I never, ever thought I would, would see.
Story_ID: 39245
Speaker 1: So what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: About ideas, about culture, about taking things, you know--producing black programming and, and creating outstanding black programming that you know--in this digital age I mean you can get things so quickly.  I mean you can, you know in 20, five seconds you can go to Google and pull up, you know, who are the leading black--blah, blah.  So information comes to us quite in a different way now.  But, but sometimes that keeps us from looking at things more in depth and so I would like to e able to be remembered for producing and creating, you know with, with other people, with teams, black experience subjects in depth, you know.  And with lasting influence.
