Story_ID: 579798
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Walter Theodore Hayden.  That's W-A-L-T-E-R, T, initial, H-A-Y-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My place of birth is Tuskegee, Alabama, on the campus of Tuskegee University [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And that date would be June 24, 1926.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired print shop owner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now didn't you have something to do with Black Pages here in the, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--
Speaker 1: --just briefly, just express.
Speaker 2: Yes, briefly, I published the Fort Wayne Black Pages for the last five years.  And consequently another young man bought it and he is now continuing that tradition.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 23, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Fort Wayne, Indiana, at my home at 4221 Bowser Avenue.
Story_ID: 579799
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight warm-up questions we always ask and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed, barbecued ribs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'm partial to red.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Always the winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any place where I can just get away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Now that's unusual, but not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not really.
Story_ID: 579800
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Charles Hayden] side.  And we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Maude Evelyn Hayden [Maude McCloud Hayden].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: It's M-A-U-D-E, E-V-E-L-Y-N, H-A-Y-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her birthdate was 1893.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: As far as we, I can ascertain it's Yazoo, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Oh, Yazoo City [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yazoo City, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yazoo City, Mississippi, okay.  Well, how much do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace those ancestors?
Speaker 2: I knew my uncles on her side.  One lived in New Jersey, they are all deceased now, and one lived in Memphis, Tennessee.  And as far as I can ascertain, they are both buried in a little town, Uniontown, Alabama, at this time.  One, the one that lived in New Jersey was a publisher and a union activist as far as I know, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother had one sister that I knew of who lived with us for a short time in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how far back can you trace 'em?  How far back do they go?  Did they talk about slavery or Reconstruction or any of that kind of thing in the family?
Speaker 2: They both of them were too young for actually been having been in slavery (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir--
Speaker 2: But shortly--
Speaker 1: --but are there stories, are there stories?
Speaker 2: Shortly thereafter, they were, and they were taught, they told us about some of the things that went on during that time before they died, yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, during the time that they came along, rather?  Are there any stories about, stories in the family about the people that did grow up during the time of slavery and Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Yes there were.  My older brother knows more about that than I do at this point in time.  But while they were alive they did tell some of the stories to us, they did, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of the stories?
Speaker 2: The family that they lived, worked for, that was my great-grandfather's people, were very, at that time, I guess, it was nearing the end of the war [Civil War] and all of this time I think they were very lenient to them and treated them very well for that time of, period, that time period, as far as I can ascertain on that.  So, but it was still sketchy as far as, the actual dates, places, and et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As far as you know, was that side of the family like, you know, from, I mean, did they originate in Yazoo City or did they go back to some other town in Mississippi or--
Speaker 2: As far as I know the siblings, my mother's siblings are, were from that area at the time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there a story about why they moved to Alabama?
Speaker 2: Originally, I guess, they were sold, the original family, my great-grandfather and his wife were sold at that point, at some point in time, and they were moved to Mississippi, and that's as far as I can get with that, that they came out of Georgia, my mother's side, I think that's where they came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they got, we have 'em going from Georgia to Mississippi--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then they go to Alabama at some point, your mother ends up settling in Alabama, right or--
Speaker 2: My mother--
Speaker 1: --or her brothers or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) her, my mother's brothers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --were all born somewhere in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at the time.  Basically that's the reason why my father and my mother got together, because the two families were in the same area at the time.
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Not necessarily Yazoo City, Greenwood [Mississippi], but in that vicinity.
Story_ID: 579801
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Maude McCloud Hayden] talk about growing up in Yazoo City [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes indeed, yeah, yeah.  She was a student, and of course, peculiar as it is, I'm not sure whether, ever, she ever finished high school or not, I'm not sure, but she went to college at Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] and did teach there, shortly thereafter.  And later in her life when she finished teaching in Alabama, she retired, she then went to Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] to get her master's degree (laughter) after she had retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she got her, and did she get her master's?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At Alabama State?  Okay.  Now was she down there during the time of the sit-ins and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Of course, that was really, those things were going on at that time.
Speaker 1: Yes, I figured they might have been (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's when it happened, really happened, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was a teacher--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all of her life?
Speaker 2: All of her life.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe her personality?
Speaker 2: Very outgoing and a very good teacher.  I, in fact, I suffered under two grades (laughter) with her.  I had to be better than everybody else.  So I was, she taught me in fourth and fifth grade.
Story_ID: 579802
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles Douglas Hayden [Charles Hayden].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called him C.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It was 1895, I believe, it was, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was younger than your mother [Maude McCloud Hayden]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Eighteen ninety-five [1895], and he was born in, you said Greenwood [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Greenwood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Greenwood, Mississippi.  And well, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can they remember?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather [Charles Hayden], I knew him.  He died in the early '40s [1940s].  He was also a minister and he pastored churches in Mississippi and Alabama.  When I really knew him he had long since been retired, see.  Now he came along right after the end of the Civil War, or during it, I, he was a very old man when I knew him in the '40s [1940s].  I think he must have died in about '42 [1942] or '43 [1943].  So he was well into his nineties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he tell any stories about those days?
Speaker 2: I didn't get ever to, get a chance to do much talking with him because he lived with another of my uncles at the time in another city, but we visited him once or twice and that's the extent of my having it, you know, just to talk with him, not very much did I talk with him about those times.  In fact, since I was so young at that time, it never occurred to me to talk about the things that I would like to know now, I would have heard it from the horse's mouth as the saying goes, but I would like to have, it's something that I missed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you ever hear from any of your other relatives or even from him, maybe, how he came to the ministry?  Did he talk about that?  I know that's a favorite topic of a lot of ministers how they became a minister.
Speaker 2: Evidently I, from what I've understood about him, the mantle of leadership just falls on certain people.  And I think where he lived at that time, I guess, the mantle fell on him to be the leader, the spokesperson, what do you wanna call it.  And that's one of the things that I did learn about him that he was expected to do things for people and when something needed to be done, he was the person to go to get it done, the knowhow, et cetera.  So that's as far as I can understand it about him at that point in time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you touch on an interesting point here that a ministerial calling in the black community in those days was, you know, people talk about the Lord calling them and that sort of thing, but it's also the community calling you to take responsibility, right?
Speaker 2: To take the responsibility, and along with that goes the other part.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's basically what it is.  He, they took care of the spiritual and physical needs of the flock as you might call it, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So providing basic leadership for people, and, okay.  Now what denomination was your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Methodists, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal].
Speaker 1: Oh, A.M.E?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, at that time, if you recall, that was about the time, let's see, eighteen, da, da, da, the Methodist church had been established for quite some years at that time, like as early as 1841.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it goes back a little further than that but, yeah.
Speaker 2: See, the Methodist church was formed back in 1841 in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it, I think the official date is 1829 [sic.], I think, for A.M.E., I think.
Speaker 2: It, records are kind of blurry at that point in time.  But I have, I did have rather because I gave that information to the African American museum [African/African American Historical Society Museum] here in Fort Wayne [Indiana].  I have, I had records of a meeting in Indianapolis [Indiana] that dates back to 1941 [sic.].
Speaker 1: Is that eighteen [1841] or nineteen [1941]?
Speaker 2: Eighteen forty-one [1841].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, 1841 that records the mission here in Fort Wayne.  So the church here in Fort Wayne was basically in operation sometimes prior to 1841.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that means that officially the A.M.E. church, I am not sure, I, that information, I think, was also in some of that package that I gave to the museum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, that's something.  So they have like, the names of the people that were there and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who were the--
Speaker 2: Who started the church here and everything, they all, et cetera.
Story_ID: 579803
Speaker 1: Any stories about your [paternal] grandfather?  We've talked about your [paternal] great-grandfather, but was your grandfather a minister too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: It's another Charles Hayden (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as, and I don't know the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was the, your great-grandfather Charles Hayden too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They were Charles all the way down through there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So basically Charles Hayden your grandfather was at least a junior, if not--
Speaker 2: Well I don't think that had any sayings, the juniors or whatever, I don't think that had anything to do, at that point in time.
Speaker 1: So they really didn't use that designation?
Speaker 2: No, it was just Charles, I guess.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Named after his father, and he was Charles.  I have a brother who was named after my father [Charles Hayden], our father, and his name is Charles [Charles Hayden] also.
Speaker 1: And he's the fourth one we know about.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I know.
Speaker 1: --but he doesn't call himself the fourth or anything?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well I'm thinking of Charles, who is it, Foreman, that has what, Georges, all his boys are named George.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  George Foreman, right.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now well, what about your grandfather, any stories about him?  Now did he grow up in Mississippi, well, I guess, he--
Speaker 2: And he did--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he did also, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he is buried in, he's buried in Jackson, Mississippi, yes.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now were they the pastors of the only A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church in Greenwood [Mississippi]?  Seems like--
Speaker 2: I don't know if that was, in all probability it was only one church, in all probability, it was only one church.  That was a very small neighborhood compared to what, neighborhoods today.  That was very small, so I'm sure of that.  And ministers didn't move too often in that area, in that time frame.  Three, four, five years, maybe, or six years at the same place, and then they would move, they would move to another location.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know they moved the Methodist ministers around--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the conference would move 'em--
Speaker 2: Move 'em around.
Speaker 1: --you know, from one church to another.
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: But it's significant to be the only A.M.E. pastor in or have the only A.M.E. church in a place like Greenwood--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --with this national connection of A.M.E. churches, you know, founded the first, that being the first black church founded, you know, in the United States.
Speaker 2: So generally you would find, unless the city was of some size, you would only find one A.M.E. church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Generally.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, are there any stories from your grandfather in terms of what, what he had to go through in Greenwood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes.  I, the church was, we're speaking of the churches.  Most of the A.M.E. ministers were called circuit riders.  They would have maybe a home church, but they would go into surrounding counties and hold meetings periodically.  In other words, serving the needs of those people outlying, who weren't within the same area as the church building, you know.  And so they had little meetings here and there, and it was known when the pastor, the minister would be in that neighborhood.  And they called them circuit riders at the time, you see.  Tuesday would be in a certain place, Wednesday another place, and so on, yeah.  So the parish was very small.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he had to travel around quite a bit?
Speaker 2: Quite a bit.  Yeah, they all did.  It was standard procedure that if you got a base church then you would go and service their whole county maybe, the outlying county.  Instead of having all the people journey into the city for a meeting, he would go to them, and they would meet on a farm or someone's home, whatever, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any stories from your grandfather about what things that happened when he was--
Speaker 2: And I didn't hear any bad things about him, all good things and because it was quite a thing for him.  And I did go on a trip with my father once 'cause he did the same thing, and it was always interesting because you were always in a different locale, meeting different people.  In my case I always met a lot of kids my age.  At that time I was about thirteen or fourteen and it was quite an adventure for me to go out and see some, and meet and talk to other kids my age in a different locale.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I suppose a lot of people didn't really get a chance to travel around as much as somebody doing that kind of--
Speaker 2: That's right.  It was new to me because I had a chance to, and all of my siblings too, we would all go with him at one time or another and travel.  The travel mode was kind of rugged, a wagon (laughter) but we got there.  And in some cases you walked, yeah.  So it was not that unusual not to walk two or three miles out in the country to a meeting, and we'd leave on time, get there on time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you knew when to leave to get there at a certain time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, (laughter) that's right.
Story_ID: 579804
Speaker 1: Now did your father [Charles Hayden] go to school in Mississippi?  Did he have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did.  And he was also taught and then matriculated at Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he went to Alcorn as well.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did he talk about growing up and have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I thought that he was better educated than normally, but the reason I thought that was because he could do anything as my kids say, (laughter) he could.  He could lay brick and he could, he was a minister and I don't know--at that time, I don't recall him going to a divinity school per se.  I don't recall that happened, except maybe at Alcorn where you would get a class or so in bible study or whatever.  It was before that time when you would go to seminaries.  As they say nowadays, well, there are seminaries, used by lots of people, and you go to one or the other and you're taught the same at all of 'em, and then you go to whatever denomination you prefer.  But I don't recall him ever going to a divinity school per se.
Speaker 1: Now what did he, what was his major at Alcorn?
Speaker 2: I really don't know but they, the emphasis at that time was on mechanics.  What can you do with your hands to make a living, you know.
Speaker 1: Did he teach mechanics later on or, or did he--
Speaker 2: I think that was basically what, same thing as what went on at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  You were taught to till the land, how to fix machinery, carpentry, being productive in that manner was the thing at the time.  Running a business, not one of the things that they taught, no.  It was how to make things, how to do things.
Speaker 1: Did he have one particular specialty?
Speaker 2: None that I know of.  But he could do most anything and do it well because he applied himself to it.
Speaker 1: Now was he involved in printing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  He knew about it.  He was a great writer, I know that.  He published lots of articles and I'm trying to think of that East Coast book that was some kind of a journal.  As I recall he did a lot of writings and in the end when he died, we gave his library, he had an extensive library, we gave to a school in Birmingham, Alabama, in Birmingham, Alabama, the name of the school, was it Miles College [Fairfield, Alabama], I believe, he gave it to, Miles College.
Speaker 1: Now, did he write for The Christian Recorder?
Speaker 2: That's it, thank you.  He wrote for The Christian Recorder (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was that published in Baltimore [Maryland], I believe?
Speaker 1: I think so [sic. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --ordinal, you know, it's an organ of the A.M.E. church and I--
Speaker 2: The Christian Recorder.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if someone wanted to find out what he had to say they could look in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, indeed, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --archives of The Christian Recorder.  Which has been published continuously since, I think, 1830 something [sic.]--
Speaker 2: All the way--
Speaker 1: --you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: --it's been going, it's one of the oldest publications in the country as I recall, yeah.
Speaker 1: It grew out of Martin Delany's newspaper, The Mystery, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He sold it to the A.M.E. church.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just a little funny thing I happen to know.
Story_ID: 579805
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Maude McCloud Hayden and Charles Hayden] met?  Do they have a story about how they--
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter) yes.  My mother, there were ten of us now, my mother was my father's second wife.  And when his first wife died in childbirth, there were five children.  And somehow or another my mother got involved in kind of taking care of those five kids in some way, I don't know how it happened, but she became involved with those five kids.  And it turned out he eventually got together and made, they were married.  And then subsequently five more children came, so there were ten of us.
Speaker 1: Now that seems like a lot now but in those days that wasn't necessarily.
Speaker 2: Nothing to it.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Large families were the thing to survive.  It was a survival kit.  And I remember some years ago when people were talking about cutting down on the populations, you know, there was an uproar in the black community, oops, they're trying to kill us off (laughter) but I didn't think that was quite true, you know.  I took that with a grain of salt (laughter).
Speaker 1: And people are used to these big families where you had like ten, an older set of ten and then a younger set of ten.  Now where do you fall in the--
Speaker 2: In the second group, I am the second to the last.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're one of the youngest?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, my younger brother, yes, my younger brother died last year, yeah the younger brother.
Story_ID: 579806
Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory, an earliest first memory?
Speaker 2: Childhood memory, of me?  What I thought, the first thing that I recall, walking to school in a little town called Demopolis, Alabama.  That always stuck into my mind because the school I attended was sort of outside the city limits and we had to walk to school.  We didn't have a bus.  And the bus passed us as we walked to school and as we were coming back, the bus passed us again (laughter).
Speaker 1: And who was on the bus?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) the white kids rode the bus.
Story_ID: 579807
Speaker 1: You were talking about growing up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you were born in Tuskegee [Alabama], right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Alabama.  And did you live there a long time or did you--
Speaker 2: As far as I can ascertain, about three or four years maybe in Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you remember much about Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Not too much, not too much at all, except I remember we did have a big garden at the back of the house during that period of time, you know.  But I think we left there before I was four years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You, do you have any memories of--do you remember the statue [Lifting the Veil of Ignorance] out there on the, near the center of the campus [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Oh, that wasn't there at that time.
Speaker 1: Oh, it wasn't?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: The statue of Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: That came later (laughter).
Speaker 1: The one of Booker T. Washington (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  And--
Speaker 1: --either uncovering black people or covering them up--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --one of the two.  There's a debate--
Speaker 2: Now that was--
Speaker 1: --about what's he was doing, you know.
Speaker 2: That was, I was, that was, that came after my time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was George Washington Carver on campus when you were there, do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't recall that, that was--
Speaker 1: Now I think he probably was there you just didn't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He probably was there but I didn't know about that, no.
Speaker 1: Did your--
Speaker 2: He was probably there.
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Maude McCloud Hayden and Charles Hayden] have any stories about Tuskegee in those days 'cause you're, let's just say--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we haven't said this yet but your--what capacity was your father serving in?
Speaker 2: He was chaplain there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the time.  He was a chaplain there at the time, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's a big responsibility on that campus.
Speaker 2: And as far as I know, I was born in the, what they called the infirmary (laughter) on the campus.  I was born on the campus, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, I've seen the infirmary at--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --Tuskegee.  It's no longer in use, I believe but it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the building is still, was still there a few years ago.
Speaker 2: But as far as I can ascertain, I think that the, you know, see I'm seventy-eight years old now so that was, that statue came after I was, after we left there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your father ever talk about those days at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Oh, a little.  And here again, the black population wasn't too big at that time, in Tuskegee.  The school population I suppose was larger than the city population at the time.  And they, again, that was part of his outreach program, circuit rider, part of that 'cause the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church there was very small.
Speaker 1: Did, I was wondering if your father ever taught or mother ever told stories about some of the personalities on Tuskegee's campus, or if they considered that experience special because of George Washington Carver or P.H. Polk or any of them?
Speaker 2: No, actually my parents expected us to learn by looking and listening.  You can learn a lot from those older people by looking at them and listening to them when they talk.  So they, they didn't talk too much about those people who were in the forefront of anything because again, you were expected when the mantle fell on you that's what you were expected to do.  This is not something that you were elected to do, you were expected to do certain things because you were capable, see.  I wish we could go back to that.
Story_ID: 579808
Speaker 1: Where did your parents [Maude McCloud Hayden and Charles Hayden] move when you were three or four, now where did they move from Tuskegee [Alabama] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was given a church in Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's where my younger brother was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, this is about 1930 or so?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--he was born in 1929, my younger brother was born in 1929.
Speaker 1: In Mobile?
Speaker 2: In Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you all, Mobile, Alabama.  Now do you have any memories of Mobile?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  He wasn't there too long either.
Speaker 1: That's down on the Gulf [Gulf of Mexico] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I started going to school there, I know that.  Usually my mother always got into the school system wherever he was moved to, that was nothing unusual because teachers were always needed.  So whenever she moved into, he was moved to a new neighborhood, a new town, she had no problem getting a job as far as teaching was concerned, yeah.  We didn't have that many learned teachers.  Our, you could attribute that to the fact that most teachers during my elementary days were not, some may not have been high school graduates, let alone talking about college graduates.  So if you were adept, you were taught, you would teach.  And then like most of the teachers of that era, once they had finished their teaching they went to school to get the formal piece of paper by getting their degrees.  And they used their tenure as teachers as credits to get their degrees from accredited colleges.  Not a high school diploma because some of them never had high school diplomas.  If they were good at what they, adept at what they learned and could teach others, they were made teachers, that's, the mantle fell on them as teachers.  Teach you what I know and what I've learned and then they went on to get the formal education as much as they could.  In the later years they could take high school, colleges, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your, both your parents were working and you had all these brothers and sisters at home--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I suppose some of them may have not been there by the time you were coming along, I don't know, right?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Or was everybody, all ten at home?
Speaker 2: --the family was close-knit, it stayed together for quite some time, as far as I know.  The older sister, Vernon [Vernon Hayden Howell], moved here to Fort Wayne [Indiana] in 1926, the year I was born.  She moved here and stayed thereafter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is she a link to, well, why you're here now or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Definitely.  And then I had an uncle that pastored the local A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church from 1931 to 1933.
Speaker 1: Here in Fort Wayne?
Speaker 2: Here in Fort Wayne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I would come from Birmingham [Alabama] or wherever we were living at that point in time.  I lived all over Alabama, Troy [Alabama], Mobile, Tuskegee, Birmingham, Bessemer [Alabama], wherever my father was sent.
Speaker 1: Tell me, well, what was it, hard, to be moved around like that all the time, or did it just make the family more cohesive or--
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't, I never thought of it as being hard.  It, to us, it was a new adventure, going to a new place, new school, new friends.  And during those formative years, we kept in touch.  I would go back often to visit some of the churches that we, my dad had pastored to renew friendships and so forth.  It was interesting to do that.  So, no, it wasn't a hardship at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, it was like I said it was, we were expected to do that and adapt and wherever dad was going, you go, you know what to do.
Story_ID: 579809
Speaker 1: What you're saying is that, what I keep hearing you say over and over again is that this experience with your father [Charles Hayden] as a pastor of the church and tagging along with him was a socializing, a great socializing experience for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for you.
Speaker 2: And he was a fixer and we moved often to churches that had difficulties, I didn't say problems, difficulties, he was a fixer.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any of the problems he had to fix?  Were there any stories?  I know I've heard some church stories around.
Speaker 2: Well normally, a church gets out of hand when certain people within the church take charge, literally.  And at that time the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church hierarchy didn't take kindly to that sort of thing because that was not what the church was all about.  If a church had financial problems, and, of course, they all mostly did, some of 'em had real problems, financial problems.  He would go in and fix it.  If their church needs to be rebuilt, he'd build one.  As far as I know, he built three or four churches during our tenure, or went in and finished building one, boosting the membership and whatever, yeah.
Story_ID: 579810
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, and I realize you grew up in a variety of places--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but they were mostly in the South and you said mostly in Alabama--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but can you describe for us some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Troy, Alabama was a real thing for us.  Small town, very small, at that point in time the church had just been rebuilt.  I don't know why my father [Charles Hayden] was moved there but it was interesting because there were a lot of young people and we went and that was one of the great experiences for me to go into a church where there were lots of young people.  By their own volition, it wasn't like you have to do this but the previous pastor, I guess, was, had programs that interested the young people.  My father always, his first initiative was young people, always take care of their needs, the young people, because that's the basis for the church.  And Troy was one of my great experiences.  The other one was St. Luke [St. Luke A.M.E. Church] on 21st Avenue in Birmingham, Alabama in the early '40s [1940s].  Great, large church, big playground, big ground, that's all.  Big ground, it wasn't long before we had utilized that ground for what it could be and that was a big basketball court on the far end of it, two tennis courts, and then the big grassy area for other playground games.  The church sat on one side of the city square block and the parsonage sat on the other side and all of this expanse in between it, he put, my dad put it to work.  That ground was always full of children, always full of children.  He made room for them.
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story, I mean, you know, that's 'cause I know a lot of places even today when you go to, they don't have any--there's hardly anything for kids to do--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the neighborhood, in the poorer neighborhoods.
Speaker 2: And you could play basketball and we had tennis courts, you know, unheard of, we had two tennis courts.  I don't know what kind of equipment they had but (laughter) we had it.
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to play tennis?
Speaker 2: I never did learn how to play tennis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just getting into high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] and the war [World War II, WWII] was starting so I never learned to play tennis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Baseball was the black thing in that place.  Piper Davis, the old baseball player, was a member of the church, and I recall the, even the manager, I think.  One of the steel companies, I'm not sure which one, Stockham, Stockham Pipe Company [sic. AMERICAN Cast Iron Pipe Company, Birmingham, Alabama] it was, had a baseball team, a black baseball team, and I think they turned into the Birmingham Black Barons.  I believe that team turned into the Black Barons, eventually.  So I knew some of those guys.  But they were members, some of the team members were members of St. Luke A.M.E. Church, there on the corner of 21st Avenue.
Speaker 1: Wow, a lot of great black baseball players came out of Alabama.
Speaker 2: Out of Alabama.  Mays, Willie Mays (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Willie Mays, right.
Speaker 2: Some of the others.  But I recall Piper Davis for one.
Speaker 1: Now what did Piper Davis play, I mean, what position?
Speaker 2: I don't recall exactly what position but I believe he was a first baseman 'cause he was tall and lanky and I think he pitched for a little while too.  But he played with Stockham Pipe shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you see a lot of baseball games (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I saw some of 'em, yes.  They played, I'm trying to think of the name of the field, what was that field called out on 1st Avenue South, can't remember the name of it, but we played, they played at that field, the same field that the white teams played.  I don't know what the white teams name was but I know the Black Barons is what they were called, the Birmingham Black Barons.
Speaker 1: You ever hear of [HistoryMaker] Henry Presswood?
Speaker 2: Sounds familiar.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he played for Birmingham, later on at one time.  We interviewed him in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: He might have been the catcher [sic.].  But, 'cause Willie Mays came out of Brighton [Brighton High School, Brighton, Alabama] or Fairfield [Fairfield Industrial High School, Fairfield, Alabama] one of the high schools there.  That was quite a thing for me, those two places.
Story_ID: 579811
Speaker 1: Now did you play baseball when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: I did not play baseball.  I played football (laughter).  I played football.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Quarterback, I was the quarterback in football.  And it's really funny because at the time we had a guy on our team whose name was Nick [ph.], oh, I can't think of it, Barnes [ph.] maybe, and Nick weighed 192 pounds, and we called him Big Nick .  And we thought, and nowadays 192 pounds you would be a scatback (laughter).  Nick wouldn't make it in this day and age, the guys that are at 350, and these are high school players, but in my day Big Nick was his name, 190, I weighed 130.
Speaker 1: And you're playing football?
Speaker 2: Playing football, and we were tough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You would have been in high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: So now this is when you were in--
Speaker 2: Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: --Birmingham, okay.  All right.  Can you tell us now, how would you describe yourself as a little kid?  I mean, as a kid growing up, I mean, what kind of personality did you have, what did you like, what did you dislike, you know?
Speaker 2: We had a good life as a loving household, as many kids as we had, we always had extra kids, always.  The house there on 21st Avenue, my dad [Charles Hayden] built a sun porch because we'd have three or four kids every night sleeping on the porch.  Come over and play, run home and ask mother, can they stay, and they'd come back.  And so it was a fun time for me.  We were well taken care of.  Now were we rich?  No.  I would say we had better things going for us than I would say 90 percent of the rest of the children.  Mother [Maude McCloud Hayden] and father, educated people.  One of the most prestigious jobs that a black could have in the city at that time was being a minister, and a teacher, as a parent, as parents.  So we did well.  We did well.  And it was, the times of the year that we lived there in Birmingham and what was going on throughout the South at this time did not really affect us per se, except that we abided by the law until the time came when we made it known that the law was wrong.
Story_ID: 579812
Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back to school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your grade school and--
Speaker 2: My grade school was Hudson Elementary [Bertram A. Hudson Negro Elementary School; Bertram A. Hudson K-8 School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And that's in Birmingham [Alabama], right?
Speaker 2: In Birmingham.  And my high school was the biggest and largest school in the country, Parker High [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: That's the biggest and largest--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --high school in the county?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: And this is an all-black high school?
Speaker 2: All-black.  The only, at that time, high school in Birmingham.
Speaker 1: Well the only black high school in Birmingham, right?
Speaker 2: Well, there were two.  There was a Catholic black school, black Catholic school on the south side, but Parker High was the only public school.
Speaker 1: Period?
Speaker 2: Period.
Speaker 1: The white people didn't have a--did they have a high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had plenty of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I'm just asking.  I was asking, just trying to get it clear.
Speaker 2: They had plenty of 'em.
Speaker 1: But there was one for the black population of Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Period.
Speaker 1: Now, let's explore the significance of this because I would guess, now you have to tell me 'cause you were there, I would guess black folks in Birmingham would have been at least half the population?
Speaker 2: At that particular time, that might have been true.  But consider one other thing that the county schools also had large population like Brighton [Brighton High School, Brighton, Alabama], there was Fairfield [Fairfield Industrial High School, Fairfield, Alabama], there was Ensley [Ensley High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  And so those were out of the city perimeters, limits, and they were also large population, large in population.
Speaker 1: And so there was this big black population in many of the suburbs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I don't know what--
Speaker 1: --the surrounding area.
Speaker 2: --I, you know, what that was something that never came as a factor to me at the time, I, just something I didn't have to worry about or bother about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you said there were many white high schools in Birmingham--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --but Parker was the biggest one.
Speaker 2: Biggest school, period, yes.
Speaker 1: Biggest school, period.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And was it overcrowded?
Speaker 2: Never.  We had, I think, one or two feeder schools like we have nowadays, you know, you have what do they call, not elementary school, when they're passed that stage, you see, you--
Speaker 1: A junior high?
Speaker 2: A junior high school.  We had, I think, two of them and they were practically next door.  You see, so that Parker High was quite a school.
Speaker 1: How many students would you guess were in Parker High then?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Over there are two pictures that you could take a look at (unclear).  My class, we graduated every two classes, January and June.  I can't remember how many was in my class.
Speaker 1: Was it over a couple hundred or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  We could take a look at that later (laughter).  I--
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to get a sense of what size it might be in terms of, you know, a large school, I guess, in Chicago [Illinois] today would be two thousand, 2500 students, maybe, you know, three thousand students.  I don't know, was it anything near that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter) oh, yes, oh, yes.  I'm trying to think.  You're thinking about three or four hundred in a class, graduating class, almost a thousand kids every year, graduating two classes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that, you know, we have to take in account those who didn't get that far, you know.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: May have dropped out--
Story_ID: 579813
Speaker 1: And when you were in high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], World War II [WWII] was going on, right?  If I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 2: Had--had just begun, World War II had just begun.  Well no, not really, '38 [1938], '39 [1939], is when Germany started their thing.  We steadily became more involved in that, 1940, '39 [1939], and '40 [1940].  And then Pearl Harbor in '41 [1941] we really became involved in both theaters of war in the South Pacific and the European theater.
Speaker 1: So in '41 [1941] you would have been what, fourteen or fifteen?
Speaker 2: Oh, about fifteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifteen, fifteen.
Speaker 2: I graduated in '44 [1944] so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was eighteen when I graduated, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you would have been fifteen--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess.
Speaker 2: We were living in Bessemer [Alabama] in '41 [1941].  My father [Charles Hayden] had been moved to Bessemer in '41 [1941].  And--
Speaker 1: Now I wanna pick back up with this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --then I wanna go back maybe a little bit further and talk.  Were there any teachers in grade school or in high school that really looked out for your interests or thought you were special or had a special relationship with you as a mentor?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As I said, I went to Hudson School [Bertram A. Hudson Negro Elementary School; Bertram A. Hudson K-8 School] in north Birmingham [Alabama].  And I have to think that that was--the principal at Hudson was Professor Hudson [Bertram A. Hudson] (laughter).  So he took an interest, early interest in me and my younger brother at the same time, yeah, and I recall him doing that.  So he was special to me for a while there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: So was the school named after him?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I really believe Hudson was named after him.  See they built that school, and it's elementary, that was the elementary school.  And as I recall in previous years, because I had been in that neighborhood some years before that, it was just a clapboard building, then they built this new school, it's brick.  Hudson was retiring and I think that's when they named it after him.  He was, he had been a long time teacher too from what I understand.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a long time.
Speaker 1: All right.  So anyone in high school that you can think of?
Speaker 2: Well Professor Sheehy, my chemistry teacher.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think it's spelled S-H-E-E-H-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sheehy.
Speaker 2: Sheehy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now I think there was a, it's funny, there was a basketball player in Dayton [Ohio] who won the state championship named John Sheehy.
Speaker 2: Sheehy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But then it was Sheehy--
Speaker 2: It was Sheehy, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Professor Sheehy.  And he was my chemistry teacher, and he taught us a lot of things.  He used to make things there, dyes and so forth, showed us some real pertinent things like how things were made and what you could make out of certain things and what you could do with certain things, with chemicals, what you can do with them, you know, make things out of 'em, basically.
Story_ID: 579814
Speaker 1: You were telling us about Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], A.H. Parker. Said it was interest- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, A.H. Parker.  The school was named after A.H. Parker [Arthur Harold Parker].  Before that it was called, well, the previous history it was called something else, but it was also called Industrial High [Industrial High School; A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  Again, back to the Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] thing we were taught to use our hands, tailoring, printing, shop, automobile, those kind of things.  And it had, that portion of the curriculum had a separate building to house that and a separate building entirely, rather than the academic side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And basically all of the boys were required to go through what we call shop.  You either took printing, tailoring, automobile, mechanics, or woodworking, carpentry.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked, I took the printing when I was there as far as that goes but my favorite subject was chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: And you were just talking about how your professor--
Speaker 2: Sheehy.
Speaker 1: --Sheehy--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --was like Mr. Wizard, I guess, on the TV, she [sic.] was always explaining--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the ways things work.
Speaker 2: Made things relevant, you know, for instance.  This is what you can do with this if you learn how to do this, this is what you can do with it.  It's not learning mathematics or trigonometry, but what can I do with trigonometry, you know.  I know trig, show me what can I do with this now that I learned it.  And I think that was one of the things why most of us took to the shop part because here's something I know what I can do with.  And it was later, some later years but and I look at the kids books nowadays and you can tell that they are taught what to do with what you're learning, you see.  Not just math, what can you do with these numbers when you crunch numbers, what can you really do with them?  What can they tell you?  Not two plus two is four, so what?
Speaker 1: Now did you have any memorable chemical experiments when you were a young man?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter) well making dyes.  I learned how to make dye, different types of dyes and how to color them.  That was interesting.  You, dyes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you make dyes out of?  I mean, you know, most people buy 'em at the store but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you actually learned how to make some dyes?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Now what--
Speaker 2: --using certain chemicals already there in the lab.
Speaker 1: What, for instance, give us an example of--
Speaker 2: I don't remember though all the components of it all but how baradium [sic. barium] which was, it, that was purple, there was one chemical that was purple, now you could use that chemical, dilute it, add certain other chemicals to it to make different colors, you see.  And the components, how you did it and how you mixed them to do that.  I also learned something about that in the printing business, how to mix colors to make other colors.  There are formulas that you can do it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: An ounce of this, couple ounces of white, couple ounces of yellow, some blue, and you come up with green, different shades of green, you can make any, the spectrum of colors is practically endless.
Speaker 1: Now did you do any printing in high school at all?
Speaker 2: I did, the old letterpress, handset type, in a chase, lock it in, print it.
Speaker 1: Now you all were using handset type?  This is something that--now we live in an age today--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in 2005 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We don't do it that way--
Speaker 1: You know, we--
Speaker 2: --any more--
Speaker 1: --you know, just use a computer program and type with Microsoft Word or--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --and we print the whole thing out it looks the same way, it looks the same way on the screen.  You had to actually set the type, each letter--
Speaker 2: For each letter.
Speaker 1: --and to spell out each word.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did you have like a linotype machine or did you have to do it by hand?
Speaker 2: No.  That was later (laughter).  That was a modern machine.  That big clunker (laughter).  No, we simply handset typed.  Everything was handset in school.  Later on, the newspapers were using linotype, lead, hot lead, type it in, cast it, same thing, but they were using the same thing only on a larger scale, the newspapers.
Story_ID: 579815
Speaker 1: You played football.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right?  And you were the quarterback.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the leadership position on the team.
Speaker 2: Right, at that time.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And who did Parker [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] play?  Did they play the other black schools around the area?  'Cause I assume now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you'll have to tell me 'cause you were playing then that you didn't play the white schools?  Didn't--
Speaker 2: No, no we didn't play the white schools.  We played--and each time I go to Nashville [Tennessee], I hear that Pearl High [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School] in Nashville was supposed to be tough also because that's a large city, it's an academic city too by the way.  And we went up there and clobbered them, eighty to nothing or whatever.  Knoxville [Tennessee], they even imported teams from Texas, we beat them to death.  In fact, we were so good we played Alabama State Teachers [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] Hornets and Tuskegee's [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] junior squad and we beat them.  No one could do that.  I mean, if you could not get a team from what you had there at Parker High, you didn't have to be a coach 'cause it was--basically I worked my way up, second year I became the first string quarterback, behind Arthur Harrell [ph.].  And seldom would the first team play more than three or four minutes, seldom.
Speaker 1: Because they would be, they would be in the lead that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that quickly?
Speaker 2: That quick.  We would, well most of the schools that came to play, we played in Legion Field [Birmingham, Alabama], if you were familiar with that, Legion Field is a bowl nowadays, and when we played it was only one side that was really high, and then the visitors team was kind of low, but it, the Legion Field in Birmingham is now a full bowl, I don't think they call it Legion Field anymore, I think they've given it a name, somebody's bought it, you know, how that goes, advertising.  But that's where we played all of our games.  And we suited up ninety-nine men (laughter).
Speaker 1: A ninety-nine man football team?
Speaker 2: By the time the last man came out of the dugout, the first man was sitting on the bench, they would, you would run all the way around the field, and by the time the last man came out of the dugout to run around the field the bench was full.  And so we went out and ran up the score, and by the second quarter, I was dressed, had a shower, and I was back on the bench.
Speaker 1: Dressed and with a shower?
Speaker 2: We beat teams 120 to nothing, ninety-nine to nothing, eighty-eight to nothing, it was nothing unusual.  We were good.
Speaker 1: So it was unusual for those days to have that many players?
Speaker 2: No, but that's what it was.  We suited up ninety-nine men, and during the course of the year, every man was gonna play a full quarter at least, and we only played eight minute quarters in those days.  We just played thirty-two minutes, those days.  That's all we played.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It wasn't fifteen minute quarters, we didn't, that was unheard of.
Speaker 1: Now did--were you all throwing very many passes in those days?
Speaker 2: Cloud of dust (laughter).  No, we didn't do very much passing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wondered because, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --football has evolved to this big passing game now but I--
Speaker 2: No.  Single wing to the right and a cloud of dust.  Brute force, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: What were your school colors?
Speaker 2: Purple and white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, did you ever run for class officer or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  I did not.
Speaker 1: Were you a popular student or--
Speaker 2: All of the football players were popular (laughter).  We were celebrities really, all ninety-nine.  Our coach, Yak Collins [A.D. Yak Collins], and Major Brown.
Speaker 1: Yak?
Speaker 2: Yak.
Speaker 1: Yak?
Speaker 2: Y-A-K--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Collins and Major Brown.  Major Brown, I'm not sure which school he went to, he went to an Ivy League school, but Major Brown was an All-American.  And Yak Collins was the head coach, Major Brown was the assistant coach.  And they were good, they were good.  They were my favorite people, I tell you.  Really tough.  I learned a lot from 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not just how to play football.  Because you would think that the team that could whomp somebody like that, you would get a big head, and we never got a big head, we were good.  And you have to understand that's what he taught us, to be good, that's what we did.  And they imported a team out of, I believe, it was Richmond, Virginia, and they thought they had a good team, they thought they could beat us, and we clobbered them too, something terrible, something terrible.
Speaker 1: So did you all ever lose a game when you were there?
Speaker 2: We did not lose a game during my three years, did not lose a game in my three years, yeah.
Story_ID: 579816
Speaker 1: So I suppose, did you all have like a prom and all that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yes, senior class.  That was a big deal, very big deal.  That was the time when both classes, you see you had a graduating class in January and you had a graduating class in June, but the prom, senior prom was always held in June, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, but when you were on the verge of graduation [from A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama] was it, I mean, did you know you were going to college, or where did you think you were, well what did you think you were--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I had definitely decided to go to college here.  That was the first thing on my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, had you made a choice?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I had already made the choice.  I was, I, you know, I wasn't going to play football in college, that wasn't what I was coming here for.  The fact is, there's an interesting story about that.  My last year of school, '44 [1944], my sister, my older sister [Vernon Hayden Howell], said, "Why don't you come here [Fort Wayne, Indiana] and finish high school."  I said, "Okay."  So I came here and worked that summer at Phelps Dodge [Phelps Dodge Magnet Wire Company, Fort Wayne, Indiana], and before, so, school opened, of course, they had football practice.  So I went down to the gym and drew a uniform and got on the truck, we were practicing out at Trier's Park [Trier's Amusement Park; Swinney Park, Fort Wayne, Indiana] at the time.  And I went out there with the team and we practiced, and then Coach Mendenhall was the coach at the time, Murray Mendenhall, and Bobby Milton, Joe Biggs, Sam, what's that boy's name, Sam Simms, bunch of the guys were out there playing and I said--they were yakking and being a bunch of hee haws and laughing and carrying, what is this?  So I, they were running some plays lackadaisically, you know, the first team.  And I told the coach, I said, "Coach, let me see if I can run that team for you the right way."  "Oh, I'll let you get in," I said, "Well, okay."  And I asked him a couple of times and he didn't so, like we were on the bus back, truck back home, back to the school, I jumped off of that truck went downstairs, shed that uniform, and said goodbye, two hours later I was on a bus to Birmingham [Alabama].  I said, "I'm gonna play football (laughter) my last year, messing around with these clowns here."  'Cause if we had bought our fifth team or sixth team up here, and take, we would run Central [Fort Wayne Central High School, Fort Wayne, Indiana] out of town (laughter).  That was the kind of football they played, you know.  So that's, I went to Central High School here one day, and not really, and you can't say I went to school that day, I just went and drew a uniform and left the same day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that experiment, it failed.
Speaker 2: No way that's--
Speaker 1: Now what college had you decided to go to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to IU Extension [Indiana University Extension Center; Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Fort Wayne, Indiana] here on Barr Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to college here in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Fort Wayne?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And at the Illinois, I mean--
Speaker 2: Indiana.
Speaker 1: --Indiana University Extension?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was when it was just Indiana University Extension on Barr Street.
Speaker 1: Now how did your, how did your parents [Maude McCloud Hayden and Charles Hayden] feel about that, how did your father feel about that?
Speaker 2: My father, that's an interesting story.
Speaker 1: Did he want you to go--
Speaker 2: Da, da, da, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --Alcorn [Alcorn Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] or Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: No.  He wanted me to go to Miles [Miles College, Fairfield, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Miles.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now is Miles an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school?  It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 579817
Speaker 1: When I came home from the prom that night, that night, about one o'clock in the morning, he [Hayden's father, Charles Hayden] was sitting on the porch rocking, you know.  And I came home, he says, "I wanna talk to you," I said okay.  We sat on the porch, there was two rockers there on the porch him and hers, you know.  And he says, "You don't have to go to the [U.S.] Army."  He said, "I can get you deferred."  And he said, "I could get you enrolled in school, and you don't have to go to the Army," he said, "you can be a minister."  Of all the boys my dad had, he didn't have a minister.
Speaker 2: Was it, that had to be troubling for him because his great-grand, his grandfather [Charles Hayden] had been a minister, his father [Charles Hayden] had been a minister, he was a minister, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, it might have been troubling for him.
Speaker 2: And not a single one?
Speaker 1: Not a single boy, and there were eight of us, eight.  Now there was one that preached, wasn't a minister, so he picked me.  I had good grades and I pleaded with him, I told him, "Dad, I know how you feel but I don't wanna go through what you've gone through.  I don't think I can handle it and come out like you."
Speaker 2: Now what did you mean by that, what did you mean by that?
Speaker 1: In all of the years I had watched him operate, that's what I called it, he did things, took care of things, all the time.  One thing that always bothered me is on Monday morning he'd come in there early and wake us up, "You, Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Theodore Hayden]," I said oh, no, I knew what was going on, somebody had got into trouble and he bailed 'em out so they could go to work Monday.  That means I didn't have carfare to ride the bus to school.  I had to hike it over that mountain the rest of the week, you know.  But that, we did it.  And we knew what was happening, what was going on.  And like you said he was a fixer, and there was always some little problem going on at the church or he was gonna move to another church and da, di, da.  And I just didn't think I could handle people that well, (laughter) you know.  I, he could have been in any other profession, he could have been quite a force, could have made a lot of money because he was well educated.  And I thought, oh, you kind of mistreated us I thought over the years, but later he gave me something that you can't equate with money.  And I can do whatever I decided to do.  And I can.  And I've had that now, tried to instill my kids with it.  And, of course, you don't always succeed.  Now, my grandfather, my father, would have been very proud of some of his grandchildren and I have two ministers (laughter).  So it didn't go for naught, I have two.
Speaker 2: So did you, was it just the economic factor or did you feel like you really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought it was later on, but that soon dispelled because I found out that after I got out on my own, I had no problem making my own way because I had been taught how to do that.  That goes back to the time when this guy told me his kid was home from school, from school and he was gonna work, drive a truck all summer, and he would call me in the winter, I said um-hm, forget it.  So I haven't worked for anybody else since.
Speaker 2: But you didn't feel, you didn't feel like any calling to be a minister at all, you didn't really feel that was a--
Speaker 1: Although I'm heavily involved in church.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I thought it probably would have been since all this tradition, you know, you probably would have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but none, pfft.
Story_ID: 579818
Speaker 1: The war [World War II, WWII] was drawing to a close, I guess, when you graduated?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944], uh-uh.
Speaker 1: It was about, it had about a year to go.
Speaker 2: Ehh, two years.
Speaker 1: Two years?
Speaker 2: In fact, it was really ugly.  See when I was drafted [into the U.S. Army] in early '45 [1945], April of '45 [1945] right after, was it April of '45 [1945], yeah, right after President Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] died, Truman [President Harry S. Truman] came in, I was shipped out to Fort Lewis, Washington [Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington], stayed there for almost a year, they went sent a lot of boys from here overseas.  I was, the second day, I never took any basic training.
Speaker 1: No?  I mean, how, how did that occur that you didn't?
Speaker 2: Well we were lined up there and the guy said, "Any of you guys know anything about running an office and can type?"  (Raises hand) Blacks didn't know how to run typewriters, usually you weren't taught, men, but you see in high school, at Parker High [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], there was a lady that made an impression on me.  I never could write legibly, never could.  So I took typing from Mrs. Ruth Hawkins, and I was the only boy in the class, the only boy that she ever had 'cause all the girls took typing so they could work in BTW Insurance Company [Booker T. Washington Insurance Company] in downtown Birmingham [Alabama], Percy Washington Insurance Company [sic.], and other little businesses that need someone who could type, but I learned typing.  And so I held up my hand and I was made a company clerk one day, and the next day I was a sergeant.
Speaker 1: And it all happened pretty fast that sounds.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I never took any real basic training, so I stayed at Fort Lewis, Washington for quite some time, shipped all my guys out, they'd come through, see me, and go on overseas whichever way south and to Europe.  And I applied for OCS [Officer Candidate School] and they refused, "You can't go to OCS."  So one time inspector general came around, he was a sergeant major and I told him my story, I said, "I want out of here."  "What do you wanna do?"  I said, "I want out of here," well he said okay.  Of course they won't let me go to OCS.  They sent me out, they sent me out to Japan.  So when I got there the war got, finally got over, and when the war finally got over, I'm ready to come home, my name is on the list, I got points and I got everything and I didn't have it.  And so when I, you know, I had enough points to get out, didn't have it.  My name's not on the list, what's wrong with you, why can't I get out of here.  Well, they have this little Army thing, we can keep you as long as you're needed.
Story_ID: 579819
Speaker 1: And then they [the U.S. Army] came up with this idea, okay, we'll send you up to Sendai [Japan] and when you come back, you'll be a first lieutenant, I said, "Thank you but no thanks.  I've got enough points and time to get out, I'm outta here, okay."  So they kept me two rotations before they allowed me to come home.  When I wanted to go to OCS [Officer Candidate School], black officers were rare.  I had the wherewithal but I, they wouldn't let me get in.
Speaker 2: Do you think that things were starting to change then, to--
Speaker 1: Of course, they were changing because the airmen were over there at the time, Tuskegee Airmen were over there at the time and they were all officers.  They weren't recognized, that was a, on the 92nd [sic.] was an officer, they had some black officers see.  So that was, oh, what's his name?  The [U.S.] Air Force general--
Speaker 2: Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Not Chappie.
Speaker 2: Benjamin--
Speaker 1: Benjamin--
Speaker 2: --Davis.
Speaker 1: ---Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.].  His dad [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.] was a general.  Benjamin, well 'cause he was a brigadier, when I knew him he was a brigadier general but his dad was a full general.  And so they were the only two people you could really look up to, the rest of the guys weren't officers.  My brother, Andrew [Andrew Hayden], was a warrant officer, now that's a top sergeant actually.  And so things were kind of ugly.  But I wanted out and I finally got out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my outfit, at that time the war [World War II, WWII] was winding down and they were sending recruits in, right now, they were only staying in eighteen months, so instead of training, sending them to six months or nine months training, they sent them right into a unit and trained in the unit.  And so when the Korean War broke out, my former outfit went over and was cannon fodder, they lost over 85 percent of 'em.  Untrained, not enough officers, the whole bit.  That was a devastating thing for me personally.
Speaker 2: What, what was the name of your unit?
Speaker 1: 1692nd Combat Engineers [1692nd Engineer Combat Battalion].  Actually the 1st Cal- actually units of the 1st Cavalry Division, which was black, Muleskinners.  That's where the 1st Cavalry Division came from.  And I had some of those old guys in my outfit, regular Army men could have been my grandfather.
Speaker 2: They had started as Muleskinners then--
Speaker 1: They were Muleskinners, that's what they were called, Muleskinners, because that's what they used to pull those caissons, mules.  And that was the 1st Cav- that's where the 1st Cavalry Division came out of.  It was a black unit.  You don't see that, believe me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So when you came back to the states did--
Speaker 1: Went back to school.  I started my premed work in '44 [1944], yeah, '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, now you came, you started, did you start here before you went to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Army.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Before you went to the Army and then--
Speaker 1: I got one year in.
Speaker 2: --came back and--
Speaker 1: Got another year in, then I met that lady [Ernestine Thomas Hayden] and end of that story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well tell us about her, you know, too.
Speaker 1: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 2: Who is that lady and--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, we were in school together at IU [Indiana University Extension Center; Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Fort Wayne, Indiana].  She went to school there and I did too.  And we had this relationship, and it grew, it grew, and so we decided to make it that, and that's what happened, we started that.  We got married in 1947.  And when, I think, what is it now, 58, 59, it's, I don't know, almost 60 years, it's coming up pretty quick, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We had our fifty-fifth, fiftieth in '97 [1997].  And then we had the fifty-fifth, did we do anything?  In '92 [1992], I don't know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 2007 would be the sixtieth.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, a couple of years from now.
Story_ID: 579820
Speaker 1: You were telling us off-camera about some of the crises in the [U.S.] Army here that you know about, and just tell us that story.
Speaker 2: Well, while I was in Fort Lewis, Washington [Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington] and the war [World War II, WWII] was winding down there in Europe, they were shipping the black soldiers to Fort Lewis, Washington, past home for most of them, to Fort Lewis, Washington, on the West Coast, and ready to send them to the South Pacific to wind that--
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is they were coming in on the East Coast, then they were flying 'em out to Fort Lewis, Washington?
Speaker 2: No, train.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Train.
Speaker 1: By train, okay.
Speaker 2: Train.
Speaker 1: All right.  And then, then they would, then from there they were shipping them out to South--
Speaker 2: Right, right to South Pacific.
Speaker 1: When they should have been going home?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So they were flying out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't, they didn't--
Speaker 1: --and they were going right past home.
Speaker 2: They bypassed home, for the most part bypassed home, right off the boat, onto a train, right across this country in three days.
Speaker 1: And we're talking about the still segregated units, right--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That is correct.  And so they shipped them out there and they were supposed to get leave and didn't get them, didn't give them the leave and when they found out they weren't getting relieved they did go into the riot mode, shot poor Fort Lewis, Washington up.  And then they gave 'em leave.  So when they came back, that's when I got out of Fort Lewis, Washington, we went down to San Francisco [California] and to Hawaii and then to Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we got to Japan, my unit got to Japan and we built the air base there in Yokohama [Japan] in jig time.  Then we went up into Sendai [Japan] and built another air base up there, just right outside of Vladivostok, Russia.  In a clear day you could see it.  Not too cool (laughter).  So I spent quite some time as an army occupation force in Japan right after the armistice.
Story_ID: 579821
Speaker 1: We were saying, when you came back you resumed school.
Speaker 2: Yes, I went back and finished my pre-med school and met that young lady [Ernestine Thomas Hayden] and then that's when we decided okay, let's get married, and we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, I didn't finish the pre-med work and again, well I have credits and I have checked out here that IU [Indiana University Extension Center; Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne, Fort Wayne, Indiana] just recently, I need about three hours, then I could get a B.A. and so with my experience as a businessperson, di, da, di, da.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you wanted, did you wanna be a doctor in those days?
Speaker 2: I did, yes.  I was well on my way to being a doctor.  Had finished my pre-med work and the next thing to do was to go down there to Bloomington [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Now what happened that you didn't finish it?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, met (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know you got married and--
Speaker 2: Met the young lady, and hey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you started a family and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you do for a living when you were--
Speaker 2: Well, I went to work for this plumbing company, and that's when he did that thing, that number on me, and I went to work then for another black entrepreneur here in the city, Charles Wallace.
Speaker 1: Now, tell that story now, 'cause you told it off-camera but what happened and why did you, how did you lose that plumbing job?
Speaker 2: Oh, the owner of the plumbing company, Saturday morning I was loading the tractor to take some orders up north, and he came out and said that, well his son was coming back from school, he went to IU, and he was gonna drive the truck all summer and he would call me in the fall when his son went back to work, went back to school.  At that point in time I think I had three kids, my oldest daughter, and then twins [Ronald Hayden and Donald Hayden] came along, so I had three kids at the time.  And I said, "Okay.  Thank you.  I'll take my money now."  He said, "Oh, I'll pay you next week."  "No, give it to me now."  And when he paid me, I said, "Don't bother calling me in the fall, I won't be available."  So that was the last time I had a formal job.  I only take a job then, the next time I would work for somebody, it wasn't the fact that I was working for you if anything I was just gonna get a stake 'til I can get into something.  See, I can't have people telling me when to go and come.
Speaker 1: So well, what did you get involved in immediately after that job?  I mean, did you have any prospects (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I went to work for another young black entrepreneur here in town, Charles Wallace, he was another guy who never worked for anyone.  He just didn't like the idea of working for anybody else.  And he had a star route, if you know what a star route is, that's what the post office puts up for bid where you can hire, buy yourself a truck and you deliver mail to nearby towns on a regular basis.  And I drove his truck for a couple of years and he had some other little businesses, I would drive the truck up north in the morning, come back and work, do some work for him, he had cleaning services and he had catering services, he had a limousine service, he had a lot of little things going in, he needed someone like me to, that he could trust to go do it, and I did.  So I'd come back, work with him during the day, and drive the truck back up, pick up the mail on the way back at night.  So, and worked for him quite a while until I could get a stake, and that's when I, let's see I worked at GE [General Electric] for a little bit, just long enough to get a stake to try something.  Finally when I got enough, okay, here I go.  Bought that company, the greeting card company, and I thought the people were charging me too much to process my greeting cards, that's when I learned to be a printer.
Speaker 1: Now what year is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All of this stuff began, this stuff began shortly after '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.  The--
Speaker 2: 'Cause between--
Speaker 1: So the plumbing job was what, about what year was--
Speaker 2: About--the plumbing job was in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, no '49 [1949] to '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I worked at GE a couple of weeks, a couple of years, no about a year and a half, from '50 [1950] to '52 [1952], that's when they laid off everybody.  Everything went bust in the early '50s [1950s], I don't, you wouldn't remember about that (laughter) but I do.  Everything went bust in the '50s [1950s] and then I started driving a truck over the road.
Speaker 1: Charles Wallace, okay.  That's from '52 [1952] to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --about '60 [1960]?
Speaker 2: Into '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's when I was contacted by this consortium out of Buffalo, New York.  A bunch of guys got together and they started building black bowling alleys throughout the South.  Called me, and asked me if I would like to, they knew that I was bowling around here and they called me and says, "Would you go down and help manage that house [Star Bowling Lanes, Birmingham, Alabama]?"  So I went to Birmingham [Alabama], back to Birmingham again, and managed that house down there for three years until 1964.
Speaker 1: So you managed a bowling alley?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Big one, forty-eight lanes.
Speaker 1: So you went down, so did your family stay here when you were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you took the whole family to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and lived in the old family homestead.  We still had a house there in Birmingham.  The old family homestead.
Story_ID: 579822
Speaker 1: Got a lot of new bowlers, and at that time, integration went over the hill, now this was in, this was during the time of the riots, if you recall.
Speaker 2: In the mid-'60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Early, no.  No, no.
Speaker 2: Earlier?
Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961] to '63 [1963].  That was when every, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came through, in Birmingham [Alabama] that was when there were kids were all hosed down in--
Speaker 2: Right, '63 [1963] was a big, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that, another interesting thing, the bowling alley [Star Bowling Lanes, Birmingham, Alabama] was host to all those little, chick, kids to teach them how to be nonviolent.  And that was when they went over to Atlanta [Georgia] and swam in the pool and where, what's his name?  Governor, the later governor, the manager of that hotel later became governor of Georgia, where he had the pick ax and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Lester--
Speaker 1: Lester--
Speaker 2: --Maddox.
Speaker 1: --Maddox.  Lester Maddox.  But I was instrumental in teaching those kids how to be nonviolent there at night.  And those would, the white girls from up in Chicago [Illinois], New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, all along there were down there, and they threw themselves at those black kids and made them toe the line, yes, sir.  They learned to be nonviolent.  And they went over there and swam in that pool, they sure did.  And the riots--
Speaker 2: That's quite a, now let's go back a little bit here.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Some of this is really interesting.  Now, how did you get, now, you were managing a bowling alley?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now when did you do, first, were you approached by, approached by the civil rights people or did you--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --come to them?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did they, for a place to meet?
Speaker 1: They needed a place to teach these kids how to react to violence.
Speaker 2: Who came to you?  Do you remember who it was that came to you?
Speaker 1: I really don't.  I don't--
Speaker 2: All these figures now their names are so--
Speaker 1: They, they--
Speaker 2: --historical, now.
Speaker 1: --they weren't muckety-mucks as you would call them.  They were just people who were doing a job.  And they needed a place, a large place to do this where it could be done in privacy 'cause after the bowling alley closed up at night, just close the doors, turn the concourse lights on, it's a block long.
Story_ID: 579823
Speaker 1: Do you remember James Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] or [HistoryMaker] James Forman or--
Speaker 2: James Forman, yes, that name, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And they were all down there at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Hosea Williams and--
Speaker 2: Pastor Abernathy [Ralph Abernathy].  He was out of the, in fact, Reverend Abernathy spoke at one of my Black Pages [Fort Wayne Black Pages] meetings in Nashville, Tennessee, and he, what year, I've got records of that, that was, no that's down, down at Anna Lee's [ph.] place.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking Bernard Lee was, he, did you ever meet him or--
Speaker 2: I might have, I might have.  But the mayor of--who is CEO of the board of directors now of the Urban League, what's his name?  Tall light-skinned guy, Bond [HistoryMaker Julian Bond].
Speaker 1: Oh, Julian Bond.
Speaker 2: Julian, um-hm.  I met Julian Bond and a lot of people, yeah.  Abernathy was a favorite, my favorite, he was a, pfft, you're talking about somebody who was something else.  He was quite a gentleman.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us when you first met him and can you remember when you first met him or what he was like to you in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, that was the--there on, it was 8th Avenue, 8th Avenue, 7th [Avenue], and 9th Avenue, a motel, BTW, Booker T. Washington Hotel, motel, it was on 8th Avenue, they were there and I had occasion to be in the meeting when they was talking about all of these people who was gonna teach those kids over at the bowling alley [Star Bowling Lanes, Birmingham, Alabama] how to react to nonviolence.  So I did meet them.  I meet Julian Bond, Abernathy, one other guy that died, what was his name, kind of in the background, and I remember I met some of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] too, I sure did.
Speaker 1: That would have been later on I guess, right in--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  No.  They came, Black Panthers later, but they were--
Speaker 1: They were--
Speaker 2: It was, it was in its forming stage, (unclear) and Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Davis].  See her father [Frank Davis], owned a filling station out on 8th Avenue and 15th [Street], 16th Street, yeah, see.
Speaker 1: Well, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was there later, I know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], '65 [1965], I think he was there.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: So the students were trained in nonviolence--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --at the bowling alley.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's one of the places they were trained.
Speaker 2: They were trained, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And did you have to be real careful about letting people know what was going on?  I mean, did they have to be secretive about it?
Speaker 2: No, it was well known what was going on.
Speaker 1: You mean that you all were training them at the bowling alley?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, well known, yep.  They were, actually the people in Birmingham [Alabama] chose the kids to participate in that.  They picked the ones that they thought would handle rigors of being what they were to do.  And they chose 'em, they chose 'em.  It was fantastic, really.  Same thing like if you've seen newsreels of the kids being hosed down there in the park, if you'd ever seen that, 'cause you, when the dogs were attacking some people, the same thing.  In fact, during those riots, they were using city buses, the cops would gather up a bus load of kids, push 'em on the bus, the bus would take off all the way to the south side, 1st Avenue South over to where the pound was, pull into the pound, let the kids out, they hit the gate back up town.  It was a no-win situation for the police.
Speaker 1: So I hear it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They couldn't, they couldn't handle the crowds of kids.  They couldn't keep them because they would have to feed them, so they didn't want them, what they was trying to do to get them out of the area and so far from town that they couldn't get back, the minute they turned 'em loose, out there on 1st Avenue, back over to the main street back up to town.  The bus would come, they'd be waving at the kids going over to the park.  That's the way it was, though.  They were determined and they won.  They won.
Story_ID: 579824
Speaker 1: Did you know Fred Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The reverend?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Reverend Shuttlesworth.
Speaker 1: He was a pastor of one of the churches.  And he, I think he really got the movement started, or was one of the pioneers, right, in the--
Speaker 2: He was one of the pioneers, that's right.  You had a lot of people in this town, we have a couple of people here in this town that were, Mr. Williamson [ph.], he was one of the people that was involved in that in Mississippi, Jackson [Mississippi], I think it was.  Quite happened he spent some time in jail.
Speaker 1: Who lives here in Fort Wayne [Indiana]--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or lived here in Fort Wayne?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me now, did, did you ever get a chance to meet Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: At a distance.  I didn't talk with him, yes.  I was in the hotel room at BTW [Booker T. Washington Hotel] when he first came, before he was arrested he came to town [Birmingham, Alabama], he was, he was in town (laughter) maybe two hours when he was in there.  His entourage was too big.  Anyway you couldn't get too close to him.  Which surprises me about how he was that, well, that was a second floor near his room or just outside his room, I can understand that.  But if you see celebrity, Jackson, on TV now, you see the entourage that's around him, it was more than that around Dr. King.  I mean, there was six to eight people always, almost breast to breast around him, you see.
Speaker 1: Did, now is, did you ever feel in danger yourself for allowing the meetings to occur in your, in the place that you managed?
Speaker 2: No.  I never did.  I never thought about it, no.  I never thought about that, that never came into play that I was in danger or thought about being in danger even.
Speaker 1: Did you receive any threatening calls or did anybody threaten you or--
Speaker 2: If they were, they came into the bowling alley [Star Bowling Lanes, Birmingham, Alabama], I never got them.  The people that, no I never got them, so.  The only thing that bothered me mostly, on Indian Ridge [Drive], it's where the hoity-toity, the elite, the bourgeois lived.  Where what's his name, the lawyer, Shores, Arthur Shores lived.  His house was bombed several times and--
Speaker 1: You got, the Dynamite Hill [Birmingham, Alabama] or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And they brought this little, I call it a Humvee, but it was a little armored vehicle that the police used to run up and down the streets out there all the time, you know.  But they firebombed it, they quit sending it up there on the hill (laughter).  They got it, it got a Molotov cocktail once or twice is why they quit sending it up there.  But my sister lived up there on that hill about a block and a half from Arthur Shores' house.  And I was really concerned with her so we, I went up there a couple of times at night to see how she was doing.  But they never got quite up there, but Arthur Shores' house was bombed several times.  They would send people down that street, it was a big hill, down that street, Central Avenue I think it was called.  And they would get at full speed and fly down that hill and get out of range of anybody before you could really say anything because it was a steep hill and they'd come up the back way up that hill and fly down that hill, and throw bombs, throw dynamite at his house.  And it was hit, and his house was quite a ways off the street.  But the most devastating thing, I could, I thought I ever witnessed, Arthur Shores was quite a lawyer and I was in court one day watching him perform, he was defending some man and the policeman, the cop that arrested the guy was on the stand was saying that the guy was a moonshiner, and, you know, he found the moonshine that the guy had had and Attorney Shores stood up and said, "I object to this gentleman referring to my client as a nigger."  He said, "Nigger sit down," the judge.
Speaker 1: This is in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Arthur Shores never lost his composure though.  So those guys would be, had to be commended for their tenacity.  I'm surprised though that--but then again in retrospect they didn't want to make a martyr of him so they couldn't afford to kill him, they was probably trying to scare him to death by bombs, you know, with the dynamite.  But I guess they couldn't afford to kill him because then he would be a martyr and that could be bad.
Story_ID: 579825
Speaker 1: Do you remember the church bombing in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, 16th Street [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.  Yeah, the young man that, who later took, the guy that took our class pictures was not involved but he later, his daughter, the guy was taking pictures in the later years after I had left high school, his daughter was one of those killed in that attack, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you remember where you were when you heard about it?
Speaker 2: I was probably at church that day.  And in fact, I know I would have been in church because as I recall it was announced, see that happened on a Sunday, and so that news spread real quick.  That was quite a bomb too by the way, the devastation on that.
Speaker 1: When did you see the church, I mean, when, when, did, do you remember like how soon it was after the bombing that you went to see it?
Speaker 2: It was the next day here on Monday, yeah.  You couldn't get close to it 'cause all the national media was there at the time, couldn't get within a block of that place.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an idea of what it looked like, I mean, what portion of it was actually bombed and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the front part of the building, right past the steps that led up to the front of the church.  This is an all-brick church now, so it was quite a bomb.  It was quite a bomb, it did some real damage.  And almost everyone was surprised that more people weren't killed than that.  But the time was ripe and I guess the kids were moving, their class was moving at the time, the Sunday school class, that's what it was.  See they didn't, didn't get any grownups hardly.  But it was, it was a good, nothing like what the guys can put together now with the fertilizer stuff, but it was a good bomb, it was dynamite.  That was their weapon of choice at that time.
Speaker 1: Now did you know any of these, any of the perpetrators of that crime, did you ever meet 'em, I mean--
Speaker 2: No.  I read about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The guy they called Dynamite Bob, Chambliss [Robert Edward Chambliss] I think it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I read about them in later years and the rigmarole about whether or not they really did, who really did it, the da, di, da, so the whole scenario was kind of convoluted all the way, the whole scenario.  So that's one of the things that really, over the years, the one thing about the truth though, it finally comes out.  It finally comes out, yeah.  Not all of it but some of, enough of it to make you realize, yes, this is the right person, whether it was in, where the people were involved, they wouldn't talk about that maybe but we got one of them.
Story_ID: 579826
Speaker 1: Now did you ever, yourself, get involved in any of the marches during that period of time?  I know they had various marches in Birmingham [Alabama] and then the Selma [Alabama] crises was later (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --later on in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get, none of that.  But I understand there were quite a number of people from here went to Selma for that march [Selma to Montgomery March].
Speaker 1: From Fort Wayne [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: From Fort Wayne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Really did, yep.  See Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came through here at one time, [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis came through here, Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] came through here, and we had a big man here working in that area too, Reverend White, Jesse White.  So it was, and then, of course, the Dr. Wilson, R.B. Wilson, and A.L. Wilson, the dentist.  Those people were involved in this.  They took, they took food down there, a whole bunch of stuff.  So Fort Wayne has a legacy, there were doing pretty good.  They were doing pretty good.
Speaker 1: So a lot of Fort Wayne people had connections then?
Speaker 2: Yes of course, yeah.  This town is full of people from Marion, Alabama, from Demopolis [Alabama], from Uniontown [Alabama], Linden [Alabama], Selma [Alabama], Tuscaloosa [Alabama], Birmingham, here in this city, transplanters, (laughter) we call 'em, yeah.  So it was quite a thing though, and we survived.  And what was that song, 'I Will Survive.'
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Somebody sings that song all the time.
Speaker 1: That was a disco hit, right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, they sing 'I Will Survive.'  And that's what they did is survived.  It took some doing.  I, hardships, and then what really gets me is the fact that this younger generation does not understand the sacrifices that some of these people made for them, they don't see it.  They were freed so to speak, freed to cuss a teacher out, you know.  You touch me, I'll call my parents, and then the parents would go up and give us, the teacher a bad time.  So the teachers got to the point where okay, you gonna disturb all these kids, kids that wanna learn, I'm gonna leave you alone, just sit there.  And if you start acting up, I'll just call the principal and he can have to come and talk to you, I don't have to discipline you, like telling you to be quiet so that I can teach.
Speaker 1: Now what you just touched on is an interesting aspect of human nature that those civil rights people exhibited, being able to sacrifice their own lives--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for the sake of another generation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that's what it basically amounted to--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --you are putting your life on the line.
Speaker 2: For this, for this next generation.  And they don't appreciate it or take into consideration really what's going on.  You know, all they can think about, oh, I can cuss the teacher out.  And they think that a police record is a badge of honor.  They wanna get arrested and get a, I said, "Don't you realize that the system says you cannot really get ahead in this country with a police record?"  And they wanna give you one and keep you in bondage.
Story_ID: 579827
Speaker 1: How long did you live in Birmingham [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960] to '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you left just before the black power era, I guess, when Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] called for black power and all that down there in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, so you came back to Fort Wayne [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what did you do when you came back?
Speaker 2: When I came back to Fort Wayne?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's when I--
Speaker 1: And, well, what, why did you leave first of all, and what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, that's another story about that bowling alley [Star Bowling Lanes, Birmingham, Alabama] you see.  I worked my little self to the bone getting the bowlers integrated into the bowling congress, ABC [American Bowling Congress; United States Bowling Congress], you see.  And finally I got them integrated and then they all left and went over the hill to bowl in the white bowling establishment (laughter) and the bowling alley went down the hill.  So I left and came back home.
Speaker 1: So you're telling me--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that the black bowling alley was thriving--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --be, and, you know--
Speaker 2: Twenty-four hours a day.
Speaker 1: --but it, okay.  And but it, but when--
Speaker 2: We got everything integrated--
Speaker 1: --integrated--
Speaker 2: --they left.
Speaker 1: --they all went to the white bowling alley?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's exactly what they did, exactly.
Speaker 1: The, the same story can be told for quite a number of black institutions in the community where that happens and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --do you regret any of that now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What, what are your feelings about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it was a badge of honor to some of them.  I went back on occasion and I would go to the bowling alleys where they're bowling, you know, one of them is on 1st Avenue, and when I first approached the powers that be in Birmingham, I said, "We need to get, let these kids bowl in the city tournament," well, we gotta wait.  I said, "We have already waited long enough.  It's time to do it."  Okay.  How can we do it?  I said, well, I said, "Let me talk to them and I'll get back with you."  I called a meeting, we talked with the guys and some of them said, "Well what do you think, how can we best do this from our side?"  And I said, "Well I would think that if you talk to them and ask them to get," I said, "I don't wanna go out here, I don't wanna go over there and bowl against all these black teams, put us in there and we'll shoot a squad of black teams."  I said, "Okay, let them pick out some teams that would be willing to bowl against us and we'll do it without an audience."  I said, "Sounds good to me."  So I went back and made the proposal and they kind of looked at me and kind of said well, so and so, I said, you gotta give something.  And I said, "I can understand how you feel, but I believe there are bowlers that would go for this because it's gonna happen, it's up to us to make it happen good, okay."  Because at that time, that very time, the ABC always, the president had one year to be the president of the bowling, of the bowling circuit.  And so the man in Birmingham, it's ten vice presidents and each year they go up.  And it was his turn and I know he didn't want that mark on his, (laughter) his record, you know.  And so he was there, he was the first vice president.  The next session at that national tournament, he was gonna become president for a year.  And so they said okay and it happened.  The day, very next year.  And they bowled in the city tournament that year under some strained conditions but the white teams came and bowled.  We held it at the bowling alley where it was supposed to be held, early in the morning, on a Sunday morning nothing, no, no incidents, no nothing, you know.  They said, "Well, we like to put patrols all out," I said, "don't do that."  I said, "Nobody in here is afraid."  And basically the white bowlers being in there would be our protection, you can't kill us without killing some of them.
Speaker 1: If somebody bombed the bowling alley they'd kill everybody.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there you go.  Just psychology, so it worked.  But the next year my bowling alley started going downhill, I closed, they all went, and I go back some times--
Speaker 1: You couldn't have, the white bowlers weren't gonna come over to your--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --place.
Speaker 2: That was unheard of.  No, and I knew that wouldn't work, although it was the nearest bowling alley in the city.  I knew that wouldn't work and I said, you know, when you know something you don't bother about it.
Story_ID: 579828
Speaker 1: The failure of the bowling alley [Star Bowling Lanes, Birmingham, Alabama] or the decline of it is what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's why, yeah.
Speaker 1: --caused you to move back to Fort Wayne [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and I moved out.
Speaker 1: So you, you moved back in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, what did you do when you got back?
Speaker 2: Well, looked around at, what I did, I took a job with, who did I take a job with?  GE [General Electric], yeah General Telephone [General Telephone and Electric Corporation; Verizon Communications, Inc.] rather, I took a job with General Telephone and I worked for them for ten years.  Meanwhile I was funding my new business (laughter) just in case and so I did.  We got the, we got the print shop going, we (unclear), I started the print shop downstairs rather.  (Laughter) Did you hear that?  That's where I started it, right downstairs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we left there and went on Clayton Avenue, and then we went to Hanna Street, then we went to Oxford Street, and then we went to where we are now Hanna and McKinnie [Avenue], which was in the former 7-Eleven building, so we got that.  So you'll have to go by and see that.
Speaker 1: So what's the name of your shop?
Speaker 2: Di- well, in the beginning it was Diamond Point Printing [Fort Wayne, Indiana].  When the young one, when the kids took it over in '93 [1993], they changed the name to Express Printing [Express Print and Copy, Fort Wayne, Indiana], which is okay.  New name, same people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you get in the card business?  That's one of the--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --highlights of this story, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter).  That was, I'm trying to think what year it was that I went down there.  That was, yeah, that was shortly after that.  That was shortly after '64 [1964].  That's when my sister from Birmingham [Alabama], who made jewelry, she, she had this big table that she beads, you know, she could make jewelry, make a earrings and everything right quick like, you know, and that's what she was doing.  She said come and take me over to Richmond [Virginia] to this black expo.  I said okay.  So I drove down to Birmingham, picked up all her stuff, and drove to Richmond, Virginia.  And she set up at this black expo and that's when I saw the, this card company display, beautiful stuff.  Talked to the guy, he says okay.  So he went, gave me his name and everything.  When I got back here and after the show was over there in Richmond and I wrote to him and couldn't get an answer.  And I was talking to Charles Redd, who was the CEO of the Urban League [Fort Wayne Urban League, Fort Wayne, Indiana] at the time, telling him about it, he got on the phone right and called a friend of his and said I want you to look up something for me and he told the man what he wanted.  A few days later he called me and said, "Hey I got a name, a number for him."  And I called the young lady and she talked to me and asked me a lot of questions, I told her I wanted to buy the stuff, and so she said I'll call you back.  And a few days later she called me and explained to me who she was, and what she was doing and what happened and said it's for sale, the print shop, a printing company has it.  I finally negotiated with the printing company a couple years later, we bought it all for $5000, cost me, I think, about $2500 to have all of that stuff shipped.  I had three, three tractor trailer loads, three.  I mean, I rented a building over here on Oxford Street, took an inventory and, and I brought my partner in with me and we started hitting black expos from all over the country, and we sold 'em like hot cakes.  Somewhere I've got, I think, I still have pictures of the setups, down in Indianapolis [Indiana] which is--still is going.  What's the guy's name, black comic strip, what's his name, what's his name?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Morrie Turner?
Speaker 2: No he's, he's an activist, (unclear) with big beard and, and the Afro, still wears the Afro and the big beard.  Oh, I can't think of his name.  But anyway he stopped at my booth and just, oh, he just had a fit (laughter).  Said he'd never seen anything like it.  But it was an experience.  That's when I got into the card business now, and, and it flourished.  And then, of course, Kmart [Kmart Corporation] gave me my big break, they gave me twenty-nine stores and it did well.  I stayed, I had, I ran the, started running out of cards.  I had some big reprints done and that's when I started saying wait a minute, I think the guy is charging me too much.  So I started learning how to print.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's when you got into the print business?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Basically that, I said hey, in doing this, I can do this.  Bought me a press and put it put down stairs and that's, made some comical cards and they came out well, I said hey, I can do this.  But by that time, in three years that I was doing this, selling these cards all over the country, Hallmark [Hallmark Cards, Inc.] and American Greetings [American Greetings Corporation, LLC] started listening.  I went to one store in Chicago [Illinois] on Shadeland [ph.] and my cards were gone, all gone.  And whoa, I went out to the truck I said, "I'll load this cat up, you know, these sold out."  And when I talked to the manager he said, hey--
Story_ID: 579829
Speaker 1: So you said the American Greetings [American Greetings Corporation, LLC] and Hallmark [Hallmark Cards, Inc.]  got--
Speaker 2: Got wise.
Speaker 1: --got wise to it.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  And started taking, well what happened, they were in Kmart [Kmart Corporation] too, American Greetings was in Kmart, that was when Kmart, Hallmark wouldn't go into Kmart, that was below them at the time, and so Kmart was doing land office business with me.  And then American Greetings was in there.  So I came in there and American Greetings, the guy that came in had taken my cards out but I didn't know this.  So when I told, talked to the manager and said, "Hey, you're out of cards," she said whoa, she said, "That guy took your cards out."  I said, whoa, I got right on the phone and called my contact at Kmart up in Troy, Michigan, he said let me talk to the manager just like that and he talked a few minutes and hung up.  I mean, just about that time, hung up.  He said, "I gotta get you some space down here now."  So the deal was, I was to get some space because if, you know, that the deal with it is that, that these card companies buy X number of fields, space for their cards.
Speaker 1: So they had squeezed you out basically?
Speaker 2: They squeezed me out, yeah.  So but now, as it was, there were a few blacks making cards, good ones.  And a young man in Detroit [Michigan], and then the young lady in new, there's a guy doing it in New York, I'm not, I can't think of the name of the city but several in California.  But after that, they got to making a decent black card.  And now, thanks to that group of people you can buy a good black card any place, every display has black cards in them.  So we accomplished something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We accomplished something.
Speaker 1: Now this card venture, it did make some money for a while.
Speaker 2: Oh, made, yes, it did (laughter).  I'll say it did.  I recouped real quick at the expos.  I'm telling you, we did a good thing.  And it was an impressive display when I got it all set up.  I counted at one time we had 150 designs, different designs, 155 is what it is, I'm sorry, plus--
Speaker 1: Now what did you call the card company?  What was it called?
Speaker 2: It was called Unique Cards [Unique Greeting Cards, Fort Wayne, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And basically it ran from what year to what year, what do you think?
Speaker 2: From about '64 [1964], from '64 [1964] until about '71 [1971], about '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the time that Hallmark, American Greetings, and this company right down in southern Illinois, right down there where the southern university, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], can't think of the name of that company but they got, came in, that was an interesting thing.  They told me up at Troy, said, "Call 'em and make an appointment and go down there and show your stuff, 'cause we can get in with them."  And I went down there and set up a display, drove down there, it was quite a drive too, way past Detroit, pfft, set up this display and they came in there and oohed and aahed and said, "We'll get back with you, okay."  So I came back home and a few days later somewhere over there, (unclear), he's got that letter, I got a letter from this company that said that, saying we really appreciate your display, it was very impressive, but we find that your cards were too sophisticated for our clientele (laughter).
Speaker 1: These are the stories.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: These are the stories that--
Speaker 2: Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: No fat behinds, no red lips, the bandannas on their head, none of that.
Speaker 1: Now you're referring to cards, I mean, images of black people that appeared in print during the time that you grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, in the late--that's something that we don't really talk about a lot in these interviews but when you grew up, there were a lot of images of black people, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or supposed to be black people.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: They weren't really.  They were how they wanted to see us.  And I said they, in parentheses.
Speaker 1: They as opposed to we (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So and these images were comic images and--
Speaker 2: Degrading images, you name it.  That's right.  That's right.  And my cards like you said, they told me they said they were just too sophisticated for their clients.
Speaker 1: So, well when the card business kind of folded in, then, then what did you--
Speaker 2: I just concentrated on the printing.  I had learned how to do that then and found out there was money in that and I learned how to do that.
Story_ID: 579830
Speaker 1: I think I'm on the right track here, but going to all these expos--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and networking with these other black businesspeople, did you, well, I don't know you haven't said this yet and I haven't read it but did you, were you part of any black chamber of commerce movement here in the city [Fort Wayne, Indiana] or did you all form a black business organization--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --as a result of that?
Speaker 2: No.  No we did not form a black organization.
Speaker 1: Well did you think about doing that after all of--
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  I had no, I had no inclination as to doing it in that vein because you had two organizations, you had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and you had the Urban League, really.  So that was how we did it.  And if you would think about what was going on before then, the group that we needed were those two groups and a black chamber per se would be a duplication, I think.
Speaker 1: Of their efforts, so are you saying that these, that the Urban League and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --NAACP already had black business committees or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: All we needed to do was join and support those two.  A chamber was built to, black chamber was built to enhance their own, you see.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I have some idea what your clientele would be in a black print shop and stuff but tell, tell us like, I mean, I know probably funeral homes probably would use a lot of service, you know, give you a lot of business I would guess.
Speaker 2: The black businesses that would use our services could not support us [Diamond Point Printing; Express Print and Copy, Fort Wayne, Indiana].  And so when I decided to go into doing something, I decided to go with it and doing something that everybody could use, you see, everybody could use.  And printing was that, everybody used paper.  There's no doubt about it, everybody uses paper.  And so that's what I did.  Now we have some very large clients, right now we're getting a new base, Spanish.  We have a person on staff that speaks pretty good Spanish.  So they feel comfortable coming into us and trying to, they don't have to bring a, a young kid who's lived here as an interpreter with them because they can talk directly to my typesetter who's a Spanish speaker.  Now my young, youngest daughter is taking a Spanish class too because we have a large Spanish clientele now.  And we can type in Spanish.  So we don't need an interpreter, we got one on the staff, and people are comfortable coming in to see us.  And we treat them as topnotch customers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, now tell me about the Black Books [sic.] business guide, now how did you get involved in that?
Speaker 2: Black Pages [Fort Wayne Black Pages]?
Speaker 1: Black Pages, right.
Speaker 2: The Black Pages.  I became involved in that on a hit and miss thing.  A young lady called me, had learned about me being a printer and she says, "I got this book, I need printing.  Can you do it for me?"  A book, and I said, "Well we do some books, but we don't do certain books," I was on my way to Birmingham [Alabama] to see my brother and I stopped in Nashville [Tennessee] and saw this young lady and she gave me what she had and I said, "Yeah, I can get it printed."  And I did.
Story_ID: 579831
Speaker 1: I did that, I printed the book for her, she said, "Why don't you start one?"  And I thought about it, I started thinking about that here and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a young lady here in town [Fort Wayne, Indiana] who was--already had a Black Pages [Fort Wayne Black Pages]?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, we didn't have one.  But I was dealing with, Rae Pearson.  Rae Pearson is, has a personnel company [Alpha Rae Personnel, Inc., Fort Wayne, Indiana].  And we always talked with each other and so we, we were trying to get a meeting where everybody knew everybody.  And so people started bringing me copies of Black Books from, Black Pages from all around the country, so I said, okay, I can put one of these together, I got a print shop [Diamond Point Printing; Express Print and Copy, Fort Wayne, Indiana], so I did.  It took me two years to get the first one through but after that, I put out five good ones after that.  The first one well, it's typical of a first book and then the rest of them look like it was done right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now is this a, is the Black Pages like a franchise or something--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --or anybody can start their own version of it then?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's not a copyrighted idea where--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --you can get in trouble if I wanted to start one, I just go start one?
Speaker 1: No.  It's just a matter of, I've got this here and it can only support one, you can start one in another city but like Chicago [Illinois], Chicago could support two Black Pages, pages, okay.  French [Arnette D. French] up there, nobody wants to get in French's way 'cause can't, printing fifty thousand books a year.  And the advertising from that is tremendous in Chicago.  What he gets a page up there, I can't even think about it here, most I can get for a full color page would be about eight hundred dollars.  He can get two, three thousand for a full page because of the coverage and people who keep these books.  And I have created mine to the point where it was really something.  And the young man that bought it from me is doing the same.  In fact, the new edition will be out some times this week, I think.  I was up to see him last week in his, this year's book is coming out this, this week.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So the Black Pages is a way for you to find any service that's in the black community that you wanna spend your money with.  That's what it's all about.
Speaker 2: Now it probably has more significance, tell me if I'm right or wrong, I would guess it would have more significance today than it, even in the past because the black--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --community is scattered around, people don't even know what the other black businesses are.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  This is what it's, that's basically what it's supposed to be.  It's your avenue to everything that's going on in the black community.  Unfortunately, there's a downside to that, okay (laughter).  Everything has a downside.  Some people want the very first issue right away as soon as they can get it.  And they are using it as a hit list.
Speaker 2: A hit list?
Speaker 1: By that, yes, a hit list.  Same as telemarketing, they know where the black community, the black businesses are so they can reach them real quick like they know where all of them are, they're in that book.  They don't have to go out, government agencies get them, the city gets them, all government agencies have to have them because they're looking for suppliers, you see.  They're looking for suppliers and they're used for more than one purpose what I'm showing you.  It became quite a book because of that; they're using it for more than one purpose.  Some use it as a hit list, some use it for information, and some use it for use, basically.  And they are all over the country doing well.  And like you said about it, what's the difference then, I can just start, yes, you can.  But there's this thing about what you can do and what you shouldn't do.  For instance, this city cannot support two Black Pages.  It can support two black newspapers because the advertising in newspapers are here today and gone tomorrow, whereas on this book you see it once a year.  And the people who are in that book are very stable, the advertising you see in the newspaper is hit and miss because the guy that puts it in there today he puts in two issues that's it.  You won't see it again for some time until he gets another budget maybe.  But whereas the Black Pages are full of people who are stable, they're not going in that directory for a seasonal thing, they're going in it because on the long run it's there.
Story_ID: 579832
Speaker 1: Why you don't push for a black chamber of commerce as such.
Speaker 2: The reason, like I said, was because basically we are consumers, we don't have making processes, you're not manufacturing, we don't make anything to sell outside of the community.  We're carpet cleaners, beauty shops--
Speaker 1: Funeral homes, yeah.
Speaker 2: Funeral homes.  We have some professional people but they're not producing, we have doctors, we have lawyers, dentists.  So the Black Pages [Fort Wayne Black Pages] is an avenue for those people in the black community to get to them.  But as far as producers of goods, we don't have 'em.  And so we're not gonna have four or five hundred people hired.  At the most it'll be two or three in any black business in this city [Fort Wayne, Indiana].  So I don't see the need for a black chamber per se.  I, people could disagree with me but that's okay.  But I think of a black chamber as being able to represent some people that can supply, Philips [Koninklijke Philips N.V.], Magnavox, GE [General Electric], GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], with some goods that they can use in their manufacture of a product.
Speaker 1: Now, there's another way to think of this too, and a lot of black chamber of commerces develop in areas where there's a black business district or something, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where you have maybe restaurants and businesses and other kinds of businesses, you know, servicing a black district where you might have tourists coming in, and you might have like all this activities like, I don't know, like Auburn Street [sic. Auburn Avenue] in Atlanta [Georgia] used to be--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in my own hometown [Dayton, Ohio], West 5th Street at one time was a big black--now it's a black center of town basically with all the professionals that are there, restaurants and other things.  I mean, of course, it doesn't exist now, but in California, Watts [Los Angeles, California] and other places, they've had--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --chambers of commerce to deal with the district, Harlem [New York, New York] say, or maybe, you know, South Philly [South Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or, you know.
Speaker 2: But that would work in a larger city very well.  You have manufacturers and people who are doing--I haven't found out that the government rates a small business that's doing over a million dollars.
Speaker 1: And we would see it as a big business (laughter).
Speaker 2: That would be a monster business.  But there are some black businesses that are doing many times that, but they're few and far between.  I got, I knew a couple of people in Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], but they are few and far between.  And then the thing is, you need to bolster the little people so they can get big enough to get in the high tech stuff that they're doing, you see.  What can you make to sell to Kmart [Kmart Corporation]?  A young man had a little project he thought he had something going for him, and the little item he had was pretty good, and he was asking me about it and I told him I said, he said, "I'd like to get into Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.]," I said, "Oops, now Walmart is fine," I said, "but they're tough people to deal with, friend, but that's where you need to be, if you wanna make some money."  But their way of doing business is just business, you won't count as an individual, it's plain business.  You say you've got a product, they say I want it today, not tomorrow.  They want it to meet specs, they don't want it tomorrow, they want it today.  And I said, "If you can produce the amount, of course, do you realize how many Walmart stores there are?  Do you think of that logistics?  You gotta think of all of this when you're talking about selling something to anybody like Walmart.  You gotta be able to produce it, can you do this?  We're not talking about twenty or thirty items a day, we're talking hundreds of thousands of 'em.  That's the way they deal."  And if you get into Walmart, you better be having your feet ready to run.  It's today or never.  That's how they operate and that's how they're so big.  So be careful about, you can think big but you gotta (laughter) produce.  And it's nice that you have thought about it, but I just wanted to warn you about what the difficulties are in dealing with large corporations--
Story_ID: 579833
Speaker 1: Is it easier now for black businesses to get capitalized by--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --banks?
Speaker 2: No, N-O.
Speaker 1: Not even a little bit easier?
Speaker 2: N-O.  Don't even think about it.
Speaker 1: Not even than it was way back in 1960?
Speaker 2: Same old, same old.  In the first place, it's like I told you about these young kids thinking it's a badge of honor to have a police record.  By the same token, any black business that has lived a long life, and I say a long life is ten to fifteen years, that's a long life for a black business, and after the fifteen years he doesn't have a credit record because he's basically self-funded, he's been late with everything under the sun, and so he's a bad credit risk according to the statistics.  Any black business that, you know, you talk to any of 'em, they don't have a credit record that's worthwhile because they use this little thing as a stigma, you were late, you were late, you were late, you were late, you were late.  Your credit record goes down.  And then every time you apply for something, then you get that on your record, list.  That lowers your points too.  Although you just made an inquiry and the guy who check your credit and say, when they ask about you, send that in the reference, that's what happens.  So black businesses have a tough time.  I know, I've been there, done that.
Story_ID: 579834
Speaker 1: So now, at this stage in your career you are semiretired, I guess, right, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But not completely retired, right?
Speaker 2: Not yet.  I'd give a, I'd think, I gave them a warning a couple of weeks ago and said, "I'm about out of here," especially after I had that little bout with the hospital, and so I'm about ready to really hang it up, now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you see the--do you see things getting any better for black businesses in terms of being capitalized, or, you hope?
Speaker 2: I would say that anyone thinking to go into real business, I'm not talking about mom and pop, if you have an idea that's worth it, the best avenue is to get investors.  Now historically, black business owners want to own the whole bag of wax, they don't want any of the wax to leak out.  Unfortunately, if you don't let some of it leak out, you're not gonna get anything in the bag.  You need investors now to compete.  You can't compete off of a living, make money that you made off of a wage.  You cannot compete, cannot do it.  There's no way to do it.  So the best way to do it is to get an idea, band together, consortium, put it together, get incorporated, and do it in such a manner, get the advice that you need, legal advice that you need, and see a financial planner, put your idea in together, get up the business plan, do it by the book.  By the time you gather this information the bottom line will say yea or nay, and you do whichever it says.  If it says nay, hang it up, try something else.  Do it, go through the same thing until you get all the facts.  And once you get the facts, get it down in ink, and your investors are in cahoots with you, and are with you, go.  And it's all business, forget about friends, you don't even know any friends, you want business partners who are thinking business, and once you get that, you've got it made.  You can't have friends in business.  There's no such thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My other advice to them, anyone who wants to start a business, there are two entities that you have to consider, the first entity you have to consider is your spouse, whether it be a he or a she, that's the first, if they are not with you, hang it up.  Don't try that.  The second one is, once you get it together with the spouse, leave your relatives outside of the loop (pause).  It's true, leave the relatives outside of the loop, get business partners.
Story_ID: 579835
Speaker 1: There's so many people that come here from other countries that come with a whole family and extended family, and they all participate in the business, and they patiently wait for their turn to rise to the top of a business.  And they come from a history of, and these are, we're talking about people from the Middle East, from India, China, and other places--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --who have a long history, even back in their home country of being in business and being able to patiently wait for their turn to come up to the top.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that, you're saying that we shouldn't try to emulate that model?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of the guy's name that hurt us so badly.  What's his name?  Willie what?
Speaker 1: What did he do, he?
Speaker 2: Well, this guy was a plantation owner down in the islands [British West Indies].
Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about the story of Willie Lynch [William Lynch] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lynch, Willie Lynch.
Speaker 1: --the Willie Lynch letter.  This is a story that's told in the black community, we that--
Speaker 2: And somehow or another I wanted to research that and find out if it was true, if the story was really true, but in retrospect I looked at our situation, and I said, "Lynch you did a job.  I congratulate you, you did a good job."  He told the plantation owners how to deal with us.  Have you ever read that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And then you look at the situation as it is, Lynch did a job.  He said I, and the one thing that struck me, he says, "For generations this will compound itself," and it has.  Now whether that story is true or not I don't know.  I refuse to research it because I don't wanna know the truth about the story.  But the story itself is a proof that he was telling the truth.  He told those plantation owners exactly how to do it, and it has worked.  And so until such time as we become--not integrated, what's the word I wanna use, more than that, will we be out of that mode.  Sad to say, but it's, that's the facts and I have tried my best to combat it and I haven't found a solution to it.
Speaker 1: Specifically, what he's talking about is this, this is, it's a story, it's probably not true in the historical context but the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's probably, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the content--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is true in terms of how--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to do it.  I think he says, you pit the old against the young--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --light against dark--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --men against women--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, man.
Speaker 1: --you know, as a slave master that's how you control a plantation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that seemed to have all those divisions going on in a active way even today, right?
Speaker 2: That's why I said I don't wanna, I don't really wanna know (laughter) the history of that except that you read something and it's true.  I don't care who wrote it or where it originated, it's true.  What more can you say?  And what more can you do about it?  But that's my reasoning behind it.  And, and I really don't know, like I say, the Mexicans have come into town and have bought everything up, how could they do this in ten years and we've been here all our lives?  We've got two used car lots, and that's what they are, used, look more like a junkyard.  I can count at least ten, I think, Mexican car lots, that rivals Jim Kelley [Kelley Automotive Group, Fort Wayne, Indiana].  He's one of the biggest dealers in town and over the country, rather.  Has racing cars.  So there's the proof to me.  They had a guy, a group of guys took a truck, stole a truck, backed it into a grocery store, put a chain around the ATM machine and yanked it out of the floor, pulled it out of the building out on the sidewalk, and the four of them got out there and couldn't pick the ATM machine up and put it on the truck, you know.  Planning, no planning.  And that reminds me of us.  We get a project going and can't pick it up because we don't have enough of them there to do it (laughter).
Story_ID: 579836
Speaker 1: This leads to a question we normally ask, and you've already expressed some of it already.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: We always ask, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hope is that some young person decides at an early stage that he's going to be something and go about doing it.  And enough of them can see you, I think if, for that to evolve is gonna take more time.  I would, we thought after a hundred years, things would be much better, but they didn't change.  I think that once a few of the young people get the idea that I can do, and then do it, now I don't think at the moment, I really don't think that a college education can ensure you of anything in this day and age.  What I think an education can ensure you of something, is something that you decide that you want to do, and you spend your time learning how to make that work and stick to it.  Get all the necessary tools in your head to make it work.  Then I think we'll be able to move forward.  This is not anything like a single person going out and doing something.  Once he gets I out of his mind, he'll be okay.  It's us.  It's not I against the world, it's us, and the more of us, the easier it is.  If they had had about ten people out there to pick up that ATM machine they might have gotten it up off the sidewalk and put it on the truck.  It's that simple.  A lot of hands can make easy work, and we haven't learned that chore.  And one person just cannot do it all any more, technology is too vast.  You can't know all of these things.  That's why we have so many doctors now because they specialize in one thing, they can't know all of this.  The main surgeons don't know anything about setting the doggone bone in your leg (laughter) can't do it.  They don't know about the leg, but let me get up in your head, I can handle that.  And they got these little computers that they use now, they just make a tiny hole in your head and go in there and do all the things they used to do, what they called invasive surgery.  They don't do much of that anymore, it's technology.  So that's why I'm talking about.  It's an easy solution, but how do we teach it to our people?  I don't know.
Story_ID: 579837
Speaker 1: When you look back over everything that you've done up to this point, I mean, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes indeed.  That's the song, oh, yes, 'Yes Indeed.'  I would do more, maybe 95 percent of things that I did, I would do them differently.  I don't mean the concept but I mean I would actually do the process differently.  First of all, I would school myself a lot better, and I would prepare my background to handle the situation as it is today.  You gotta be clean and squeaky-clean nowadays to borrow money, and then that is not always the same.  But you need a few people who are squeaky-clean, and the best thing to do is diversify.  That's what it's all about.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's what I would do differently.  I would, yes I would do most, 95 percent of what I have done, I would do it differently.
Story_ID: 579838
Speaker 1: What would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Something did happen.  We're still there.  And when you look at it this way, twenty-seven years, not too bad, it's still there.  It's viable.  And on the other hand, some friends of mine who started way after I did in the same business, are now retired and living in Phoenix [Arizona] and Florida.  Two companies, company owners that I know.  One of 'em, I had an old press that's sitting in the garage out there, he bought that press off of me, or rather I gave it to him for hauling it away, but that's what he started with.  But he had something else I didn't have, expertise in another field, a salesperson, and contacts where the money is.  So yes, I would do things differently (laughter).  I would gather around me expertise, yes, sir, and what I've left is there but it could have been so much better in retrospect.  I'm not ashamed of it, but it could have been.  And now the technology is changing so rapidly, we need young brains in there to cope with this new technology.  And sadly to say, I can't find them in the black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Have you ever taken on an apprentice or apprentices to--
Speaker 2: We tried that, they don't have the basics, knowledge.  They've missed school, they missed it.  They missed it.  And then let me put it like this, take for instance, I said, "I need to teach somebody typesetting."  So I go to the Urban League and said, "Send me some people who can type."  They did, and I sat them down to the typewriter.  Hunt and peck, but they're typing, and that's what they call typing.  Now I can't waste valuable time teaching people, a person to type and then try to teach him typesetting, (laughter) you know.  That process will take what, three years at least.  So if you could type, I can teach you typesetting.  But if you can't type, I can't teach you this, the process is too long.  And that's the thing that bothers me about this new generation of blacks.  They can't do anything with their hands and they have no desire to learn.  Technology now it requires that you know keyboarding.  And anybody who can't see that is lost.  You gotta know the keyboard or you don't, you're not gonna make it.  And so, my high tech computers that we have down there, they're monsters, they've gotta know how to handle them.  And in the black community, we don't have it, we do not have it.  But I was gonna teach some people this, they couldn't type, and when I did find some that type, guess what they wanted to know?  How much am I going to pay them?  So I managed to hold my breath and, and exhale and I told 'em, I said, "Well tell you what, what I'm going to teach you is a way to make a good living.  And if you were to go out there to Ivy Tech [Ivy Tech Community College], and they don't have a department like I have because you're gonna teach it hands-on, you're gonna be taught hands-on, you're gonna forget about the books, I'm gonna give you hands-on stuff, but Ivy Tech is gonna charge you somewhere like seven or eight hundred dollars an hour for what I'm going to teach you for free so that you can come in here and get a job, any place else, and get a job."  Newspapers, lawyers' offices, anywhere, ad agencies, good stuff.  But that's their thinking, how much am I gonna make?  Nothing.  You don't have anything to make money with, first of all.  Come into the shop, say, "Are you hiring?"  "Well, yes, I need a printer."  "Oh, Mr. Hayden [HistoryMaker Walter Theodore Hayden], I can do anything."  "Oh, where are you working now?"  "I'm not working now but I--."  "You just told me you can do anything and I know there are some jobs out there for a person who can do anything."  It didn't sink in on him.  He's lost, but he can do anything (laughter).  One kid came in there and he says, "Oh, printing presses, I ran one of those when I was in school."  I said, "What kind of a press did you run?"  "I don't know, it was just like those (laughter)."
Story_ID: 579839
Speaker 1: I have adopted an elementary school, and I go there once a month to show the kids what I do for a living, like printing and what it entails.  And this particular day, I took some four color separations and one of my greeting cards.  And I asked the kids, I said, "Do you ever think about how this is done?  How did this come about?"  Of course not.  I said, "Well you just looked at it and you saw it was pretty, that was it."  I said, "Let me show you how it's done."  And I put these four color separations, one at a time, beginning with the yellow, and I put it on the board, on the overhead projector, and the yellow is just barely there, you can just barely see the image of this young girl.  And then I put the magenta on and you could, you could see it just a bit more, okay.  And then I put the black on and that gave it some detail, you see.  And I said, "Now watch this," I added the blue neg [negative] to that and there this picture was, all right.  I said, "But, you know, I could go even further, I could put as many as eight or nine different colors in this picture and do things with it that would just blow you away."  And they were really fascinated by it.  So now, get interested in things you see every day, how did they do this?  Ask yourself, how do they do this?  And then go find out.  It will broaden your scope of living.
Story_ID: 579840
Speaker 1: How did your father [Charles Hayden] feel about your career, well your mother [Maude McCloud Hayden] and father, you know, feel about what you eventually, you know, wound up doing, did they--
Speaker 2: They were supportive, very much so.  But my dad was a little disappointed, you know.  But in later years I gave him what he was looking for though, I have two sons (laughter) who are ministers like I said before, but he was a little unhappy with me.  Well maybe, he didn't really show his displeasure but he thought he would anyway broach the subject with me, and I refused.  And, you know, it was just like everything, I was out of high school [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama], I'm on my own, yes he could have sent me to college but I didn't care about not going to the [U.S.] Army, that wasn't the reason I would wanna stay.  But I just didn't wanna be a minister though, at that time.  Not to say that I won't become one, I think, I'm always ministering, I guess.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it though.  And tell us about your, now how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: Nine.
Speaker 1: You have nine?
Speaker 2: Nine children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And, well, tell us about 'em.
Speaker 2: Well, I have three girls.  The oldest one, I won't say, but anyway she's the oldest.
Story_ID: 579841
Speaker 1: --All right.  You were talking about your three daughters.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have three daughters and six boys, and a pair of twin boys in the second group.  But my oldest daughter, they're living, all of 'em are living in town [Fort Wayne, Indiana] except one.  One's living in Charlotte, North Carolina, used car, new car salesperson.  One daughter is a nurse, a registered nurse.  The twins, Ronald [Ronald Hayden] is managing a plant down near Peru, Indiana, for, I'm trying to think of the name of that, The Andersons [The Andersons, Inc., Maumee, Ohio] out of Toledo [Ohio], the big feeding and supply house up there.  They have a plant down here in Peru.  And Donald [Donald Hayden] is a phlebotomist, and he works for, mostly he works for the doctors independently, they like to have him go to these homes where older people need to have blood samples because he can do that so good.  So that's what he does.  Make, it's what he does, makes a good living at it (laughter).  Steven [Steven Hayden] has been with General Tel [General Telephone and Electric Corporation; Verizon Communications, Inc.] for thirty years, he's ready to retire and he's about forty-eight.  And he's ready to retire, and he's also a musician.  Michael [Michael Hayden] is a used car salesman for Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation].  Anita [Anita Hayden] works for an aircraft carrier out here in Baer Field [Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station, Fort Wayne, Indiana].  One of these--all they carry is supplies.  I don't even know the name of the company.  And my youngest daughter is running the print shop.  Yeah, so, Tracey [Tracey Hayden] is a big time four color printer for Craftline Incorporated [Craftline Graphics, Fort Wayne, Indiana] out there in the industrial park.  So they are all doing quite well.  I've got fifty odd grandchildren (laughter) twenty-two great-grands.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's, I mean, that's quite a family.
Speaker 2: Mostly boys, mostly boys.  And just Sunday, yesterday, the 22nd of May, I have a great niece that graduated from Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin].  And this year alone I have three or four grandchildren graduating from high school here in the city.  I attended one last Friday night, there's one on the 3rd and one on the 4th.  I think there's another one, yes, there's another one somewhere in there in June.  So I guess they've done well.  And like I said I was, that information you wanted from me I have already given it to Hannah Lee [ph.] and I don't know if she will have that big two boxes of mine handy where I could get all that stuff out of it, but I will gladly do this tomorrow and send you ASAP what I do find.  So it would be at your office in Chicago [Illinois] by the end of the week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can do that.
Story_ID: 579842
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you that--haven't covered that you think you need to talk about?
Speaker 2: Larry [Larry Crowe], you've done really well.  I don't think there's anything that I, I don't, you know, I was surprised to think that I was chosen as one of the HistoryMakers.  I didn't consider myself a HistoryMaker, it's just that I was trying to do something and sort of succeeded.  It's not what I wanted, it's not as well off as I had hoped at this stage, but then after I had that little bout with myself and then my wife [Ernestine Thomas Hayden] is at this point in time having that illness of hers, I said, "Okay, it's time to slow it down and kick back."
Speaker 1: Well tell me, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think that most of my friends have made it evident that I have accomplished something.  I don't say I have it, it took a lot of people to do what did happen.  I don't take credit for that.  And I would like to say and feel that I did something for this community [in Fort Wayne, Indiana].  The building itself is self-evident that we created something on that corner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 579843
Speaker 1: Just describe this photo for us.
Speaker 2: This photo you're now looking at is a picture of my graduating class of 1944, Parker High School [A.H. Parker High School] in Birmingham, Alabama.  We graduated two classes per year, January and June, and this is the June class.  Professor Johnson [William Bennett Johnson] was the principal at the time.  And that's, this class consisted of about 375 people, the January, the June class, it was 375 people.  This was considered the, Parker High was considered the largest black high school in America at the time.  I'm not exactly sure but I think the entire enrollment was a little over three thousand.
Speaker 1: That sounds about right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the 1942 Thundering Herd [Parker Thundering Herd] first team starters.  And that's me, number twenty-four, as the quarterback.  We always called us the signal and wing to the right and a cloud of dust (laughter).  Our football practice field was just about two block from the high school in a project.  This football field was in the project, we called it, on 8th Avenue and about Center Street in Birmingham, Alabama.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Any time you're ready, sir.
Speaker 1: I was thinking, this is a shot of the school, and the fifty-sixth class reunion of 1944, which was held in Birmingham, Alabama.  The school is no longer standing, the original, that school.  A new school was built directly behind the old school.
Speaker 2: It burnt down mysteriously.
Speaker 1: And it burned down mysteriously, yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in 1982, when I was lucky enough to win a bowling tournament in Lima, Ohio.  Took out about twelve grand in that tournament, which I used to finance my print shop.  I was working at that time for General Telephone Company [General Telephone and Electric Corporation], which is no longer in existence now.  It is now called Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of one of my Black Pages directory [Fort Wayne Black Pages], published here for the City of Fort Wayne [Indiana].  In this particular directory we focused on black entrepreneurs, businesspeople, and people of note in other fields.  It's a good resource, but because it gives the black community the wherewithal to purchase goods produced in the black community.  This was the fifth edition of the Black Pages here in Fort Wayne.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And I am a member of a consortium that is nationwide Black Pages producers.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I produced some coloring books and it went over real big.  Now all of a sudden you can get black coloring books on the newsstand and then at Kmart [Kmart Corporation], Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.], and stores like that.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Back in 1967 through '71 [1971] I produced black greeting cards, and this was one of them, of the many.  I had 155 items, including stationery, thank you notes, wedding cards, and baby cards.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I tell you what, you might see some wedding cards over there and Christmas cards.
Speaker 2: Oh, this--
Speaker 1: This is one of my Christmas cards that I produced back in the early '70s [1970s] and one of the 155 items that we had.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell you what--and this is another one of my Christmas cards, the three wise men, and they were black.
Speaker 2: Hey, in the story, one is black I know but--
Speaker 1: All three of them.
