Story_ID: 669934
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Laurie Robinson Haden, L-A-U-R-I-E, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N, H-A-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 14, 1972, and I was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an attorney and I am also the founder and CEO of Corporate Counsel Women of Color [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December the 13th, and tomorrow is my birthday.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That is right.  That's right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in New York City [New York, New York] at the law firm of Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP].
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On 42nd Street.
Speaker 1: And just for the record, you're affiliated with CBS, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I'm an attorney at CBS Corporation.
Story_ID: 669935
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a kind of a warm up and a tradition now 'cause we ask them of every one.  So the first one is--they only require a short answer--first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chinese food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: December.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Florida.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I can do all things through Jesus Christ"--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --"who strengthens me" [Philippians 4:13].
Story_ID: 669936
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Robinson] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Frances Privott Robinson, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, P-R-I-V-O-T-T, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 14, 1943.  She was born in Cofield, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's C-O-F-I--
Speaker 2: I-E-L-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, so what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  First of all, how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I am very aware of the fact that, you know, with respect to my mother's side of the family, they came from North Carolina, and my mother grew up on a farm as a sharecropper, and they worked in the fields and they, you know, they picked cotton.  They worked the tobacco and at the end of the year, they had to settle up with the owner of the property, Mr. Bashnight [ph.].  And my mother's mother [Annie Powell Privott] was also a sharecropper and that's as far as knowledge goes in terms of my mom's side of the family, our grandparents being from North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Is there, is there any, are there any stories of them having come from any other place in--
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.  I just know it starts in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: So are there any stories about slavery in the family or--
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure there--that we have stories of slavery, but those aren't stories that have been shared with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  A lot of families don't know.  Nobody passes any of that down.  And I guess it's--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I know we pick up with the sharecropper story, which not quite slavery, but it entails people of color working the land, picking cotton, dealing with tobacco and, you know, taking what they're doing and then presenting it to the owner, who makes the money, and then breaking even at the end of the year or owing money, and typically I know they would--my mom shared with me that usually they would end up breaking even, not making, you know, more than zero dollars and zero cents at the end of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mom said her father [William Privott] only had a third grade education, and though he couldn't really read or write, he always knew that his three daughters were going to go to college; and as a sharecropper, he put his three daughters through college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's remarkable.
Story_ID: 669937
Speaker 1: Did she [Haden's mother, Frances Privott Robinson] go to school in Cofield?
Speaker 2: She went to elementary school there.  The school she went to was K through twelve [kindergarten through twelfth grade], and it was called C.S. Brown [Calvin Scott Brown School, Cofield, North Carolina] and then she went to North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina], which at the time was North Carolina College for Negroes [sic. North Carolina College at Durham].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  North Carolina Central and, so was she there in the early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: She was there in the early '60s [1960s].  She graduated in 1964 and at North Carolina Central University, she met my father [James Robinson], who graduated from North Carolina Central University in 1963.
Speaker 1: Now she was there then, unless I'm wrong, during the sit-ins, right?  The first--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --college sit-ins in the country there in North Carolina Central in 1960, right?
Speaker 2: And she participated in those sit-ins.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's good.  That's good.  So, so she has a--does she have stories about the sit-ins that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: She does.  She has stories about how they would go to restaurants, and they would sit at the tables waiting to be served, and the people would threaten them and then they would throw eggs in their faces and then the police would come, and the dogs would come, but they were active.  They were together.  They were steadfast and unmovable and, you know, they made sure that their were voices were heard, and I admire that so much in terms of the people who had to go through that during the, you know, the '60s [1960s].  You know, I was born in 1972.  I haven't had that experience, but the fact that you're dealing with such oppressive behavior and you're still able to persevere through that, you know, that really resonates with me, and I feel proud that my mom and my dad were a part of that movement.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what did your mother major in?
Speaker 2: Her major is English.
Story_ID: 669938
Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: James Russell Lowe Robinson [James Robinson], J-A-M-E-S, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, L-O-W-E, R-O-B-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Now is there a, is there a story behind Russell Lowe?  It sounds like a complete name in the middle of his name, so I just wondered, wondered if--
Speaker 2: There's no story (laughter).
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, all right.  And he was born in 1938, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where- whereabouts?
Speaker 2: He was born in Scotland Neck, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now again what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: I cannot go back as far as slavery, but he, like my mother [Frances Privott Robinson], his family, they were tenant farmers.  They, you know, they worked the land.  They worked the field.  And he found his way to North Carolina Central University [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], as I mentioned, where he met my mother; and then upon graduation from law school [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina], they moved to the Washington, D.C. area.
Story_ID: 669939
Speaker 1: So he, he went to law school, you said.  Where did he go to law school?
Speaker 2: He went to law school, I would say, in 1939 [sic.], and he went to the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina School of Law, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and at the time, he was the only African American in the entire class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that is something.
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry.  He didn't, he went to law school--I'm thinking of the year he was born.  He would have gone to law school in 1965.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Nineteen sixty-five [1965], UNC, all right.  Okay.  Now did he have, does he have any stories about that experience?
Speaker 2: You know, I think for him, he does share those stories, and my mother [Frances Privott Robinson], she shares stories as well of the challenges and the difficulties in the '60s [1960s] of going to postgraduate education, pursuing that route and being in school, you know, where he was in the minority, where coming from North Carolina Central University [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], they had always been in the majority, so she said it was challenging for him to adjust to being the only minority in the school, but he met the challenges head on and he ended up building some pretty good relationships with his Caucasian student--fellow students who they stayed in contact even as practitioners in the law.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he start in '65 [1965] or come out in sixty--well--
Speaker 2: He started in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he came out in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did your father [James Robinson] go into private practice, or did he, or did he work for a corporation or--
Speaker 2: When he graduated, he went to work in Washington, D.C. for the National Labor Relations Board, where he was a labor attorney.
Speaker 1: Okay.  NLRB they call it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right.  So this was during the--I guess it was--this would have been during the early days of the Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] administration, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now I'm going to ask you more about both of them.  Oh, what graduate degree did your mother get?  Did she--?
Speaker 2: She went to Howard University [Howard University School of Education, Washington, D.C.] and she received her master's in education.
Story_ID: 669940
Speaker 1: Now when you think about their personalities and what they look like, their sense of humor, what their views are, their dispositions--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: You know, I like to say I take, I take (laughter), I take the positive attributes of my mother [Frances Privott Robinson] and the positive attributes of my father [James Robinson].  My mother, when she graduated from NCCU [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and then she made her way up to Washington, D.C. with my father, she started in the D.C. public school system [District of Columbia Public Schools] as an English teacher.  And during the course of her career, she was instrumental in helping to unionize the schools, helping the teachers have a voice, helping the teachers have rights and then she was also involved in something called the black caucus for teachers [American Federation of Teachers Black Caucus] and she would put on these conferences and these events, and my brother [James R. Robinson] and I, we would go to these events.  But through that, I was able to see my mom as a leader, an organizer.  And with respect to the attributes of my father, my father, he was very social.  He loved to network.  Whenever we would go to the grocery store, he would pull out business cards and just connect with people in the neighborhood and try to bring people in our community together and he was a labor lawyer and then I ended up going into labor and employment law as a practitioner in the law.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now did your mother's group, the black caucus of--for teachers, did it, did it become a local chapter for the National Association for Black School Educators [sic. National Alliance of Black School Educators]?
Speaker 2: No, they were in connection with the AFT.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The American Federation of--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Teachers [American Federation of Teachers].  It was a subset of that where they, you know, fought for the rights of diverse teachers in that profession.
Speaker 1: Yeah, generally--I mean, so she--was she ever a member of NABSE?
Speaker 2: She wasn't a member of NABSE.  She was a member of the AFT.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some people are both, you know.  That's why I asked, you know.  You could, you could be both.  In fact, most people are both, I mean, teachers are but, okay.
Story_ID: 669941
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's his name?  And is he younger or older?
Speaker 2: He's four years older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His name is James Russell Robinson, Jr. [James R. Robinson].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And he's an accountant now, is that correct?
Speaker 2: He--his background is in accounting, but he's now segued into the field of human resources and employee engagement in the government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: You know, we had a great community, and when I think about my childhood, I think about the times when all of the kids from the neighborhood would come together, and we would play in the street and we would have kickball tournaments and then the ice cream truck would come, and we were so excited when the ice cream truck would come and then our parents would make us come inside when the lights came up on the streetlights, so I, when I think about my childhood, I really just think about, you know, just connecting with all of the kids in the community, and how we would, you know, we would play hopscotch.  We would double dutch.  We would ride our bikes, and everyone was engaged in that.  And, now, you know, when I'm in my community, you know, you don't really see kids outside playing anymore.  They're inside, you know, on the, on mobile apps and on their, on their cell phone playing games and, you know, I really appreciated my early days of just having community with my--my fellow classmates who we could play with every day.
Story_ID: 669942
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in Fort Washington, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Fort Washington, Maryland, which is in Prince George's County--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Maryland, okay.  And, now, this is a place where lot of the black professionals in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] started to move to, I guess, in the, I guess, in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and still is a largely black area, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my, when my--yes.  When my parents [Frances Privott Robinson and James Robinson] initially moved up to the area, it was called Oxon Hill [Maryland], and the neighborhood at that time was actually a predominantly white area and then as more African Americans started moving into Prince George's County in our neighborhood, the white people who lived there left the area and moved into Northern Virginia.  So eventually you looked up and, you know, you now have a community that's predominantly African American, but I remember when I was in the our, in the first grade [at Indian Queen Elementary School, Fort Washington, Maryland] when I would go town to the local McDonald's, you know, the white high school kids would fight the black high school kids, so there was a lot of racial tension in the '70s [1970s], but like I said, as the area started to become, you know, more predominantly African American, those tensions went away and, you know, today Prince George's County is the wealthiest African American, one of the wealthiest African American counties in the United States.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, and the rents are still high, and the housing prices are (laughter) still high.
Speaker 2: Yes, they are.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not as high as New York City [New York, New York] but--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --they are high.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah and it's a nice area, though.  It's a nice area.
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: A lot of it is anyway.  So Oxon Hill, now this is your neighborhood, right, Oxon Hill?
Speaker 2: Oxon Hill and then it turned--and they added a zip code and then it became Fort Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what was your block like?  What were the hou- what was the housing like?
Speaker 2: We had a block.  We lived on Friar Road, and my neighbor to the left, his name was John-John [ph.], and they had a swimming pool.  And then the neighbor to the right, his name was Tommy [ph.].  He had a swimming pool.  And Tommy's dad was a police officer for the District of Columbia police department [Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia].  He flew helicopters.  But one summer, he taught all the kids how to swim, so during the summers, we would go between houses (laughter) and swim and have fun.  We would stay in the pool for six and seven, six to seven hours, but we had a great time.  Again we would, you know, have kickball tournaments in the backyard.  We would rake leaves and then jump onto the pile of leaves and make a mess.  We had a great, happy childhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That sounds like it.
Story_ID: 669943
Speaker 1: Is there an Oxon Hill Elementary School?  Is that where you--
Speaker 2: I went to--
Speaker 1: --started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Indian Queen Elementary School [Fort Washington, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Indian Queen, okay.  Indian Queen, all right.  And did you like school?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really liked school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought you probably would.  And did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite subject, if I, if I think about it, would be English.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And favorite teachers in school?
Speaker 2: I had a teacher named Ms. Brooks [ph.], favorite teacher who actually lived six doors down on Friar Road.
Speaker 1: So, now what were you like in grade school?  What were you interested in?  And did you, were you thinking about becoming a lawyer?
Speaker 2: I was not thinking about becoming a lawyer but I did, I had an entrepreneurial spirit and I remember (laughter), I remember when I was in elementary school, maybe like the sixth grade, I decided I was going to sell these magazines called Grit.  So I went on--it wasn't even online.  I don't think they had online.  Somehow I ordered these magazine newspapers called Grit and I was going to go outside and sell the Grit magazines for ten cents each, so I'd go door to door trying to sell these Grits.  No one would buy them so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they--
Speaker 2: There was a loss in funds because no one would buy my Grit magazine, but I really liked the thought of, you know, putting my mind to something and being in control of it and trying to, you know, get customers and provide customer service and, you know, later when I was in high school [Oxon Hill High School, Oxon Hill, Maryland], I started a carwash business in my driveway on Saturdays.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now Grit was advertised in the back of comic books and other magazines in those days.  That's probably how you found out about it.  It was like the online for those days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I'm thinking like, online, I'm like, wait.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There was no Internet then.
Speaker 1: No, but it was something that you would see commonly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, you'd see, sell Grit, you know, and they'd see a picture of a smiling kid, like he's making money, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, guess what?  No one bought my Grit magazine.  And then when I was in elementary school, I wrote a book called 'Dawn and Her Mom' [Laurie Robinson].  And my mom [Frances Privott Robinson] helped me publish this book, 'Dawn and Her Mom.'  And there was a local bookstore down the street, and I sold the book to the bookstore, and they gave me thirty cents for each book sold and they would keep seventy cents.
Speaker 1: Now what was 'Dawn and Her Mom' about?  What's the book about?
Speaker 2: You know, 'Dawn and Her Mom,' it dealt with the adventures of Dawn, who I guess it was me, and her mother.  And Dawn and her mother went to the grocery store one day, and, you know, as Dawn and her mother--they're shopping.  Dawn sees a shoplifter so Dawn goes and tells her mom, "Mom, there's a person over there, and they're stealing the groceries," and the mother kind of doesn't pay her any mind or attention and blows her off (laughter).  And Dawn decides, forget it.  I'm going to devise a plan to get this shoplifter, so Dawn takes this cart and pushes it into the shoplifter, and all of the cans that the shoplifter had in his coat come flying off out of there (laughter).  And then the manager comes out, and the police come and then Dawn ends up, not only getting a reward but Dawn ends up--and the irony of it is, I wrote this book at eight.  And the book at the end, it says, "Dawn helps capture the shoplifter, and she ends up on TV at CBS."  So I end up at CBS, not on TV but as a lawyer, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I sold two hundred copies of that book.
Story_ID: 669944
Speaker 1: What is CBS in the D.C. area [Washington, D.C.]? Is it WUSA [WUSA-TV] or is it--?
Speaker 2: WUSA--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Channel 9.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were big Channel 9 CBS watchers, 'The Price is Right,' the soap operas, so I've been a big fan of CBS since I was, I guess, eight years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a special--I mean, was there a special newscaster or a commentator you like on CBS or a show?
Speaker 2: J.C. Hayward was her name.  She's no longer with Channel 9, but she was the newscaster that I would watch a lot.
Speaker 1: Yes.  That's--we've interviewed her actually [sic.], yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, really.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we--
Speaker 2: Yeah, J.C. Hayward and, you know, it's interesting because now when I watch the news, some of the people who were on Channel 9 are now on Channel 7 [WJLA-TV, Washington, D.C.].  People on Channel 7 are now on Channel 4 [WRC-TV, Washington, D.C.], but it's the same people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is interesting.  So CBS had a place--now when you were growing up in--well, you were growing up in the, in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], I guess is when cable was starting to emerge, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause when I was--I'm older than you, and I remember having three stations.  That's all we had then.  But, so cable is coming along so--well, did you all have cable TV when you were about, you know.
Speaker 2: Cable came when I was in the seventh grade [at Oxon Hill Middle School, Fort Washington, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember we convinced our moth- you know, our mother [Frances Privott Robinson], look, we have to have this cable box.  So she went and bought the cable box, and we had cable in the basement and we watched that cable every single day and we thought it was so great because it didn't have any commercials (laughter).  And then at the time, we were watching, you know, all of these music videos that you could now start getting from BET [Black Entertainment Television] and MTV [Music Television; MTV], so the music you're hearing now, you're seeing a visual element to it, so I really enjoyed cable.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those are the early days of 'Thriller' with Michael Jackson--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --and all that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, and this is also a time period that Ted Turner tried to buy--of CNN, Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.], tried to buy CBS, I think (laughter).  I don't think it worked.
Speaker 2: It didn't work.
Speaker 1: But he came close to buying CBS, but you wouldn't--did--you wouldn't have paid attention to that, though at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't paying attention to that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I was watching the Michael Jackson 'Thriller' videos.
Story_ID: 669945
Speaker 1: So what did you, did you consider for a career?  Did you consider becoming a writer at that time period?  I mean, were you thinking about that?
Speaker 2: When I was in middle school [Oxon Hill Middle School, Fort Washington, Maryland]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, having a, having a little book ['Dawn and Her Mom,' Laurie Robinson] out in the store and, you know, that's--
Speaker 2: You know what, no.  I didn't really think about becoming a writer.  We had a neighbor who lived maybe ten houses down, and she was an executive with the [U.S.] Environmental Protection Agency and she was in charge of the environmental justice initiative, so I knew I wanted to be a lawyer because my dad [James Robinson] was a lawyer but I wanted to do environmental law and I was going to go and become an environmental lawyer to save the trees and the world from pollutants.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So that's, so but did you stick with that, you know, you know, through college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and all that?  Did you stick with that idea?  Was that the main major idea (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Through college I did have the idea that I was going to go and be a lawyer and become an environmental lawyer and then when I got to law school [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana], I took a class called environmental law and I said this is not for me.
Speaker 1: What was the problem?
Speaker 2: You know, it was a very statute heavy focus on all of these laws like CERCLA [Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980], and it just, it didn't have the excitement that I was looking for, so I knew after taking that class that environmental law may be a stretch for me and I ended up doing an internship in law school at the National Football League in their labor counsel division; and that's how I fell into labor and employment law.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, we'll get to that later.
Story_ID: 669946
Speaker 1: In 19--I guess--'86 [1986], you entered Oxon Hill High School [Oxon Hill, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now at the time that you entered Oxon Hill, what--was it still, was it integrated, or was it--
Speaker 2: It was predominantly African American, and there were aspects of high school that I enjoyed, especially when I became a junior and a senior.  I think in the ninth grade, I felt awkward because you're moving from middle school into the high school and you're trying to find your way, so I think the ninth grade, I wasn't too excited about because, you know, you're just meeting all of these new people, you know, in middle school and elementary school, you have the classes with the same people every single day and once you get to high school, you know, you start meeting new people who you don't know, so it's making that adjustment, but by my junior and senior year, I felt like I was really finding my way.  I'd made--met some great people, had some good friends, had some favorite professors or teachers and then I graduated.
Speaker 1: So what was your--what were you interested in your junior and senior year?
Speaker 2: Having fun (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah but in terms (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nothing, you know--
Speaker 1: --of school work and the professors that--
Speaker 2: Oh, school work, I was on the--
Speaker 1: Was there a focus--I mean--
Speaker 2: I was on the school newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I really enjoyed writing articles for the school newspaper and I again, I enjoyed English.  I don't know if it was because my mom [Frances Privott Robinson], she's the English teacher by background, but I enjoyed English and I enjoyed working on the school newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a chance to travel much when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think we stayed between D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Maryland and trips to North Carolina.  That was the extent of our travel.  And I really didn't start traveling abroad until the launch of Corporate Counsel Women of Color [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now were you involved in, I guess, student government at all in high school?
Speaker 2: I was not involved in student government in high school but I was involved in student government in undergrad [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] and in law school [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I wonder if there was a, was there a black student organization at Oxon Hill or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: Because it was predominantly African American.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's interesting because that seems to be a dynamic that if it's a predominantly African American setting that you're less likely to have a black student union.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Which is--means that students would be less likely to come into contact with black history materials and other identifiers and identity type things that if they were a white school (laughter).  They formed an organization--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that that's the whole issue in, whenever you're in the minority, you know, you will feel the need to collect with people of similar backgrounds, so for us, we were in the majority, so we didn't need any of that, you know.  We were the, you know, we were it so, you know, I'm sure that people who are in the minority may have felt more of a need to connect and have a unit and have a body for the things that were of importance to them; but, for us, you know, it was our world there, so we didn't need anything because all of our needs were being met.
Story_ID: 669947
Speaker 1: What was your rank in high school [Oxon Hill High School, Oxon Hill, Maryland]?  Were you highly ranked as a student, or?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wouldn't say that.  (Laughter) I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I would say I was in the middle, in the middle.  I wasn't at the top.  I wasn't at the bottom.  I was in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, considering where you are now, I mean, you would think, you know, I mean, 'cause people would assume that you were the top student or something, you know, but that's not always true with people.
Speaker 2: As my mother [Frances Privott Robinson] would say, I'm a late bloomer, and I actually had a, I have a funny situation where I had a friend, and we used to have so much fun in our classes.  We sit in the back.  We'd laugh.  We'd talk.  We'd tell jokes.  And I had this English class I was taking and I wasn't (laughter), I wasn't turning in my homework.  I wasn't--anyway, I ended up failing the class and I had to go to summer school, and my mom was so angry with me.  She's like, "How can you fail English?  English is my subject matter."  But I think by my junior, senior year, I really turned the corner and started doing better in school and when I got into college [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], I really excelled when I got to college.
Speaker 1: Now was there something that happened just preceding your junior year that caused a transition in the way you were thinking about your studies?
Speaker 2: I think just maturity and then I also think, you know, focusing in your junior year about the SAT and trying to go to college, you know, that light bulb turns on when you're thinking about, okay, now it's time to start getting serious and getting the grades up and getting the GPA [grade point average] up, but I just think my maturity level helped me settle in to just being a better student, you know, focusing and getting my homework in on time, taking time to take the test, taking the time to take the tests to get a good grade.  That came later for me, but it did eventually come.
Story_ID: 669948
Speaker 1: How did you choose North Carolina Central?  I know your parents [Frances Privott Robinson and James Robinson] went there, but is that the primary reason or is there another reason?
Speaker 2: I was not given a choice (laughter) because my parents went to North Carolina Central University [North Carolina College at Durham; North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina].  My aunts went to North Carolina Central University, so my whole life, I was told, "You're going to North Carolina Central University, end of the discussion."  So when it was time for me to select schools, I remember having a conversation with my mother, and she said, "Listen, you have two choices.  You can go to the local community college or you can go to North Carolina Central University."  So I said, "Okay, I'll go to North Carolina Central University" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, so either Prince George's Community College [Largo, Maryland] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's what she said.  You can either go to Prince George's Community College or you can go to North Carolina Central University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I said, "Okay, I'll go to North Carolina Central University."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is in, you started in 1990, I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Nineteen ninety [1990] and what was, what was, you know, it was a lot different from PG County, I would think, or Prince George's County [Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Durham, North Carolina (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --is different than Prince's George County, but I think what is great about going from Oxon Hill High School [Oxon Hill, Maryland], a predominantly African American environment to then going to higher education in a predominantly African American environment is, you know, you're not dealing with the barriers and the hurdles.  You can just go and be you and be all that you want to be without being trapped or marginalized or anything, so when you can operate in your full capacity and not have hindrance and barriers, you know, you're just going to be a stronger person in my opinion, and at NCCU, it was a great environment.  It was nurturing.  You had great profession--professors who had a strong sense of community and had a strong sense of giving back, so as a student, I was nurtured and I was pushed to excel.  And I remember when I was a freshman, I lived in this dorm called Eagleson [Eagleson Residence Hall], and it was all women, and they had another dorm called McLean Hall [McLean Residence Hall], which was a coed dorm, so I said, "Well, next year, my sophomore year, I'm going to live in this coed dorm," but the catch was, in order to live in the coed dorm, you had to be a part of the University Honors Program, so I said, "Forget it.  I'm living in this coed dorm.  I'm going to get involved with the University Honors Program," so the University Honors Program required that you take twenty-one hours a semester.  That's seven classes and that you maintain a 3.0 [grade point average].  So I remember I went home and I said, "I'm going to get involved with the University Honors Program.  I'm going to take twenty-one hours.  I'm going to get all A's and Bs on these," (laughter), "on the classes," and my mom laughed.  She's like, "You're not going to take twenty-one hours."  But anyway I did it and I got I think all Bs one semester and then I was able to move into McLean Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, was it as--what you thought it was going to be (laughter) when you moved in?
Speaker 2: It was--yeah, it was great (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it as great as--
Speaker 2: Because it was a small building, and I ended up staying in McLean Hall my sophomore, my junior and my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a great facility.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were in the University Honors Program.  You're taking twenty-one hours.  Now your--did you start off majoring in political science?  I know you graduated with--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Political science and public administration.
Story_ID: 669949
Speaker 1: And you're in the Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society.  Now you were Miss North Carolina Central University.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year did that take place in?
Speaker 2: I ran for Miss NCCU in 1993 and then I reigned as Miss NCCU in 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So '93 [1993], '94 [1994], okay.  And was it a, was it a--what did you have to do as Miss NCCU?
Speaker 2: You had to have, you had to compete in these collegiate pageants and you also had to have community outreach, so I had some activities in the community that I was involved in and then to com- to compete in these pageants, there was a pageant at the time called the 'Miss Collegiate African American Pageant' that aired on TV, but they required, one, that you had a 3.0 [grade point average] or higher and that you had a talent and that you could answer world issues and just be well rounded for those competitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you appear in the TV show?
Speaker 2: I did.  I didn't place as a finalist, but it was an honor to be there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.  So was this on BET [Black Entertainment Television], or where was it, where was the show?
Speaker 2: At the time, they aired it on local affiliate stations around the country.  In D.C. [Washington, D.C.], it was like FOX 5 [WTTG-TV].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So do you, do you know--remember who the sponsor of it was or who sponsored the pageant?
Speaker 2: It's a gentleman.  His name was--or is Frank Mercado-Valdes, and he started with the pageants and then he went onto found the African Heritage Network.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Would eventually--was affiliated with Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], and what they would do is, they would purchase black films and then license the films, but he got his foundation in the pageants.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 669950
Speaker 1: Now you also were able to serve as an intern for the U.S. House of Representatives, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So who did you intern for?
Speaker 2: I interned for Congressman Albert Wynn, and he was a congressman in the 4th District [4th Congressional District] where Prince George's County [Maryland] is located.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: W-Y-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Albert Wynn, all right, okay.  And, okay.  And you were an intern for the Durham Police Department?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: United States Senate?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who was the senator?
Speaker 2: The senator was--oh, his name escapes me.  I can picture him.  Sarbanes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sarbanes of Sarbanes-Oxley [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Paul Sarbanes.  That is his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's now retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I loved my time working for the [U.S.] Senate and the [U.S.] House of Representatives.
Story_ID: 669951
Speaker 1: Now you served as a campaign worker for Clinton [William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Gore [Al Gore].
Speaker 2: At NCCU [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, um-hm, um-hm.  So, yeah Clinton campaigned--it was nine--he was elected in 1992 when you're, I guess--
Speaker 2: At NCCU.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you were a sophomore, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did he carry North Carolina?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't recall.  I believe he did that year.  But what was great is our chancellor at the time--his name--he's passed away, [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was a big civil rights lawyer and he was also connected with Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], and they worked it out where students from NCCU would have an opportunity to intern at the White House, so I eventually was able to do an internship with the first lady's office, Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was just a great experience.
Speaker 1: That's great.  Now this is Julius Chambers who is one--former head of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A famous civil rights lawyer and, you know, so he was the chancellor of the--
Speaker 2: University.
Speaker 1: --of the university, okay.  Did you get a chance to know him fairly well?
Speaker 2: Yes, because as Miss North Carolina Central University, we would have to go out to do different events and sit in at different meetings, and he became a mentor to me, and I remember when I would--started my career out in New York [New York], whenever he would come to New York for the Legal Defense Fund board meetings, he would invite me to the dinners, and we would see each other and we would catch up, and he had a profound impact on my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's something.  Yeah, he just passed away two years ago--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I think, okay.
Speaker 2: So were there any special professors at NCCU that you want to mention?
Speaker 1: Dr. Eugene Eaves.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was the professor over the University Honors Program.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they would, you know, push us.  They would prepare us for--we had different competitions where we would have to become versed on a world issue and then speak about it and articulate it, so he had a great vision and he gave the students under him great direction in leadership, and I remember him.  I remember Chancellor Chambers, and they had, huge impact on me.
Story_ID: 669952
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you attended the National Conference on Undergraduate Research in Salt Lake City, Utah, where you delivered a paper about how the print media affects the outcome of political elections in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now this a day--these are the days when Jesse Helms was--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was, you know, the scourge of (laughter) North Carolina.  I mean, from our point of view, but there was a black man [Harvey Gantt] who ran against him.  I can't think of his, who his--
Speaker 2: I can see his face.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he came close to beating him, Jesse Helms.
Speaker 2: He came close.
Speaker 1: He came close but not--
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And a real--it was--the campaign was covered by '60 Minutes.'  I mean, you know, CBS (laughter) and, yeah it was a big deal.  It was a big deal.  All over the country people were watching that 'cause they wanted to make--people were rooting for the black man to beat Jesse Helms (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I can see his face clearly.  I just can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--his name is on the tip of my tongue 'cause we discussed him when I interviewed [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers, we talked about that race.  So were you involved in his campaign at all or--
Speaker 2: I can't recall.  I probably, if I, if it happened when I was at NC Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], I probably would have been involved in some way.  And this paper may have had something to do with what was going on at the time.
Speaker 1: And I think another politician in North Carolina that was really important in those days would have been John Edwards, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, did you ever get a chance to meet him, or?
Speaker 2: I did not meet John Edwards.
Story_ID: 669953
Speaker 1: Tell us about the White House internship and what that was like.  So did you have to move to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for--I mean, was it over the summer in D.C.?
Speaker 2: It was over the summer, and I stayed at my mom's [Frances Privott Robinson] house who--she's in Fort Washington, Maryland, which is maybe about twenty minutes from the White House, and my mom would--we'd carpool together during the summer, and she'd drop me off at the bus station, and I would go on over to the White House so I interned for the press office, and it was great because Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], she was really hands on so she would come to the office.  You would see her.  She would interface with the interns.  She would, you know, you just, you got to see this great leader at the time, when she was pushing healthcare.  That's when I was there.  And she just had a mission and a vision and a plan and, you know, she ran for president this year, and it was just great to see her, you know, you know, still advocating for the things that she believes in, and I'm proud to have had an opportunity to work with her.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, and that--the people, I know the media criticized her as--or some of the, you know, people around the country said she was too pushy, you know, that sort of thing in those days, those early days.  But, okay.  So, and that was, that discussion that, you know, that's a discussion I don't think anybody would have now today, but in those days, you know, first ladies--it was seen as being too pushy and too focused on an issue.
Speaker 2: Well, and they help to unfocus her thereafter, you know, to help with the reelection of Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  I'm getting this from something I saw on TV, that they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --moved here into other initiatives to focus on women and empowerment around the world, which I think ended up helping her find her voice and let her know that she had global impact.
Speaker 1: Did--was that kind of discussion going on around the White House when you were there about her activities in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not at that time when I was interning.
Speaker 1: Now you were an intern in, what, in--was it your, was this your junior year or senior year [at North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: This would have been my senior year--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I had just graduated.  It would have been the summer of 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Summer of '94 [1994].  And, now this is the summer when Newt Gingrich and his friends were plotting to take over [U.S.] Congress so, you know, or the, you know, and they, which they actually did.  They had a, like a Republican Revolution in, yeah, in '94 [1994].  So, but in the press office, I mean, you interacted with who in the press office?
Speaker 2: There was a lady.  Her name, her name is Lisa Caputo.  She was the press secretary for Hillary Clinton and then we would interface slightly with her chief of staff at the time, Maggie Williams.  And then also in the press office, there was a lady.  Her name is Karen Finney and then another gentleman, Neil Stern [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we would handle the dealings with Mrs. Clinton and the press and her schedule and then clippings.
Story_ID: 669954
Speaker 1: So was there anything special about graduation [from North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I graduated (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you do anything at the graduation or did you have a--yeah.
Speaker 2: My family came and it was, it was exciting.  My mother [Frances Privott Robinson] was there, and my father [James Robinson] was there, and my aunts came, and it was just a proud moment to graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did you choose Indiana University [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana] for law school?
Speaker 2: I was talking to my mother, and she had a friend who had gone to IU and knew the dean at the school and she said, "You know, why don't you look into IU at Bloomington [Indiana]?"  And I said, "Well, okay.  I'll go out there, and I vi- I'll visit."  So I went out to IU Bloomington and I visited.  And I loved it there.  I would not think initially Indiana University would be a place that I would enjoy, but the students, they were so nice.  The campus was beautiful.  They had state of the art facilities and it just--they had a great library that really impressed me with volumes of books so that's how I ended up at Indiana Bloomington.  And I had a great time from the time I was there 'til the time that I left.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I hated to leave (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you consider any other school at the time?
Speaker 2: I considered other schools, but at the end of the day, it was Indiana Bloomington where I was going to be.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about Frank Motley.  We mentioned him before we got started, and you were telling me that he was an influential person in terms of the Indiana University.
Speaker 2: Yes, Frank Motley, he was the dean of admissions at Indiana Bloomington.  And he really worked hard to make sure that diverse students, you know, had a chance to apply to the school, and they had a very strong recruiting effort, and I believe that when I went to IU at Bloomington, my class had maybe forty African American students in that class and then the other classes before me, you know, had maybe forty to fifty African Americans so for law schools, that's--those numbers are pretty unheard of and today, you know, you don't hear of schools with a lot of diversity, but he made that like his life's mission, to make sure that they got great students at IU at Bloomington and, you know, gave us an opportunity to be there.
Story_ID: 669955
Speaker 1: Was law school difficult?
Speaker 2: No, it was not difficult.  I mean, you're adjusting.  Unfortunately, my father [James Robinson] passed away during my first year of law school, but what's great is that, one, he got to see me off to law school and he saw me pursuing the profession that he was in.  But just even in the, in that difficulty, the professors were very supportive of me.  My classmates were very supportive of me.  I got through that rough first year of dealing with his passing and, you know, I went on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have a favorite aspect of law school?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of favorite aspects of law school.  I enjoyed the classes.  I enjoyed the facilities, the neighborhood.  I mean, it's like everything was perfectly situated within a, within ten minutes of a, of a drive, so I had a favorite restaurant.  There was a movie theater I loved going to.  They had a great gym I would go to and pool, and all of my friends and I, we would go out and we would eat and we would, you know, study.  I mean, it was just a great atmosphere.  And IU Bloomington [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana] was the first time in my life I had been a minority so, you know, just adjusting to that, it was an interesting experience that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you had a study group, strong study group?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you recommend that to anybody that goes to law school?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  You have to have a study group, and what we found was, a lot of the students in the study group, you know, they had understand- you know, you're ge- you're getting different perspectives as you have different people from different backgrounds.  Some people come from a family line of lawyers, so they can give you a different perspective during that study group and then you have people who come from different parts of the country, who have a different perspective as well so you just have a diversity of thoughts that help to enhance the study session.
Speaker 1: Now did your father approve of U- of University of Indiana?
Speaker 2: Yes, and--
Speaker 1: Was it--okay.
Speaker 2: He drove me out to Indiana University so he got to see the campus, he really was proud of me that he was able to go to law school.  You know, he dropped me off in August and unfortunately he had passed away that November.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did it help having a father that was a lawyer in terms of your--the way you thought as a, as a law student?
Speaker 2: I feel so.  I feel so because just in dealing with him and understanding his logic and the way he looked at things and the way he was able to peel back the layers of the onion.  I think I was able to do that as well because I've seen him do it and I was able to share that process with my fellow students who, you know, maybe they were the first person in their family to go to college and the first person in their family to go to law school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they didn't have the benefit of that at all.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now you--I know I listened to a video of you give a lecture at the BALSA conference [National Black Law Students Association], and you were advising law students to start studying for the bar while they're in law school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now did you do that?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, you know, I was never a super strong test taker so I said, "Look, on this bar, I really just need to get a head start, and I want to just learn the fundamentals of just test taking strategies," and then, you know, when I went to IU at Bloomington, I found out that, you know, my Caucasian students, you know, they were in prep study sessions since the third grade learning test taking strategies, which I never had.  So anyway I started studying the bar early because the multi state, it was a huge chunk of the test, and I just took the time and I went through each question and dissected each question and learned the fundamentals of test taking and I passed the bar on the first try and I scored high enough to waive into D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and not even having to take that bar.
Speaker 1: That's something, yeah.
Speaker 2: And the lesson I learned from that is that really if we get people to study for the bar early, or if you just give people the opportunity to understand the fundamentals of test taking strategies, as other people are, you know, we go to a situation where we think, you know, everyone's starting at the same place.  That is not the case.  You have people who have years of, you know, they're going through Kumon.  They're going through Sylvan Learning [Sylvan Learning, LLC].  Their parents are putting additional education into how to take a test and that's why they score very well and very high on tests because they had that time and someone's putting money into it.  And then you have others who--they're not exposed to test taking strategies.  Then they take the test.  They fail it or whatever the case may be, but if we all can, you know, have access, you know, it levels the playing field.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's a good point.
Story_ID: 669956
Speaker 1: Who were some of your professors that you, you know, remember that really were remarkable or fellow students [at Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember Professor Markell [Bruce A. Markell].  He was my contracts teacher.  Professor Henderson [ph.], she was a big women's rights professor, and I ended up writing a published article in one of the classes that I took under her dealing with the sex trafficking and globalization of sex trafficking and the impact on women around the world from a global perspective.  And then I remember Professor Shawn Herse [ph.], who was our criminal law professor and then Dean Fromm [Len Fromm].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was sex trafficking a major issue in the Midwest in those days?  Because I know it is now.
Speaker 2: It is now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I was wondering.
Speaker 2: Actually it wasn't.  But what was great about the globalization focus is you were, you were able to see that depending on where the young lady lived, she would enter drug trafficking for different reasons.  Here in the United States at the time, the women were finding their way into drug trafficking because they ran (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sex trafficking or--
Speaker 2: I mean, I'm sorry, sex trafficking.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they would run away from home.  Where in India, the parents would sell the child into the trafficking for money, and there were different reasons globally why these young girls, some as--like age seven would end up in sex trafficking, and I think even today in Prince George's County [Maryland], they've seen an uptick in sex trafficking.  And the way it's happening now is, you have young kids who are connecting with predators on their cell phones through mobile apps, and the predators are promising them telephones and shoes and clothes, and the children take it because their parents aren't giving it to them, and by the time these people give them clothes, shoes, et cetera, then the person goes to collect from the young kid, and next thing you know, they're into, you know, sex trafficking.
Story_ID: 669957
Speaker 1: So when you were getting ready to graduate from law school, did you know where you were--did you have a job lined up?  Or, oh, oh, first, let me ask you: did you clerk for anybody when you were in law school?
Speaker 2: When I was in law school, the first year, I clerked for the Environmental Pro- the [U.S.] Department of Energy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The second year, I clerked for the National Football League.  And during that summer, you know, I was determined that I was going to work in New York City [New York, New York] so I got on the telephone and started doing cold calls to different labor and employment lawyers at corporations where I wanted to work and I picked up the phone and called a lady at CBS [CBS Corporation], her name is Susan K. Anderson, and asked her if she would meet with me, and she took the time out of her schedule to meet with me, and we stayed in contact and then I picked up the phone and called the owner of a law firm, Epstein Becker and Green [Epstein Becker and Green, P.C.], and Mr. Green [Ronald M. Green], he met with me while I was there that summer, and I was able to score an interview with the firm, and they gave me an offer to come and work at Epstein Becker and Green, and I had that, I had that secured by December of my last year in law school.
Speaker 1: So you were on the ball.  You were on the case.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had to be because everyone said, "Look," you know, at the time, you know, they're saying to me, "you can't find a job in New York, not coming from Indiana University [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana].  You have to come from a New York school."  So I said, you know what, let me do what I can to get the ball rolling, so I just started calling anyone who would answer the phone.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Somebody told me once that a lot of people in New York are from--in fact, most people are from somewhere else.  I mean, a lot of people in the arts and other professions, they're not all from New York City (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think now in 2016, that's the case.  I think during, you know, the late, the late '90s [1990s], you know, the people at Indiana, when they graduated, they stayed in Indiana.  Today it's more of a national school where people will leave Indiana and go to different parts of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Epstein Becker and Green.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My first law firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you know [HistoryMaker] Kenneth Standard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ken Standard, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, all right, all right.  Now he was a partner there.  Was he a partner when you were there?
Speaker 2: Not when I was there.  He came in after I left, but he's done a lot in the diversity space.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how many black people were there?  What was the percentage, say, of black folks, yeah?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time that I was in the New York office, I was the only black female; and then we had one gentleman, he was African American.
Story_ID: 669958
Speaker 1: What was your experience like there?  Were you, were you--did someone mentor you or try to--you know?
Speaker 2: Mr. Green [Ronald M. Green] connected me with Fran Maloney Green [Frances Maloney Green], and she was my mentor.  You know, but I think like this was like the first time of having a professional job for me, and in the, in the law environment, as I talked to my different friends who worked at different law firms, everyone kind of had the same story in the course of, you know, they just found it challenging to get the right type of work and they found it challenging to get enough work to meet their yearly billable hours of two thousand hours, and as we talked about these issues, everyone shared the same story that, you know, it seemed like the male Caucasians connected more with the male Caucasian rainmaker partners, who had a book of business to share, so they would bring in the guy who looked like them, who reminded them of them and they would get the training and they would get ample work and they would get ample billable hours, and the diverse people would kind of struggle, you know.  They may only get a research project, where their Caucasian counterpart would actually go to the courthouse and get training and development and access and exposure so, you know, for me, I did have a mentor but I also understood there and in the environment and in the profession that there was a big challenge and a struggle for women of color and attorneys of color to gain access to quality work, to get the right type of assignments to help them build their skillset, to have access to clients because that's critical to career development, and if you don't get that, it's going to make it hard for you to move, and your career trajectory will suffer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--what you're describing is, in order to diversify, a firm like Epstein Becker and Green [Epstein Becker and Green, P.C.], you almost have to do something beyond the ordinary 'cause the ordinary or natural flow of things is going to like be from white male to white male, you know, young--old white male to younger white male--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --through the pipeline within the contacts and, you know, and to do something different, you have to change the culture a little bit and, you know, so did you, so was there anyone else there trying to change the culture a little bit, you know, to--
Speaker 2: What was great is, back then, you had great corporate clients of the firm.  At the time, it was called Bell Atlantic [Bell Atlantic Corporation].  It's now Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.].  And Verizon, they made it a part of their diversity goals and initiative that diversity, it was, it was critical, and they required the firms that did their business that if you want our business, every single month, we are going to track and monitor the lawyers that work on our hours.  If you want to keep the business and retain the business, you need to utilize diverse attorneys, so the benefit of that is, where diverse attorneys may not have access to such a client, Verizon actually created a pathway where diverse attorneys would actually get access to work on their legal matters and through that, you know, as they monitored and tracked the hours each month, they would be able to identify if, you know, people were just fudging or if people were doing something substantive.  Until this very day, Verizon is still in the game holding the law firms that they utilize accountable.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So I take it that Verizon is not the only firm that's doing that, but they do a good job of it.
Speaker 2: They do.  Well, now I'm using Verizon because as a young attorney, it was the access to be able to work on the Verizon work that was critical to my growth and development and, you know, some companies--diversity is only as strong as the leader.  And when that leader retires or he leaves, diversity falls by the wayside, never becomes a part of the culture.  Verizon is that company that it doesn't matter who the leader is.  The culture will sustain doing what is right and understanding the business case for diversity.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was there a key person at Verizon that pushed this--
Speaker 2: I can't remember the general counsel at the time, but it was the general counsel--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who made it a mandate to the law firms that you will utilize diverse attorneys on our matters, or we will not use you.
Story_ID: 669959
Speaker 1: Now you were there, what, two years, from '98 [1998] to, from the time you graduated from law school [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana] to 2000, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why did you leave?  Did you get a better offer at another firm, or did they recruit you or what?
Speaker 2: A head hunter called me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and told me that they had an opening at a law firm called Seyfarth Shaw [Seyfarth Shaw LLP], and what I liked about Seyfarth Shaw--Epstein Becker and Green [Epstein Becker and Green, P.C.], it's a labor and employment firm, but they were mainly known for labor and employment in New York [New York].  Seyfarth Shaw was more of a national firm headquartered out of Chicago [Illinois], and I was--went to work in their satellite office, but they had more of a national reputation in employment and labor law, so I thought that like that was the next best step for me in terms of trying to get access to more national clients.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Seyfarth Shaw, I was told they have like over thousand lawyers now, or--
Speaker 2: They, they've grown.
Speaker 1: That's a big--
Speaker 2: It is a big firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you thinking about becoming a partner at Seyfarth Shaw?  Or was that a realistic expectation?
Speaker 2: I thought about it.  I don't know if it was a realistic expectation because it would require maybe like eight more years there, but while I was at Seyfarth Shaw, the lady, Susan K. Anderson, who I had met years ago as an intern at the NFL [National Football League], called me on the phone, and said, "Hey, you know, one of my colleagues, he's leaving.  We have an opening.  And I think you should apply."  And CBS [CBS Corporation] is that type of company where people love it so much, they don't leave, so if there's an opening, you're really lucky there's an opening, and I was able to (laughter) get my resume in and I was able to get the job.
Speaker 1: And CBS just--so this is--you were at Seyfarth Shaw, what, three, four, five years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A year and a half.
Speaker 1: Year and a half, just a year and a half, okay.  So this is from 2001 to 2003 or 2- or 2002 to 2003?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to 200- no, no, no, 2001 to 2002.
Speaker 1: Oh, in 2002.  Okay, all right.  So that's not long at all.  So, now, so CBS calls you and gets you right (laughter)--
Speaker 2: So Susan Anderson, who I met as a law student.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you're really--things are changing fast.  I mean, a lot of the people graduate from law school, and they serve, you know, over a period of time--so you're like--you seem to be moving from thing to thing.  So, okay.
Speaker 2: Well, when you're doing billable hours, it feels like a lifetime (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So I was asked to ask you but I was--that--what was the billable hours situation at Seyfarth Shaw?
Speaker 2: It was a lot better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In terms of--now again I think I was the only African American woman there but I think too they had so much work as well, and they had a smaller office so, you know, I ended up working with two partners, who had a great book of business, and they were able to include me as their go to lawyer on many of their projects, and I worked with them during my whole time, and it made a treme- it makes a tremendous difference if you can connect and align with people who have a book of, a book of business, and they're willing to include you in on those projects.  If you don't have that, you will struggle.
Story_ID: 669960
Speaker 1: So 2002 you move over to CBS [CBS Corporation], and you're hired as assistant general counsel, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is that--okay.  And director of training and development.  Is that true, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what--can--so it's pretty clear what assistant general counsel is, I guess, but, so you handle, you know, various business matters at CBS and--as a matter of course.
Speaker 2: Well, the way it would work is, I worked in, I started out working in the CBS labor and employment group and then we would work with our different HR [human resources] clients for multiple businesses that we had and as employment issues would arise, we would be their go to lawyers so we might get an EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] charge or there may be an audit or an investigation but we would be the lawyer who would be the point of contact with the agency and in resolving the case.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, and training and development, now what were those duties?
Speaker 2: A couple of years after starting with CBS, I went to the company and I asked them to expand my role to include training and development, and it was really just a proactive way to, you know, let's get ahead of the curve and let's talk to the employees in advance and give them training on anti-harassment, anti-discrimination and anti- did I say--harassment, discrimination and retaliation.  And, you know, if you arm your people with the knowledge in advance, you know, we can kind of prevent it from bubbling up to something bigger, so they gave me this additional title, and I went around and did live anti-harassment, anti-discrimination training.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is an initiative of yours.  You came up with this idea--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to do this, all right.
Speaker 2: And they were receptive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's important.  So you're getting ahead of the game.  And, so you went around to talk about those issues.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  And did--were your efforts appreciated by CBS?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now you were there, I guess, when--I don't know if the legal department was involved in this or not, but Dan Rather leaves CBS around two thousand- was it '03 [2003] or '04 [2004], 2003, 2004?
Speaker 2: I want to say '04 [2004].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, and it's '04 [2004].  Yeah, it would have been 2004.  It was the second George Bush [President George Walker Bush] campaign, and he had come up with, like a pretty good story with documentation about George Bush having never really served in the National Guard even though he was, he was on the rolls, but he just didn't show up.  I mean, that was the implication of the records but through, you know, some disputed--and he wasn't able to really come up with a, I guess, a way to convince people that he really had enough evidence to substantiate what he said and, so Dan Rather, who was a longtime, you know, pillar of 'CBS News' ['CBS Evening News'] had to leave.  There's a movie about that now starring Robert Redford ['Truth'] and there's a, you know, so it's a big, kind of a big deal.
Speaker 2: I didn't see the movie.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I saw it about two months ago, I guess.  Yeah, it was interesting.  But there are lawyers in it, but I don't know if (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I would not have been in it but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --some of the lawyers in our legal department may have been referenced in it.
Story_ID: 669961
Speaker 1: I guess more importantly for you, you founded, in 2004, the Corporate Counsel Women of Color [New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So tell us how you, or why you founded it and how you founded it, and what its structure is and, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I, as I was mentioning about the challenges that we were talking about as law firm associates, everyone had kind of like the same story.  They were the only one at their firm.  They were not feeling that they were getting quality work assignments.  They were struggling to get their billable hours.  They needed mentorship.  They needed sponsors, so when I went in house [at CBS Corporation], a small group of us, we started to connect people and connecting with people who were women of color, who worked in house at corporations so, you know, again it's the type of situation where people are isolated.  You don't know where people are in great number, so we would just meet for dinners just to support one another, let people know you are not alone, and this is well before LinkedIn ever came about, but I decided at one of the dinners, hey, everyone just give me your business card, and I will create a directory, and in this directory, I'm going to, you know, put your name, where you went to law school, your practice areas and then I will print this directory, and I'll mail it to you so that you have it.  So I emailed the template for it and I said, "You know, get it back to me in a week," so what happened was, the thirty people who went to the gathering, they forwarded it to their friends and their friends, and within a week, we had identified a total of fifty people, women of color who were in house at corporations, so it was great.  And I said, "Well, look, let's do another run of this.  Everyone, here's the current list.  If there's anyone you know that we're missing, let them know.  Get back to us in a week."  Well, let me tell you, in a week's time, we had found over a hundred women of color at corporations and that was unheard of.  We couldn't believe it.  And, you know, that's how Corporate Counsel Women of Color got its start.  And today we have over thirty six hundred women of color attorneys that we have identified in corporations around, around the United States and we have what we call CCWC friends and we have over six thousand friends, who are people who work at law firms; so we now are able to reach over ten thousand attorneys of color in the profession.
Story_ID: 669962
Speaker 1: So the friends, I take it, are the--they, are they lawyers of color?  These are men who are friends of the--
Speaker 2: They are men and they are women who work at law firms, and we just launched the men of color, a groundbreaking research survey, where we are going to capture the work experience of men of color because that really hasn't been captured.  We really don't know the story of men of color in the workplace, and we're also finding that--as everyone's focusing on women of color, nobody is focusing on men of color, and men of color are kind of disappearing from the corporate structure, so we want to find out what's going on and try to come up a way--ways to fix it.
Speaker 1: Now this is a--it's interesting.  I--the men of color that's never organized themselves, does that--I would assume they were on the scene before the women of color just because of the way this country works, you know.  But is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  I always like to say I know they've tried to organize men of color, but I always am of the thought that women, they kind of come together in a more supportive, nurturing manner, and I think it makes it easier for them to come together, to network and connect.  Where sometimes, especially in the law what we've seen is, when men of color come together, you know, they may not be necessarily looking for kumbaya moments every week.  And it may be like, okay, we're meeting, but what can you do for me today?  I don't have a year to, you know, get business from you.  I need it now.  So I think in terms of connecting for a time period that's long, like women are wi- are willing to do, men don't do that, and they don't do it in the workplace, and I think that's what we're observing that, as they say, women of color in the workplace, and they're invisible.  Men of color in the workplace, but they're disappearing altogether, and they are being let go.  They're being laid off, and it's hard for them to reintegrate into the work space because they have haven't built the networks to get into that next job, so there's a high level of unemployment after they leave the work structure, so we're just trying to figure out what's going on.  And how can we figure out a way to fashion a solution so that our men of color don't slip through the cracks?  It's okay to have a car, and you have four tires, but if one of the tires is missing, guess what?  The car is going nowhere.  So all four tires need to be full and ready to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So I--yeah.  So what you're saying is probably true that women are more likely to form an organization.  But there have been black professional organizations that were formed, you know, by men in the past, like the black police assoc-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was, it was an African American Patrolmen's League [Afro American Patrolmen's League; African American Police League] first.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the black firefighters were all--before we had any women firefighters, they did that.  And, now the national association of black school educators [National Alliance of Black School Educators], that came along probably in the early '70s [1970s].  And during the period of late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], everybody from the black nurses to the black, anybody black doing something had some kind of organization.  They--black students formed black student unions, everybody organized on some level, but it started to dissipate where some cities, now you don't have these same--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --bodies, but they're needed as blacks begin to disappear from the workplace (laughter).  It just--
Speaker 2: Well, and I think also for men of color in the law, especially men of color at law firms, because the business model is based on clients and billable hours, you know, if they connect with someone who's at a corporation, they need business tonight.  You know, they don't have time to build a relationship and cultivate a relationship with you for a year or two before you get it.  Where women, I think, you know, they're more interested in, well, I'll get to know you, and let's have five or six dinners, and women, I think, are more willing to do that.  But I think with men, if they're not getting that benefit immediately, they're not going to keep meeting.  They're not going to keep connecting because they're going to see it as this is not fruitful.  And unfortunately what happens is, they're not connecting in the work structure internally.  They're not connecting externally, so when they are transitioned out or if they leave, they don't have a network to go say, "Hey, look.  I left this place.  Can you help me get at this place?"  And that's where the drop off is happening.  And, you know, we notice it.
Story_ID: 669963
Speaker 1: So since 2004, as you said, the organization [Corporate Counsel Women of Color, New York, New York] has grown from about ten women to thirty-six hundred (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, who are in house--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at corporations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And six thousand friends (laughter).
Speaker 2: Friends (laughter).
Speaker 1: So this is, so how is the organization structured?
Speaker 2: Well, in terms of where the members are located, we have members who are in different parts of the country.  If we look at regionally, our members are mainly on the West Coast, the Midwest region, the Southwest region, the Southeast region and the East Coast and then we also have--we've done international gatherings, and we also have members in Africa, Asia and other parts of the world.
Speaker 1: Wow, it's just remarkable to me that there are that many black women in corporate situations as corporate lawyers.  I know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how I felt when we found the fifty women.  I mean, but I think what was happening is, you know, you were at this place.  I was at that place.  Jessica was at this place, and if you don't have anything that's bringing you together, you may never see this person so, now we have a situation where--and I'm proud of this--well, now people can come together, and what we do is we share job announcements with people.  People apply for the jobs on our listserv, and they get, they get jobs so, now, you know, you now have a critical mass that's growing within corporations, and people have the ability now that they know that there are opportunities out there, you know, before they would stay at one place and take it and, now they know, guess what?  You have worth.  And if they're not treating you right where you are, there're twenty other companies that would love to have you and utilize your skills.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a governing board for the organization?
Speaker 2: We have an advisory board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we have a board.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And who are some of the people on the boards?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: We have people from Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc.], Exxon [Exxon Mobil Corporation], American Airlines and, you know, we try to have a high level of engagement with our sponsors, who we get a lot of feedback and input from, and we have sponsors from Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] to Verizon [Verizon Wireless Communications, Inc.] to Google [Google Inc.] to Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] to, you know, major law firms who are involved so, you know, we try to make it a collaborative process, where people are coming together to not talk about their problems, but we're really not only fashion- fashioning solutions, but implementing the solutions to make things better for diverse attorneys in this legal profession.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are you funded in any way?
Speaker 2: There are sponsorships.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the corporations that the lawyers come from?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have sponsors who support our annual conference and that's where we get the funding for our programming and our initiatives.
Speaker 1: And when is that annual conference?
Speaker 2: The annual conference in 2017 will be in New Orleans [Louisiana] in September, and we normally have our annual conference in September or October.
Story_ID: 669964
Speaker 1: What have been some of the milestones, I mean I guess accomplishments of the organization [Corporate Counsel Women of Color, New York, New York] over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things we've been doing is, we've been reaching back to the pipeline--our law students because we went them to know that there's a career path for them from law student to attorney, whether they go to the law firm or government or non-profit or come in house, but they know that there's a network of people out there that they can look at as role models, and what we do is, we provide them with scholarship money.  To date, we've donated over two hundred thousand dollars in scholarship money to law students and we've done groundbreaking research on the experience of women of color, and we were able to gather that information, sort of what you all do with HistoryMakers.  We gather the information from women of color to tell their story and share their perspective about their experience in the law and then coming up with solutions, where law firms can do a better job in retaining women of color, and corporations can do a better job in promoting women of color.  And we just launched a YouTube channel, Women of Inspiration, and we've had over a hundred thousand views of our programming, so we have a lot of things we're proud of, but our groundbreaking research and our outreach to the law students--that's what I'm really excited about.
Story_ID: 669965
Speaker 1: So women who are members, they, they get, they get more than just a catharsis out of this, right?  That's what a lot of--the old black groups get together, everybody get together and say, "Oh, it's rough in the police department," or, "It's rough in the school," and you get a catharsis from talking to each other, but they get more than that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I think from my observations what we have going on is, I think you have people who are going through things on their job, but sometimes they have a lot of shame in admitting this is what I'm going through.  I went and applied for this job that I thought I was going to get the promotion, and it didn't go to me.  Or I went in for that pay raise and I didn't get it.  Or my sponsor left and now that he's gone, things have gone poorly for me.  What happens is, is that when we're in a forum where we can talk about our issues, it takes the shame away and then you realize, oh, wow.  It's not just a me issue.  So once we identify, you know, this is what's going on, then we're able to fashion--okay, now here are the solutions.  This is how we get around it.  This is how we navigate so that we can be all that we can be and, you know, anything that I've gone through, fifty other people in my group have gone through, too, and they can share with me how they went through that challenge.  You know, what they say, you don't have to reinvent the wheel.  I don't have to reinvent the wheel because everyone has gone through it before, and we can just learn from each other.  So one of the things that we do is, we go around.  We do small focus groups of maybe twenty people and we go around the room, and people talk about the different things that they're going through and then we go around the room and say, "Okay, now what are the solutions?"  And the people leave, and they can go and implement the strategies.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, you know, one thing I learned when I was listening to--and I've heard it before from other people we've interviewed is that when you're in a corporate environment like a corporate lawyer, a law firm, a big firm, you're going to need probably a mentor who is white.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, it doesn't mean because you have a black (unclear) you're not going to need some friends, you know, in the, in a corporate, corporate world, you know, that are not black.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And because--but I guess the bottom line is that race is something that has to be organized around if it's-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to be--if those, if racial or racism is going to be overcome, right, in a--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --corporate environment.
Speaker 2: And that's one of the things, actually, we tell our members [of Corporate Counsel Women of Color, New York, New York].  Hey, look in your structure, understand that your mentor won't be someone who looks like you, you know.  I know from me and my career, most of my mentors or all of my mentors have been mainly Caucasian men and, you know, that's okay.  We can all learn from each other, and hopefully I'm providing mentoring to them and helping them see a different perspective, but I think the takeaway is, we think we have all these differences, but we really don't.  We're really all the same, but all of these different barriers and hurdles keep us apart and, and keeps the workplace or the work setting from not being all it can be because we are caught up in all of these differences that we think we have.
Story_ID: 669966
Speaker 1: What's the landscape now for young black lawyers?  Are they, are more of them going to the corporate setting than into private practice or into criminal law or is that, you know, do you have any sense about that?
Speaker 2: The economy was really bad the last few years for attorneys, especially attorneys of color.  You know, there were many people who just weren't even able to land anywhere, so they've gone to law school and they've never been employed, you know, so, you know, I think what I'm finding is with our new generation X and our millennials--well, I guess the young people there--I am sorry.  They're millennials.  But they're going to the law firms out of school, if they're going and, you know, we're just working with a different generation, and they're like, I'm not working all these hours.  I have a place--somewhere to go.  I'm not going to work late tonight because I'm going to the baseball game, and they don't see anything wrong with leaving and not staying and putting in the long hours like we all used to, but I think the dynamic is we have to learn how to work with our millennials, and they're going to the law firms first and then they're coming into corporations, but they have a totally different mindset than the baby boomers, your generation X, your generation Y, and we all just have to embrace each other's differences.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But are most of the law school grads now going into law firms and corporate law rather than--I know in the old, the old days, people would do--you know, they would practice law, and then they would (unclear) they were (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they're going to, they are going to the law firms, if they're able to get a law firm job.  If they're not, some people are, you know, opening up their own law firm and being, you know, Sally Jackson, Esquire and getting the experience that way.  Many of the corporations don't hire law students right after school, so they will have to go through working at a firm, and I do believe that a good, good number of people are working in the public defender's office but I don't really see, you know, I think in, back in the day, a lot of lawyers of color would work in the criminal justice system, and I just think people are diversifying their practice areas, either in labor and employment, intellectual property.  We don't have enough diverse lawyers in corporate M and A [mergers and acquisitions], the money practice area, but I think we just have to keep educating our young people to let them know, you know, think about corporate M and A.  Think about technology law, and those are the opportunities that are available to them if they pursue it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the older people that I've come across that I interview, most of the older people are the ones that, you know, went to the DA's [district attorney] office and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, had--set up the shingle in the neighborhood.  That sort of thing, you know, work for the government or either have their own sign up in the black community with other black lawyers.  So it seems like the landscape is changing.
Speaker 2: The model has changed and I do think that what's great is that with the new move in technology, you know, and that's what we tell our law students, you know, don't think about sports and entertainment where everyone talks about they want to be in.  Think about privacy.  Think about information security and all of those practice areas around data and technology because those are new practice areas.  They're easier to enter into and if they have exposure to that--and, now we're seeing technology companies, the tech companies are now interested in diversifying their labor departments.  You know, that's just going to provide more opportunities for our, you know, next generation.
Story_ID: 669967
Speaker 1: Let me ask you.  Now how do you balance the organization's [Corporate Counsel Women of Color, New York, New York] time with CBS [CBS Corporation]?  You know, 'cause I know CBS is demanding too so--
Speaker 2: I have to be very efficient (laughter), and I've always, for the most part of my life, I've worked from a to do list, and I put together the to do list and just prioritize, and it's really about execution.  I have to execute from the list and if there's something on the list that didn't get executed on, you know, I know the next day, you know, I have to get it done.  I have to be effective and I have to be as efficient as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 2009, you became senior vice president and assistant general counsel to CBS, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now what does this mean?  I mean, we--I hear the title, but what does that, what does that mean in terms of your position?
Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, I had started out in the labor and employment group, and in 2008, the chief legal officer at the time, his name was Lou Briskman [Louis J. Briskman], he retired.  He picked up the phone and he said, "I want you to come work for me," so I was promoted out of the labor and employment group to be the right hand of Lou Briskman, who reported into our CEO, Leslie Moonves.  And in that role, I took on additional responsibility including the launch of the CBS records retention program and other initiatives.  I was spearheading it.  And I was rewarded with a senior vice president promotion.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So do you report directly to Leslie Moonves?
Speaker 2: I don't.  I was reporting to the chief legal officer--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --who reported to Leslie Moonves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And maybe about two years ago, I entered a new role reporting into the head of litigation where I do litigation work now.
Story_ID: 669968
Speaker 1: Can you talk about any of the cases or situations that you deal with as a corporate lawyer for CBS [CBS Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I think what's great is that, you know, CBS law department is sort of like a law firm.  We have lawyers from all over who work in our department, and everybody has different practice areas and different specialties, so with respect to my background, I do employment litigation, and our litigation department, we also do defamation law, copyright, trademark law, any litigation that comes up against CBS, one of the lawyers in our department will handle that matter based on their area of specialty.  So, you know, it's been a great and rewarding experience, and what I really enjoy is, now I get to work with the law firms, and we get to say to the law firms, "You know, diversity is important, and we want our legal matters staffed with diverse attorneys," and then we can say, "We're going to look at your billing hours and we're going to make sure that the diverse attorneys that you said were going to work on these matters are actually working on the matters," so, you know, it's great to now be the client working with the law firms and, you know, requiring that our legal cases be staffed with diversity.
Speaker 1: So Verizon [Verizon Wireless Communications, Inc.] set a good example that you're--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you're following now.
Speaker 2: Verizon and Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.].  You know, they have been the consistent leaders in the space of diversity and inclusion.  And years ago, Walmart said, "If you do not staff our cases with diverse lawyers, we will cancel you from working on any of our matters," and that's unheard of.  You know, but that was a great example for the legal profession in general.
Story_ID: 669969
Speaker 1: Now did you allude to this be- in 2011, it says here that you spearheaded a research report called Perspectives of Women of Color, Attorneys in Legal, in a Corporate Legal Department [The Perspectives of Women of Color Attorneys in Corporate Legal Departments].  Is that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that basically through the organization [Corporate Counsel Women of Color, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: That was the groundbreaking research that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I discussed where--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --we were able to gather information about the experience.  And what was great is, because many of the women had started at law firms, and they were now at corporations, we were able to gather from them the reasons why they left the law firms.  And then we could tell the law firms, "You know, your attrition issue, it's based on these top four reasons, so if you fix these four reasons, you can actually retain women of color longer and hopefully get them through a pipeline of partnership."  So we've been working with our sponsor law firms to try to help them in this area.
Story_ID: 669970
Speaker 1: Now in 2012, you completed a certificate in entertainment media management from NYU [New York University, New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The school of continuing education [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now what's the significance of this certification?
Speaker 2: You know, I--it was something that I didn't plan to do.  NYU, they have great programming but, you know, one day. I was interested in how to put together a television schedule, and I went to the Internet (laughter) just so I could understand the business of CBS [CBS Corporation].  You know, I understood the law department, but just understanding the underlying business, I became, you know, interested in pursuing information related to that so I went to NYU, and they had this class on--it's called programming and scheduling.  It was taught by a lady from HBO [Home Box Office].  And she taught us the fundamentals on how do you build a television schedule.  So why is that show on at eight o'clock on Thursday versus nine o'clock on Monday?  And after I took that class, it just opened the door of more interest, and the next thing I knew, I was taking like twenty classes at NYU and ended up getting the certificate, but it was excellent because they gave an A through Z, soup to nuts, fundamental on the entertainment business that I didn't have before, and having that foundation and those fundamentals, I think it just helped to accelerate my, my understanding and my ability to help my clients even more.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That makes sense.
Story_ID: 669971
Speaker 1: Now in 2012 also, you launched the 'CCWC Live Blog Talk,' right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, okay.  So this is a talk show on the, on the Internet.
Speaker 2: Yes, it started out as 'Live Blog Talk,' and we were able to interview some great people like [HistoryMaker] Carla Harris and Judy Smith, who's an executive producer on 'Scandal,' and people could listen on it through Internet and then that's kind of morphed into what we recently launched this year, into our now like TED talk, YouTube Women of Inspiration channel.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay, all right.  And, you know, so is it, is it being used by the, by the constituents?
Speaker 2: Yes, we have over a hundred thousand views and we just launched maybe a month and a half ago.
Story_ID: 669972
Speaker 1: In 2013, you served as a--on the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm on the board--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --today.
Speaker 1: All right.  Does that, does that, was that--your involvement influenced by your interaction with [HistoryMaker] Julius Chambers?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), when he used to come to town, and I was a young lawyer, and he would take me to those LDF dinners, I always wanted to be on the LDF board, and they're doing great work, and I think you all did interview our executive director [HistoryMaker] Sherrilyn Ifill, but, you know, the Legal Defense Fund work is needed more today than it's ever been needed, and I'm just proud to be a part of that legacy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so many people that we've interviewed, [HistoryMaker] Toni Fay and Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --Tonya Lee [HistoryMaker Tonya Lewis Lee], [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree.
Speaker 2: And Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] just joined our board.
Story_ID: 669973
Speaker 1: What's next?  I mean, you've got a--oh, you took a new role in the litigation department of CBS [CBS Corporation] in 2015, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was the, what was the new role?
Speaker 2: The new role is, I went from working with the general counsel chief legal officer to helping to manage the litigation strategy and caseload with the head of litigation, and I've been working in this area since 2015.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we, you know, we have different cases that come in.  We work with our outside counsel, as I mentioned.  We put together the strategy for the case, the legal budget for the case and then it's really the project management of the strategy and the budget to get the best result for our clients.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now is there anything, is there anything that you want to do in the future that hasn't, that doesn't have anything to do with CBS or (laughter), or, you know, I mean, as--or the organization that you've--I mean, is there, is there a new initiative that you have, that you're thinking about or--
Speaker 2: Well, just the new initiative with the Corporate Counsel Men of Color [New York, New York].  We just launched that maybe a year and a half ago but, you know, this whole journey has been one of, you know, Corporate Counsel Women of Color [New York, New York] was something that I never planned.  In law school [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana], I never sat and thought about an organization, and it's just something that I fell into and, you know, it's kind of like the seed inside of the fruit, you know, one seed, you plant that one seed.  A tree comes up.  The tree comes up with different pieces of fruit, and inside each piece of fruit, there are more seeds.  So I don't know where I will end up going but I know I'm, I'm happy to be on this journey of learning and exploring and sharing, and as I go on this journey and meet so many people, they help to enrich my life.  So, you know, the sky is the limit, and I'm just glad to be a part of the process.
Story_ID: 669974
Speaker 1: Now are you a member of any other, of any of the other black legal associations?
Speaker 2: No, not at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My plate is pretty full right now.  But--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm--my hope is, now that I'm living back in Maryland, to get more actively involved in my local church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, yeah.  I didn't ask you about church.  Now, what church did you grow up in--
Speaker 2: I grew up at a church called Grace United Methodist Church [Fort Washington, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then when I went to Indiana at Bloomington [Indiana University School of Law; Indiana University Maurer School of Law, Bloomington, Indiana], I went to this church called Anointed Harvest Fellowship Church [Bloomington, Indiana] and when I lived in New York [New York], I went to the Soul Saving Station and, now that I live back in Maryland, I go to Ebenezer A.M.E. Church [Fort Washington, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where do you live in Maryland now?
Speaker 2: In Fort Washington, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Oh, back in Fort Washington.
Speaker 2: Back in Fort Washington.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you're able to live there and still work for CBS [CBS Corporation] and--
Speaker 2: Yes, our CEO, Leslie Moonves, he's been very supportive of me and my career; and they allowed me to work out of our D.C. [Washington, D.C.] office.
Story_ID: 669975
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point in your career, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't do anything differently--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because, like I said, this whole path, I mean, in order to do Corporate Counsel Women of Color [New York, New York] and Corporate Counsel Men of Color [New York, New York] effectively, it's required the journey that I've been through, you know, the seasons of frustration, the seasons of success, you know, being able to walk in the moccasins of our members, you know.  If you can't identify with the challenges that they face, how can you help them?  So I wouldn't change anything because I think everything that I have had to encounter has only been able to help our members in a greater way by being able to share.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And at this juncture, what would you consider to be your major accomplishment?
Speaker 2: In terms of life or a career?
Speaker 1: Well, both.  I mean, you know, it's how--well, however you see it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm very proud of my marriage to my husband, David Patrick Haden [David Haden], you know, life wise and professional wise, I'm very proud of what I've done at CBS [CBS Corporation] and Corporate Counsel Women of Color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That certainly, starting that is certainly a certain legacy then, you know.
Story_ID: 669976
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: You know, my concerns for the African American community from everything that I understand and I've read and the people I've talked to from the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], there was more of a community.  There was more of an empowerment and a self-reliance on one another.  We had our own businesses.  We came together and we supported each other.  And, now today, when I look up and I see, you know, many of our African American men are in jail, they're in jail now.  They weren't in jail in the 1950s.  You know, and we're in a situation where, you know, we're not as supportive as we could be, you know, and African Americans spend over a trillion dollars.  I know that if we took that money and we put it into our communities and if we developed our own businesses and if we educated our own people, a lot of the ills that we're facing, we wouldn't be facing.  So I think as a next step, you know, the challenges I see is that we're too, we're too separated.  You know, where we need to come back to is community and collaboration and self-sufficiency and reliance on the strength that got us to where we were today so, I mean, I hope that we can work on these things in the years of--to come where, you know, our young men aren't stopped by the police and shot by the police and that our young men are empowered, you know, to know what they're rights are if they are stopped, and they know how to handle the situation and they know who to call if they're stopped.  I don't think a lot of education has gone out on that.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  That's a crisis in every city in the country.
Speaker 2: Right.  And more reform and more accountability.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you tell us about your family?  Now you were married [to David Haden] in--what year was it?
Speaker 2: Two thousand thirteen [2013].
Speaker 1: Two thousand thirteen [2013].  Do you have children yet or--
Speaker 2: I have a stepdaughter who is graduating from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] in May.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And are your, is your, your mother [Frances Privott Robinson] is still alive, right?
Speaker 2: My mother is still alive, and she lives ten minutes away (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is your brother [James R. Robinson] in Maryland, too then?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He lives in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  He's in--about twenty minutes away.
Story_ID: 669977
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You di- you're a great interviewer.  I think you've covered everything from start to finish.
Speaker 1: Well, there's always something but I can't, we can't think about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'll probably think about it when I leave, and I'm like--
Speaker 1: Right.  Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: --gosh, I should have said this.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  But the last question is similar to legacy, but it's a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered for touching lives and having impact.  I--years ago, when I was living in Harlem [New York, New York], there was a friend of mine who was my same age.  She ran an organization called Sister Power [Sister Power Resource Center for Girls, New York, New York] and she died at a young age of forty-two years old.  And one of the things that just sticks with me is that when I am in Harlem and I bump into those young girls who are now young adults, they remember Ms. Cynthia Kirkpatrick.  You know, Cynthia had an impact on their lives and, you know, I've seen the flip side of it where, you know, you go to a funeral of someone who died at seventy and eighty, and nobody is there, and no one cares that they're gone, so at the end of the day, I want to be able to, you know, when I leave this world, I want to feel and know that, you know, some young person went to law school because of the work.  Someone had a full life because of the work.  Somebody was impacted because of the work, and that's important to me.
Story_ID: 669978
Speaker 1: This photo was taken in 1976.  It's a photo of my mother, Frances Privott Robinson, my father, James Robinson, my brother, Russell Robinson [James R. Robinson] and myself, [HistoryMaker] Laurie Robinson Haden.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me when I was Miss North Carolina Central University.  It was taken in 1994, and I won the Miss Atlantic City Holiday Classic.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me.  This photo was taken in 1973.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me.  It was taken in 1976.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me.  It was taken in 1977.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me.  It was taken in 1978.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of me as a newborn baby with my brother, Russell Robinson.  It was taken in 1972.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a photo of the collective bargaining agreement from the National Football League that I worked on as an intern in the National Football League labor counsel division in 1997.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my campaign button when I ran for Miss North Carolina Central University in 1993.  I won by a landslide and reigned as the campus queen in 1994.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's a great button.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) (unclear) and I made like two hundred buttons and gave them to people to wear (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's smart.  Oh, this is it.
Speaker 1: 'Dawn and Her Mom.' This is a copy of the book that I authored as a first grader entitled 'Dawn and Her Mom,' written by Laurie Nicole Robinson.
Speaker 2: Who did the illustrations?
Speaker 1: I did sort of.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Well some help.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two hundred copies is not bad (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't have--yeah.  We promoted it at the school and--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: --made the kids go down there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wedding photo.  I was married August 24, 2013.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my wedding taken August 24, 2013.  To the left is my mother, Frances Robinson, my husband, David Haden, H-A-D-E-N, myself and brother, Russell Robinson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: This is a copy of the article that was published in the Indiana Law Journal that I wrote while at the National Football League entitled, Are Professional Athletes Held to a Higher Standard in the Law?  Or Are They above the Law ['Professional Athletes, Held to a Higher Standard and Above the Law: A Comment on High Profile Criminal Defendants and the Need for States to Establish High Profile Courts,' Laurie Robinson].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When did you publish that?
Speaker 1: In 1997.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, that was a while back.
Speaker 1: That was in connection with the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because he got celebrity status.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.  Did you guys talk about that in the interview?
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No we didn't.
Speaker 2: No we did not.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's interesting.
Speaker 2: This is a photo of the campaign flier when I ran for Miss North Carolina Central University.
Speaker 1: That's a little plaque they made of The HistoryMakers.  Maybe--you might want to start with an opening of that.
