Story_ID: 664931
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.   Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2:  	My name is Karen Hope Hill-Scott.  K-A-R-E-N, H-O-P-E, H-I-L-L-S-C-O-T-T [HistoryMaker Karen Hill-Scott].
Speaker 1: All right.  And, ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	December 5, 1946; Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2:  	I'm president of my own consulting company.  I do consulting in two areas, in public policy related to children and families and in television programming related to children and families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is today's date?
Speaker 2:  	Today is Monday, December 16th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2:  	Los Angeles, California.
Story_ID: 664932
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into nep- into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --a warm up.  And, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2:  	No.  I don't have a favorite food.  I have a favorite type of food which is something spicy and flavorful.  But, I don't have a favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2:  	I tend to like warm autumn colors: browns, reds, greens.  Those are my, those are my colors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2:  	I really like fall I think most of all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2:  	Pretty much any place near the water and outdoors would be my favorite, a favorite vacation destination.  We have a family tradition of going on a houseboat trip every other year at lake Shasta, California [Shasta Lake], which is probably the embodiment of what we do in our family.  It just happened to be the biggest lake with the most houseboats nearby.  And, we had a lot of kids and a boat and all that kind of stuff and that ended up being our source of a family tradition.  But, normally I like being out, outdoors and near water.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2:  	I have lots of phrases.  Most of which came from my mother [Hope Morris Hill] because she used phrases in order to make an impact and create a memory of, you know, some little hook to do the things that she wanted you to do.  But, I think for myself, my favorite phrase or often most used phrase is: to do the best you can with what you've got.  That, you know, because for me, effort is 99 percent of achievement.  And, a worthy achievement is one in which some effort has been applied.  I don't like slackers.  I, I really don't have a high tolerance for people who are slackers.  And, and I have the utmost respect for people who have done a lot with what they have because their achievements really, really outstrip almost anything the next person does because they've overcome something.  They've pushed themself to a higher limit, a higher level.
Story_ID: 664933
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ernest Hill] side.  But, separately, so we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --can kind of keep 'em straight.
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: So, start with your mother.  Can you give us your, her, us her full name--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and spell it for us?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, my mother's name is Hope Morris Hill.
Speaker 1: And, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2:  	H-O-P-E, M-O-R-R-I-S, H-I-L-L.
Speaker 1: And, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	I'm not sure of her date of birth because she never shared her age and she and her sisters [Vera Morris and Janie Morris] are all chronophobic.  That's a phrase I use.  They kind of pick their years.  But, I'm--my mother was probably born in 1914, and she was born in Columbia, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the capital of the State of Missouri I believe.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about what they were doing in terms of occupation and activity?
Speaker 2:  	My mother's family is, I don't, I mean, I guess they're, they're a piece of work, I would say.  And, in a way part and parcel of the larger history of African Americans in this country.  And, which has some bearing on who I am today and also what I can say about her family today.  Because her father [Thomas Morris] was white and her mother [Willie Morris] was almost white.  And, that side of the family is very split up and fragmented because choices have been made by members of that family to live not as African Americans.
Story_ID: 664934
Speaker 1: So, this is a passing, st- some passing stories on this side?
Speaker 2:  	More than some.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Many.  And, I think really within our family, my, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] chose to be African American, and none of her siblings did.  So, all of my first cousins and all of their children are white people living all over the United States.  And, that's just how that side of the family functions.
Speaker 1: Now, do you, do they know who they are?
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  I don't know if all of the downline--my first cousins, of course, we grew up together.  But, their children I, I don't, I have no idea whether or not my first cousins' children know who they are or who their children's children are.
Speaker 1: Did they all marry white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --mates? Or, at least people that thought they were white, too (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	Everybody.  There's a whole, you know, probably a few hundred people over there on that side of the family who are out there in the world.
Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting now, this--we know that biologically, if you look like you're white, you're probably more white than black anyway.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, in terms of genetics.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: I mean, not that, race is not really a--
Speaker 2:  	Well, you know, the issue of race, race is a very complicated issue.  And, I'm, frankly I'm uncomfortable discussing it because as a child growing up, you know, I was regularly taunted or, or bullied about not looking black enough.  And, you know, it was a pain.  It was a nuisance and a pain.  And, I really felt like everybody just needed to get over it, and let me be myself.  So, I was reminded interestingly, or ironically, you know, I was reminded everyday by black people that I represented something they didn't like.  Or, that they were resentful of.  And, I had to develop an understanding of that, you know, which I think I have done quite well.  I mean, I think if there weren't racism in this country, then my black friends, the kids I grew up with wouldn't've had need to make an issue of it.  But, and I think it was hard for my mother sometimes to communicate with us around race.  She wanted us to be comfortable.  She wanted us to be nice to everyone.  She wanted us to not fight or get in fights.  I mean, if I didn't have anything I look back on, you know, in my childhood, I really wished I'd kicked some butt, you know.  Just knock the mess out of somebody so nobody would mess with me ever again.  But, that wasn't what I was taught.  It wasn't how I was trained to be.  And, so, I learned a great deal about diplomacy and managing other people growing up with that, you know, growing up in that context.
Story_ID: 664935
Speaker 1: Now, there's a flipside of that too, right?
Speaker 2:  	(Nods head) Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, as all light skinned black people know, the flipside is that you're held up to some kind of a model of what people should look like.
Speaker 2:  	Well, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even in the midst of that.
Speaker 2:  	I think, well, I think that black, black people know what's idealized in this culture.  So, the closer you, the closer you were to resembling that, the more you had to pay for it.  Because it was a source of pain for black people to be mistreated just for being brown.  I mean, I understood that.  It was, it was unfair.  It was unreasonable.  And, I rail, I mean, I rail against racism as a person because of that.  And, it's just undue suffering in the black community.  I mean, completely undue suffering that exists whether you live in an all-black community or in a mixed community or if you were a solo.  The only black people around a whole lot of white people.  The fact that you are judged on your color before anything else, you know, your--everything else about you follows your color.  It's, it's completely wrong.  It's just so wrong.  And, I, I understand that.  In my heart I understand that, and, because I understand that, I, as I, the, you know, the older I got, the more I understood, even before I was a teenager, I understood why I got the grief I got.  But, it doesn't mean it didn't hurt.  (Laughter) You know, it doesn't mean that I didn't have my own little suffering, you know.  But, like I said, I'm uncomfortable talking about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Because I know that in the world somebody else to listen to me talk about this would say, "Um-hm, well, so many problem--problems you didn't have, you know, we don't wanna hear your sad story."  And, it's not my sad story.  It's just it is what it is.  I am who I am.  I'm gonna be who I am and I'm, I own my culture, the culture I came from, that I was raised around.  And, like a friend of mine said, I have a friend in Chicago [Illinois], her son said this, which I thought was very interesting, "You don't have a choice of who your parents are, but you can chose the culture that you are going to embrace and incorporate into who you are as a person."  And, I did that.  I made that choice.  I grew up with it but I still chose it.  I accepted it, and I did not go march off, you know, to the other side, as people might say, when I grew up, as my cousins did.  Because I, I just didn't think that was a reasonable thing to do.  It didn't make sense.  And, I was proud of where I came from.
Speaker 1: Are all the relatives on your mother's [Hope Morris Hill] side very, very light?  I mean--
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, had they been that way for a long time, you know?  'Cause this country's been settled for years, you know, so.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  I mean, they go back.  I mean, my family, my family roots on both sides go back, you know, probably close to two hundred years.  But, on my mother's side, I, I would say, yes to your question.  I mean, they've looked white and they've been white a long time.  Because my grandmother [Willie Morris] was very, very fair on my mother's side.  And, she was married to my grandfather [Thomas Morris] and he was Scotch-Irish.  I mean, he was snow white.  So, you know, when I look at my relatives, I mean, some are olive complexion, but you know, red hair, blue eyes.  They don't, they don't, they don't look black at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	On my mother's side.  My father's [Ernest Hill] side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, wait a minute.  Now, we're not fi-finished--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.  We're not finished with my mother's side.  Okay.
Speaker 1: --with your mother's side.  And, because we're gonna try to follow her to adulthood and then we'll--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --go to your father's side.
Speaker 2:  	All right.
Story_ID: 664936
Speaker 1: So, are there any stories about their activities, you know, on your mo- mother's side?  What kind of work did they do, and what--?
Speaker 2:  Well, my grandmother [Willie Morris] was a dancer and acrobat actually.  I have a (laughter), she, I guess because she was pretty, you know, people, somebody decided they wanted to cultivate her talents.  And, musical talent tends to run in my mother's family.  All my cousins played instruments.  My, one of my cousins was first violinist in Frank Sinatra's orchestra for example.  So, she performed on Broadway.  I have a letter written by the producer of a Broadway show, which was a colored show.  But, you know, he was writing to my great-grandmother saying, "Don't worry about your daughter," 'cause I think my grandmother was seventeen or so when she went, went to New York [New York] to be in this Broadway show.  "Don't worry about your daughter.  We will be sure she's protected, and no man will come near her."  And, you know, all that sort of stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so this is in 1890s or something?
Speaker 2:  	In the 18--
Speaker 1: Eighteen nineties [1890s], that's what I'm thinking, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Probably.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And, what show was it?  Was it, I know--
Speaker 2:  	'Bamaland' [ph.] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It was, it was like a minstrel show.  I don't know.  I have a, I probably, I know I have the little printed program about it and this letter that he wrote in, in storage in the back of my house, in a trunk down the hall really.  But, she was in the show.  And, then when it was over, she came back to Columbia [Missouri], and my grandfather [Thomas Morris] was actually a businessman in the community.  And, of course, being Irish, he worked in the liquor business.  And, my mother's sisters [Vera Morris and Janie Morris] were born in different states because he--when prohibition was spreading across the country, they moved from state of state until the country was dry, where he, you know, was continuing with his, his business.  And, but, then they ultimately came back to Columbia and he then opened a refrigeration business for iceboxes.  And, that business ultimately failed because electricity became more widely available and people no longer used the icebox.  He had an ice business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, so, my mother [Hope Morris Hill]--he started drinking more then, when his last business failed.  And, my grandmother left him.  He--because he was drinking.
Story_ID: 664937
Speaker 1: Where did they--did they live in the black community, your [maternal] grandfather [Thomas Morris] and your grandmother [Willie Morris]?
Speaker 2:  	Well, you know, there aren't very many black people in Columbia, Missouri.  So, I didn't know this until my daughter married (laughter), this, the person we were just talking about.  Because that family is from St. Louis; my daughter's in-laws were from St. Louis, Missouri.  And, when she married into that family, they knew where Columbia was.  And, it was from them that I found out that there weren't a lot of black people in Columbia, Missouri.  So, I know that my mother [Hope Morris Hill] went to a colored school though, when she was in elementary school because she told me that the kids would stick her braids, like where ever she sat in class, someone would stick her braids in the inkwell because she had long hair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In Columbia.  So, so--
Speaker 2:  	So, I'm sure there was a black enclave and that's where I, I just would assume that's where they lived.  Because my, you know, I know they all had a consciousness and an awareness of being, of being black.  Even though they also knew who their father was and knew he was white and all of that.  He had been married before and had children.  My, my grandmother was a lot younger than he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) And, so, he had children.  They had brothers and sisters who were older, you know, a lo- I'd say ten years older than they were.  And, I haven't done a lot of research on his family except to know, I've got a newspaper clipping from when he died and that kind of thing.  But, I don't, I don't have a lot of history on him.
Speaker 1: All right.   These are the Morrises, right?
Speaker 2:  	The Morrises.
Story_ID: 664938
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Hope Morris Hill], what were her stories about growing up in Columbia [Missouri], other than the inkwell?
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter) She, I, you know, she has fragmented stories about her childhood.  I think because they moved around a lot when they were younger because of my grandfather's business.  And, and I think, you know, the, the biggest stories that I remember from her childhood are when they left there, they went to St. Louis [Missouri] and she went to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School], which was the black high school.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2:  	And, then the Depression [Great Depression] happened.  And, I think that that was a huge marker in my mother's life, the Great Depression because their father [Thomas Morris] wasn't with them and she had to go to work.  She left school in order to go to work.
Speaker 1: So, she would've graduated, I guess, around 1929 or so?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) And, they left St. Louis and went to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she's working right now.  She's not able to finish, to go any higher in school?
Speaker 2:  	Right.  Right.  She later finished.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	She finished school when I was a little girl.  When we went to school, she went back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did the whole family move to Chicago?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Not my father--not my grandfather.  But, my grandmother [Willie Morris] and her children moved to Chicago.  And, from Chicago, my mother, the story goes that my mother was dating a man who worked for the railroad, which was a really good job then for a black man to be a Pullman porter.  And, he gave her his passes.  The railroad passes to travel and the whole family came to California, and my mother settled here in Los Angeles [California].
Story_ID: 664939
Speaker 1: I assume they're just trying to find a better place to live than Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right.  Right.  And, my [maternal] grandmother [Willie Morris], she had wanderlust, you know.  I mean, I guess the same person who wanted to go to New York [New York] and be in a Broadway show wanted to come west to California.  And, so, she came first and then the, you know, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] had three siblings, they all, they came.  Vera--let me see, my mother, Raymond [Raymond Morris], Vera [Vera Morris], Jim [James Morris]; okay, so that's four of them.  Yeah, so, the three siblings--my mother was the last one to come.  And, she came and they all settled here in L.A. and there was a growing, but very small, but growing black community here in L.A.  And, that--those people who were here during that time sort of became, in later years, the black bourgeoisie of, of Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, for instance, who are some of the one's that--?
Speaker 2:  	Well, you know, like The Mills Brothers, all those entertainers who were on Central Avenue.  My mother became an actress.  She worked in the movie.  She was in two or three colored talkies.  The, the colored movies when--
Speaker 1: With the Oscar Micheaux movies?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	She played opposite Louise Beavers in, in a move called 'Life Goes On.' She was the female ingenue.  And, her sisters finished school here.  Her younger sister just finished high school.  Her other sister went to college here in California.  My mother later went to college, like I said, after, after I was born and we came to L.A.  But, my mother didn't share.  And, I know my mother had like, hot clothes and, you know, she was an it--like an it girl, here.  Newspaper clippings with her pictures in them and stuff like that.  And, she was, this was, she got married to someone here that was not my father.  They got divorced and she married my father [Ernest Hill] later in Chicago.  She went back to Chicago after she left here.  But, her '30s [1930s], after the Depression [Great Depression].  That was probably, that decade was probable her heyday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, during the 1930s (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Nineteen thirties [1930s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a--now, you say she's the only one of her siblings that didn't pass?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right?  So, the culture of that, from I understand is once they pass, they don't, they don't contact you there very much anymore.  I mean, your other relatives, they don't talk to 'em.  Was that, was that the true (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, I think that became more true as the kids were growing up.  Anybody who was in Los Angeles at that time, knew my mother and her sisters, and her brother.  But, as the, my paren- my mother's siblings, I mean, as they, as their kids grew up, the distance got wider.  So, my mother's younger sister married a man who was in the [U.S.] military who was also very, very fair.  Well, they just disappeared into the military.
Story_ID: 664940
Speaker 1: And, I can remember when my aunt died.  I mean, it's one of my funniest stories of all.  But, when my aunt died, her son, who's white, who's passed on now.  But, her son was white.  His white wife was there.  We were at the funeral.  My mother [Hope Morris Hill] took care of my aunt all the time that she was really, really sick.  And, and my aunts moved to the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California].  That was another way, you just moved.  That's all you have to do.  One contingent lives in Orange County [California].  The other contingent lives in the Valley.  And, once all the kids, you know, and we were the youngest group of kids in the group of first cousins.  So, as the other first cousins reach adolescence, they moved on and moved out.  That's how it happened.  It was a drift.  It wasn't a big schism.  And, but, when I went to my aunt's funeral, here I am, I'm, you know, I grew up with my aunt being around.  And, she helped make my wedding dress and when her husband died, he was a commander.  He was an officer in the [U.S.] Army and went up to the rank of colonel by the time he died.  But, he was never known as, you know, the first or second black colonel, you know what I mean.  He was just a colonel in the [U.S.] military.  He worked on joint--chief of staff and he was the base commander at Fort Baker in Seattle, Washington [sic. California].
Speaker 2: Can you tell us what his name is?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  Larry Brooks [ph.] was his name.  Anyway, we go to June's [ph.] funeral which is up there at the cemetery at the, at the military cemetery so she can be buried with her husband.  And, the chaplain who was chaplain when they were stationed there talked about this family and they had no relatives, and we were their family in the Army and blah, blah.  I'm listening to this and I'm going, this is crazy.  This is just crazy, because of course, they had family.  You just didn't know who their family was, you know.  And, we didn't come around.  I remember my Aunt Larry [sic.] died.  I was very irate.  Well, all three of us, my brother [William Hill (ph.)], sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] and I were like revolutionary during the sort of civil rights, you know, during the Civil Rights Movement and the war against Vietnam [Vietnam War] and all that.  Of course, Larry was full on into being a colonel during the war in Vietnam.  And, he would say, "You're young.  You don't know anything."  I mean, you know, they would still come to town.  If they came to town, they visited.  They stayed with us, or whatever.  And, when he died I remember being so angry that my father [Ernest Hill] would not go to his funeral because he didn't wanna ruin the life that Larry and June had created for themselves within the military.  You know, I just thought that was wrong (laughter).  That, it was, it was just very upsetting to me.  I don't have any anger about it anymore.  But, I was angry with them for the longest.  And, I remember my sisters saying, "Well, they'd rather be undistinguished and white, than to be black and accomplished."  You know, because to be black and accomplished means you have to bring some attention to yourself.  And, when people are undercover, they are deep undercover.  They, they don't wanna bring that attention to themselves.
Story_ID: 664941
Speaker 1:  	Oh, I was gonna say, I, I, like I said, it's uncomfortable for me to talk about because people don't have very much empathy for this story.  But, when Shirlee Taylor Haizlip [HistoryMaker Shirlee Haizlip] wrote her book, 'The Blacker the Berry' [sic. 'The Sweeter the Juice: A Family Memoir in Black and White'] about her search for her mother's sister [Grace Morris Cramer], I really, really, I knew that story so well.  And, it turned out that part of her family line was from a family named Morris as well.  And, I thought, oh my god.  I met her and knew her well later on.  We were in the same club together for a while.  But, I, I knew, I knew the pain her mother [Margaret Morris Taylor] felt at losing her sister.  And, of course, her sister was really completely lost to her.  With my mother [Hope Morris Hill], my mother was like, she just forgave them.  That, you know, they made a choice because it was easier for them to live that way.  And, I understand it in that context now.  But, it used to make me angry.  And, I thought my sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] had the best way of capturing it with that phrase, you know, "If you go under the radar, you have to stay there."  You can't, you know, you really can't be your full self because you, you don't want people to know your full story.  And, I, you know, I would say my cousins, some are not very accomplished at all and others are.  But, again, the full extent of their talents will never be known to the world because they have that secret.  It's just there hanging over them.
Story_ID: 664942
Speaker 1: So your mother [Hope Morris Hill] goes back to Chicago [Illinois] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm.  And, she meets my father there.  I mean, she got divorced.  I don't know when she went back to Chicago.  So, she met my father there in the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, they got married and he went to war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's, let's go to your father's side and then we'll bring him up to where she was, and then we'll--
Speaker 2:  	Okay.
Speaker 1: --put 'em together.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2:  	Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T, Dunbar, D-U-N-B-A-R, Hill [Ernest Hill].
Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2:  	September 12, 1905; Beggs, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2:  	B-E-G-G-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well, what can you tell us about your father's side?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2:  	I can trace them back quite a ways I think.  Probably to my great-greats.  There's (laughter), you know, there's a story of race mixing on his side of the family as well.  But, it, it just sort of went in a, a different direction.  So, on my father's side, again, my grandfather on that side of the family is, was very, very fair complexion.  His father was Dr. John Hill who was white.  His mother was a very fair complexion woman, Adelaide Hill [ph.].  And, they all came from, well, the Hills came from North Carolina originally.  And, I think, the contemporary heirs to the Hill family name in North Carolina are, are prominent white folks in North Carolina.  I went to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [Chapel Hill, North Carolina] for a conference, and stayed at the, there's a hotel on campus for visitors.  And, it was plaque behind the front desk and I, I knew that my great-grandmother Adelaide and Dr. John came from North Carolina and moved to Mississippi during the, right before the Civil War, moved further south right before the Civil War broke out.  And, so, there was, the Hill family was from North Carolina and there was plaque in the, behind the desk that this building was dedicated to a John Hill, blah, blah, blah, who had funded, ironically, one of the Hill branch had funded the music building on the campus and, you know.  They named all these people and these were all family names for me, you know, who had--I grew up knowing my branch of the Hill family in Oklahoma.  Because what happened, it was just, I was stunned to see this because I had heard of these stories.  But, you just hear them and you don't, I didn't do a lot of research though I didn't put that much credence in them.  But, when I looked up there and saw all my uncles' names and these family names and even the married name of one of my aunts was the same as a married name of one of the women on the Hill family.  I went, "Oh, my god.  This's a, a real thing."  I mean, I was so stunned I had to call my sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] and call one of my cousins who's--I'm not that close to.  But, I knew she had been researching family history to say, "I guess the stuff must really be true."  You know, I mean, it was, it was quite a revelation to me.  But, that's neither here nor there, that's just history.  So, I can go back that far on my father's side.  So, my grandfather, who was Allen George Hill [Allen Hill], who was the son of John Allen Hill, was born at Silver Creek, Mississippi.  And, that's a teeny tiny town in Mississippi which was named for the Hill family plantation, which was called Silver Creek.  I guess it was a creek that ran through that property that attached to the Yazoo River, if I'm not mistaken.  My grandmother [sic.] was a midwife.  And, she and Dr. John delivered, you know, all of the babies in the region.  And, he was disinherited from his family because he had this family with this one son.  My grandfather had four sisters and he was the only son.  And, so, since he was disinherited by the family, my grandfather had no inheritance in Mississippi.  And, so, when the war was over, and they had the land rush to go west and go north, he packed up his family and his wife's family and they all went to Indian Territory in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oklahoma land rush (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  And, this was in the late 18--
Speaker 1: --was in the early--around the turn of century.
Speaker 2:  	Late 18--18--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 664943
Speaker 1: In the meantime, the, the Hills, and the Tuckers were very ambitious people.  And, so, my grandmother [Birdie Tucker Hill] on my father's side finished college at Rust College [Rust University; Rust College] in Holly Springs, Mississippi.  I don't know, 1890 something like that, 1895.  And, her brother who was a Tucker, she came from a Tucker clan, also finished college.  They were educators.  So, when they went to Oklahoma, they started schools for Indians [Native American] and freedmen in northeastern Oklahoma.  And, my father [Ernest Hill] was born in Indian Territory before Oklahoma was a state.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, Indians and freedmen schools and, now, where they, was the town of Beggs [Oklahoma], would that be considered a black town?
Speaker 1:  	No.  It wasn't a black town.  It was just tiny town.  I've forgotten the man who actually started the town.  But, it was railroad crossing.  So, that was the point of, it's right outside of Tulsa [Oklahoma].  And, my father--my grandfather [Allen Hill] was a farmer.  My grandmother was a school teacher.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Are there any stories on that side of the family about the Tulsa riot of 1921?
Speaker 1:  	No.  No.  It's funny but, same year that Tulsa riot is the same, is the year, I believe that they discovered oil on my grandfather's farm.  So, they struck oil (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is 1921?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm, um-hm.  They had oil wells in the '20s [1920s].  And, I would go to, we would go to Oklahoma every summer.  So, I know a lot more about my father's family than my mother's.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, it seems, you know, a very active family from with the schools and all that, and then the discovery of oil.  Did that make family members rich (laughter)?
Speaker 1:  	Well, I, I will say that the contrast in my parents' stor- each of their respective stories of childhood are very different.  Because my father did not experience any impact from the Great Depression like my mother [Hope Morris Hill] did.  Now, that, part of that is because his father owned a farm and, you know, they were doing well in Oklahoma somewhat.  Even though, I guess, the Dust Bowl must've happened during that time period.  But, he, he did not, he was not, not affected by it.  He doesn't remember soup lines, for example.  My mother remembers the soup lines in Chicago [Illinois], you know.  And, she used to talk about that to my all the time.  That people didn't have anything.  It was just so hard to have anything, you know.  And, my father was like hunting and fishing and, you know, reading books and going on about his life.  Even though there was about a decade between them in age.  He--the war, World War II [WWII], would have a must greater impact on my father than the Great, you know, than the Great Depression had on my mother as a person.
Story_ID: 664944
Speaker 1: Well, just in terms of your father's developmental years, did he have any stories about growing up in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, lots of--we, and, I, we had lots of stories from my father [Ernest Hill] about his growing up and about, and even about his adulthood and stories of the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Well, growing up right now, what--?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  So, his growing up, I mean, what he remembers about growing up is going to school, having to work on the farm, being disciplined by his parents.  My father was very--he was a reader.  And, he was, he was known, his brothers and sisters called him Tramp, because he would pack up a knapsack full of books and go off in the woods and read.  He bought the complete works of O. Henry with his own money when he was fourteen years old, you know, so that he could read.  And, I'm sure that was due to, I mean, both my grand- my grandfather [Allen Hill], my grandfather and my grandmother [Birdie Tucker Hill] were both intelligent people.  But, my grandmother being an educator and an English teacher.  My father's named for Paul Laurence Dunbar, the poet.  When they built the high school, the colored high school in Beggs, Oklahoma, she named the school the Phillis Wheatley School.  She, you know, she taught English and she wrote well.  And, my aunt, my mother--my father's oldest sister was a very, very well known children's librarian.  She was a children's author and children's librarian in Chicago [Illinois].  Recognized for her work, actually.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2:  	Charlemae Hill Rollins.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Charlemae Rollins.  I can remember, even as an adult, doing work, you know, in education.  Like, early education and opening a children's book and an author had dedicated his book to her.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2:  	You know, different, different authors.  So, I know she had an impact on the development of Af- of children's literature, African American literature.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're father's family was much into education.
Speaker 2:  	They were very into education (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, he's a self-motivated reader.
Speaker 2:  	Very--yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: And, now, did he, now so did he have a chance to finish high school--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Beggs?
Speaker 2:  	He finished high school.  He didn't finish--he finished high school in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: St. Louis.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	So, they sent him to St. Louis.  He went to the same high school that my mother [Hope Morris Hill] went to but he was there before her; Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School].  It's a big high school in St. Louis for black, black kids.
Speaker 1: And, then, did he go to college?
Speaker 2:  	He didn't go to college.  He went to work.  And, he was a tradesman.  So, his first trade was as a carpenter.  And, he--
Speaker 1: Had anyone in his family gone to college?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  His sister, his older sister.
Speaker 1: Who was teaching?
Speaker 2:  	Who was, she was a librarian.
Speaker 1: Librarian, okay.  Right, right.
Speaker 2:  	His mother went to college at Rust College [Rust University; Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi] and then his older sister.  The oldest child went to college.  None of the boys were sent to college.  It wasn't practical, given what their job outlook would have been--
Speaker 1: I can--
Speaker 2:  	--at that time.
Speaker 1: --I can imagine that your aunt was probably the librarian at the George Cleveland Hall Branch in Chicago [George Cleveland Hall Branch Library], which was--has been the black community (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Probably.  It was on Wabash Avenue.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	I know that the library, there's a room in that library name for--oh, that's right, you're from Chicago.
Speaker 1: I lived there thirty years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.  That's was the Hall Branch, I'm thinking.
Speaker 2:  	Hall Branch, yes.  That was it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	That was her library.
Speaker 1: Named for George Cleveland Hall.  He was one of the founders of Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2:  	I was born in Provident.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  All right, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 664945
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, but, so, he, he's operating as a carpenter?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, was he satisfied or did he wanna go, did he wanna go to school and somehow couldn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I, I don't think he, he perceived having a career as an educator.  He was very, very, well read.  And, and, was a quiet man actually.  I mean, he could have--company could come over to the house and he would go get a book and read instead of entertaining company.  He wasn't really that sociable, unless he knew you, you know.  He was more taciturn and reticent as, as a personality.  My mother [Hope Morris Hill] was much more gregarious than he was.  But, he came from a family that was ambitious.  But, the men in his generation did not go to college.  The subs- the next generation did.  So, for example, my grandmother's brother, Nye [Nye Tucker (ph.)], went to college with her at Rust College [Rust University; Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi].  He was an educator.  Now, his sons all went to college.  But, his sons were younger than my father [Ernest Hill], and my father was the youngest son in his family.  So, they all went to school and to, and to medical and dental school.  So, I always grew up looking at the Tucker side of the family as being more accomplished educational.  And, my mother's side of the family as, as being under realized (laughter) in terms of their academic potential.  You know, although my mother finished college and graduate school.  My father had a business, and, and he was a tradesman, he ran his business.
Story_ID: 664946
Speaker 1: Now, the war, you know, now, now they met before the war, right?
Speaker 2:  	They met before the war--
Speaker 1: In Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met or?
Speaker 2:  	I have no idea how they met.
Speaker 1: There personalities being so different.  I mean, he's an introverted kind of (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right.  He was an introverted kind of guy.  And, for both to them, I think, at the time when you think about it, it was a late, a late in life marriage for both of them.  My father [Ernest Hill] was forty-two when he went to World War II [WWII].  Well, he was thirty-eight, and he was forty-two when I was born.  So, and my mother [Hope Morris Hill] was in her thirties; somewhere in her thirties.  I'm not quite sure if she was thirty-two or thirty-five or thirty-nine; she was somewhere in her thirties.  And, so, I don't know, I mean, I think that when they met, my father was probably more, more sociable and he had big plans of what he was going to do when he came back from the war.  But, I think the war took a lot out of him.  I only realized that when I was in my fifties because my husband [Timothy Scott] was reading a book about World War II and about his unit in the war.  And, they, they saw more days of combat.  They were in the European Theatre, his unit was in the European Theatre longer than any unit in the U.S. Army during World War II.
Speaker 1: Now, now, here's a question.  Now, did your father enlist as a black man?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what unit--?
Speaker 2:  	He as in the 761st Tank Battalion.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, the Black Panthers.
Speaker 2:  	The Black Panthers, that's right.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, they have a real interesting story.  So--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --so, what is your father's story in the Black Panthers?
Speaker 2:  	Well, my father by that time had become a mechanic and he was in charge of the, the tanks; all the tanks and all the maintenance.  He was a master sergeant and he was decorated for his service during their work in the European Theatre.  And, you know, that battalion, since you know a little bit about them, they remained close after the war was over.  And, on the fiftieth anniversary, went to Europe and went to every place that they had fought in the European Theatre during, during World War II.
Speaker 1: I know, for those who's watching this, their history was written by Alexander Scott [William Alexander Scott III].
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, subsequently, a documentary was made for public television ['Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II'].
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: It was shown on public television [Public Broadcasting Service].
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Which was then challenged by certain Jewish groups--
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: --who criticized the fact that they liberated, I think, Dachau--
Speaker 2:  	Buchenwald.
Speaker 1: --Buchenwald, Buchenwald.  Okay, there you go.  So, and, but, not all the, I mean, other Jewish people who were at Buchenwald claimed that they, they did--
Speaker 2:  	Remembered them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	And, my father told us that they were there.  Now, I, I think there may be confusion about which Army unit got there first.  I mean, that's the only way I can explain it.  I can't imagine my father making up out of whole cloth a story about the concentration camp.  I mean, I, you know, it just--
Speaker 1: No.  This is what I think, you know, this is a morass of paperwork and stuff to sift through.  I looked at it online.  But, the, apparently, the 761st to prevent them from getting there first as the 761st were split up and attached to other tac units [tactical unit] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Other units.
Speaker 1: But, the men of the 761st actually got there, the Black Panthers actually got their first as, as per the eye witness accounts of the Jews that were there.
Speaker 2:  	I see.  I see.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they, when they saw a black man emerge from tanks, they knew they were safe.
Speaker 2:  	They knew that those were Amer- who else would have black folks in the war.  Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	And, my father, I mean, he remembers that story.  I mean, I, I can tell you every Christmas, we fought the war over again at home.  My father, on our block, there were two other people who had also been in World War II.  So, the men would get together and drink and the kids would wanna play with whatever they got for Christmas.  And, they had wooden guns and play guns and all of that.  And, they would have them march in formation, and do all kind of, you know, I mean, the war, the war was a big presence in our life--
Speaker 1: Now, this is remarkable (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	--(simultaneous) growing up.
Speaker 1: --in a sense.
Story_ID: 664947
Speaker 1: Most black men who came back from the war [World War II, WWII] didn't talk about it all.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The experiences were so bad.
Speaker 2:  	It was very devastating.
Speaker 1: And, they wouldn't talk--talk about that.  My father did talk about.  He wasn't in 761st [761st Tank Battalion], but he talked about his experience in the (unclear) tour, which I find to be odd 'cause hardly anybody talks about in detail what happened to them during the war.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Well, I, we had the book, the 'Come Out Fighting' ['Come Out Fighting: The Epic Tale of the 761st Tank Battalion, 1942-1945,' Trezzvant W. Anderson], which was the [U.S.] Army's book that was published about them; the Black Panthers.  It's khaki green, it's got, it's all military type, it's, it's a military type book, compendium of their work.  This is different than the nonfiction work that has been done by two or three different writers, about the 761st.  And, then, you know, they got the, the presidential citation [Presidential Unit Citation].  I mean, they, nobody even wanted to give them their credit for the work that they had done for twenty, thirty years after the war was over.  It was thirty years, 1976.  They were all discharged in '45 [1945].  So, for three years my father [Ernest Hill] was gone.
Story_ID: 664948
Speaker 1: Any particular story about that period stands out as something that surprised you when you heard it?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I mean, all of it surprised me.  I mean, it surprised me when we saw things about the Jews and the camps, you know.  And, my father [Ernest Hill] would say, "Well, we were there," you know.  Because, of course, as a kid, you know, the first question--we watch these war movies on television when television came out so they rerun all those movies that were made during World War II [WWII].  And, you didn't see anybody black in the movies unless it was Bojangles [Bill "Bojangles" Robinson] or whatever, you know, in those 1940s movies that were made.  And, so, we, you know, the first thing kids ask is, "You were in the war daddy.  Did you kill anybody?"  You know, that's the first thing a kid wants to know.  And, he would say, "Well, there's a lot of killing that takes place in the war.  I never killed anybody deliberately.  You know, we were in a war and in a war you don't see who you shoot.  You're shooting to keep--to stay alive.  And, we were in tanks.  So, all we knew was we had to drive these tanks," you know, that kind of thing.  We, we drove, you know, we just drove, anything in front of was plowed out of the way.  So, we knew things like that.  And, so, I do remember him talking about going into a village and they, he came back with things from the war.  Like he had a German luger.  This is what got, you know, what you call loot, I guess, from wandering someplace where the Germans had been.  He had mementos like that from the war, German marks [Deutsche mark].  And, so, we had money and like I said, the guns and pictures.  And, and pictures that they took out on maneuvers and stuff like that.  We would see all that stuff.  His flag that he had from, from the war, his American flag.  He had a picture of my mother [Hope Morris Hill], a photograph of my mother that he had taken two pieces of glass from the windshield of a plane that had crashed and sealed them together, you know, with heat so that her picture was protected.  And, he kept that picture in this vest, you know, while he was going through the war.  And, her--his letters to her.  There were a couple of footlockers at home.  So, we, we would go through all that stuff, you know.  And, it was, it's all interesting, it was just for us kids; my brother [William Hill (ph.)], sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)], and I.  It was just like history.  History lived in our house.  And, it was really, between my father and my aunt, his sister [Charlemae Hill Rollins], who would send us books for every birthday.  And, every Christmas we had, we just had exposure to a different world that none of the other kids on our block even knew about.  You know, like, I would be reading books about Vermont and maple syrup, and getting on your sled.  And, we lived in sunny California.  I can't tell you how many Christmases I'd ask Santa [Santa Claus] for skis or a sled or ice skates because all these books are published in New York [New York] and they all have these big winter, winter stories in them.  But, you know, nobody else had an aunt who had written a book, you know, about Langston Hughes, or who, she wrote another book called, 'Christmas Gift' ['Christmas Gif': An Anthology of Christmas Poems, Songs and Stories']. It's out of print now.  But, it was Christmas poems and Christmas recipes from, you know, from African American poets and, and people of note during that time.  And, so, you know, between the two of them, and then our cousins were coming up, coming out of Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and they were setting up their practices and, and stuff like that.  So, I always saw my particular family, 'cause I grew up in South Central Los Angeles [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], as hardworking and, and very achievement oriented.  You know, there was just an expectation, you had to perform.
Story_ID: 664949
Speaker 1: Now, what did your father [Ernest Hill]--did, did he continue as a carpenter after the war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2:  	No.  No.  He was be--he developed his mechanics skills.  So, he owned, he worked for Ford [Ford Motor Company], and Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC] at different times.  And, he had his own auto shop with a friend.  I mean, you know, in Los Angeles [California] people were buying cars and cars didn't have warranties like they do today.  So, my father had a, I wouldn't say a lucrative business, but, you know, I don't think, we never, he was, you know, it's weird to say this.  But, I mean, he was never unemployed.  There was never a time when, I know there was times when my mother [Hope Morris Hill] say, well, she was stretching her dollar, or that sort of thing.  But, my father always worked and made a big deal out of demonstrating that he was working and earning an income.
Story_ID: 664950
Speaker 1: Did you parents [Hope Morris Hill and Ernest Hill] get married before the war or after the war [World War II, WWII]?  Was it before or?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I think they got married twice.  They got married once in '42 [1942] before he went.  And, they got married again in Chicago [Illinois].  When they got married in '42 [1942], they got married--I just happened to find this marriage certificate, in Yuma, Arizona.  But, I think my father was not completely divorced from his previous wife when they got married down in Arizona.  And, so, they got married again in '45 [1945] when he got out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For good measure, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 664951
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions their sense of humor, their interests, how they walk, talk, acted, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I take after my, on an, in an outward level, I take after my mother [Hope Morris Hill] much more than my father [Ernest Hill].  I'm sociable and I'm outgoing and I like to help people and have fun and I'm really dedicated to my kids.  And, I identify very strongly with her.  I was the oldest of three.  So, I identify very strongly with her and with her, her quest to be successful.  She was very driven.  And, really she wanted to have children when we were born.  We were not unexpected, we were planned; four children.  I mean, she didn't plan the month and time like people do today.  But, she wanted to make sure she had children and that her children were gonna be well educated.  And, I can remember one of her cousins saying to me right before she died, she said, "Don't ever think you haven't done enough for your mother.  All she ever wanted was to have children and for her children to be successful."  And, so, I, you know, I just identify with her passion for that.  And, I think my brother and sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] did too in their own way.  But, I'm more than any of the three of us, outwardly and more like her.  Inwardly, I'm actually a lot like my father.  I don't--he doesn't let things bot- he did not let things bother him.  He could distance himself from things that happened and not let personal--he didn't hang on to personal affronts.  And, I am like that.  I'm not a vindictive person.  People hurt my feelings, if people hurt me or do things to me, I mean, I feel it, I obviously, you know, a lot of my childhood like I say, I resent many of the things that happened to me as I--as a child.  But, I had to, you have to move on.  You, you harbor bad feelings, anger toward people, it's using up your energy.  It's not using up theirs.  They're not expending any energy, you know.  They didn't even expend much energy to hurt you 'cause all they're doing is unloading their frustrations on you.  So, I just have to--my sister says, "Duck," you know, "Water rolls off your back like a duck."  Whereas with her, she's more sensitive.  And, my mother was actually, underneath the social part of her, she was very mistrusting of others and very sensitive.  Her wounds went deep and I don't have that, that same thing.  And, I'm mechanical like my father.  But, my brother is just like my father and is an engineer.  So, you know, I read like my father did.  My brother though, fixes things.  His wife says, "Billy [William Hill (ph.)] knows everything.  Billy can do anything."  That's her mantra, you know.  And, she tells people, "You wanna stay married?  This is how you stay married.  Billy knows everything.  He can do anything."  And, that's probably true of him, with my brother, actually.
Story_ID: 664952
Speaker 1: She almost sounds like the way that men talk about their, their wives, you know.  They, they, they're always right.  Don't, don't (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  But, I think she means it.  I'm--to be honest, he married the right person.  She's just a great sister-in-law.  But, my brother is, he's, you know, he's, he's a scientist, and he's a deep thinker and he does, he can do--if my husband [Timothy Scott] were to come in here today he'd say, "Oh, yeah, Billy can do that."  You know, anything could happen.  Your stuff, your equipment could go wrong, Billy--and that's not what he does for a living.  He is a high level science physicist.  He does R and D [research and development] work.  But, that talent, that ability, he has taken to another level.  I'm a fix, a MacGyver type fix it, so I've, you know, I figured that I got that from my father [Ernest Hill], especially for a woman.  But, so, but not like my brother.  He, he has it.  And, my sister's a surgeon.  My younger sister.
Speaker 1: Let's kind of go, can you go through your siblings from the oldest to the youngest?
Speaker 2:  	I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	So, I'm the one they call pride and joy, you know, that's what they call me.  That, you know--
Speaker 1: You were really (unclear)?
Speaker 2:  	That's what they say.  And, "Who made you the boss of me," you know.  I have very classic first born type traits.  I organize everything.  I, you know, get stuff done.  I tell people where to go, what to do, you know.  My sister used to say, "Who told you, you could be directing traffic?  I'm not gonna do this or that," you know.  But, I just have those, those kinds of traits.  My sister is more introspective.  So, outwardly she seems more like my father.
Speaker 1: So, it's just one sister?
Speaker 2:  	One sister and one brother.
Speaker 1: And, what's your sister's name?
Speaker 2:  	Shelly [Michelle Hill (ph.)].  And, my brother's name is William Allen Hill [William Hill].  (Laughter) He has one of those Hill, Hill family names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, so, my brother's in the middle.
Story_ID: 664953
Speaker 1: He [Hill-Scott's brother, William Hill] is a solid state physics person (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 1:  	Who's won, you know, he has patents and--
Speaker 2: Now, where does he, is he at a university?
Speaker 1:  	He's recently retired.  No.  He's recently retired from Lockheed [Lockheed Martin].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	He was in industry.  He worked in industry--
Speaker 2: So, okay.
Speaker 1:  	--all his life.
Speaker 2: At Lockheed, all right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We interviewed quite a few physicists over the last couple of years--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --with a grant from the National Science Foundation.  So--
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  He is, he's in the generation, the cohort before the crop that's here today.  You know, it's like that first wave of people who, who are over fifty who were able to enter demanding programs and had good careers.  The next generation has even better careers.  And, so, he's in that, that first crop.  And, he didn't, he didn't, he didn't get his Ph.D.  So, he didn't, he--it's funny, he equipped the physics lab at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for Rockwell [North American Rockwell Corporation].  Rockwell gave them a grant and my brother actually built the physics lab at Rock- at Howard University but he didn't go back to school to get a Ph.D. for himself.  He liked working.  And, just, and doing.
Speaker 2: Now, we did interview a few people like him who were employed by Bell Labs [AT&T Bell Laboratories, Inc.; Nokia Bell Labs], and other places like [HistoryMaker] James West and others.  It just went--
Speaker 1:  	Right.
Speaker 2: --right to work (simultaneous).
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: They was so talented that they, you know, had--
Speaker 1:  	They just stay, yeah.  If you get an R and D [research and development] position in, you know, places that have labs.  Not all companies have labs but here my brother worked with Rockwell, and Rockwell is still a company but he left here and went to a company Loral space labs [Loral Space and Communications Inc.], I believe.  Which was then bought by Ford.  Ford Motor Company actually had an engineering company that did lab work.  And, then he ended up at Lockheed.  Lockheed bought out Ford, Ford engineering and he went to work for Lockheed and that's where he retired is from the lab at Lockheed.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what about your sister?  Now, what did she do, Michelle [Michelle Hill (ph.)] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) She's a physician.  She's an ear--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	--nose and throat specialist.
Story_ID: 664954
Speaker 1: So, it's leave no child behind in this family, I guess.
Speaker 2:  	Unh-uh. Unh-uh. Unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody did something.  And--
Speaker 2:  	Hope [Hope Morris Hill] was serious, I'm telling you.  I did not have, when I was high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California], I didn't have a senior class ring, a senior sweater, nor did we buy senior pictures.  And, the reason for that was, "This is nothing.  Why would I spend all this money on this stuff?  You have to go to college.  That's the graduation that counts.  High school graduation is just a step along the way.  It's, it's not worth my time."  And, for my--I was her first child so when I finished high school, I tell a lot of people this story.  When I finished high school, okay, I, I had been junior class president.  I had been, you know, active and all this little stuff at school.  And, on the night of graduation I asked my mother, "Well, I know you didn't really care about a senior sweater and that was a waste of money.  It wasn't any big deal, and all that."  I can remember actually at the graduation ceremony and she came, and people were there crying with their children and all that, and I said, "Well they're all excited."  So and So's parents are all excited.  She said, "Nobody in that family ever finished high school before.  That is nothing in this house.  Don't get exc- you know, this is nothing to be excited about.  It's just a step along the way."  And, I said, "Okay, okay."  So, then that night I said, "Well, mama, I know you didn't think high school was anything, but did you, you know, did you decide, you know, maybe you'd get me a high school graduation present or something like that?"  And, she said, "Yes.  I do have a present for you."  And, I said, "Wow!  Really, what is it?"  She said, "Just a minute."  And, she came back and you know how when people back then, we, things weren't on computer, you know, you got things, receipts were written by hand on carbon paper.  And, it was about this size.  And, she said, "I have something to give you."  And, she gave me this yellow carbon paper and it was a receipt from my tuition to go to college.  And, she said, "School starts Monday morning."  She had gone and registered me in fifteen units, my first semester of college.  She made sure I was registered.  She said, "This show that you've been in the last three years, it's over."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	We're turning a new leaf on Monday (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  Now--
Speaker 2:  	And, that was it.  I knew she was serious.
Speaker 1: Well, for the record, what school--?
Speaker 2:  	I went to Pepperdine undergrad [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University].
Speaker 1: Pepperdine, okay.
Story_ID: 664955
Speaker 1: I wanna flash back though to growing up.  And, let me ask you, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2:  	I can remember, I--my earliest childhood re- well, I have several child- early childhood memories.  I remember when my brother and sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] were both born.  And, I was young.  I mean, we're eighteen, each of us, eighteen months apart.  I can remember when my brother came home from the hospital.  I was just like really upset that she had brought this other child in the house, and that he wanted to nurse.  I didn't know what nursing was.  How would I know what that was?  And, I was just really, he's gonna bite you.  I can remember pulling on him, you know.  That's one memory I have.  Then, when my little sister was born, I was three and half I guess.  And, all these people came over and they were just carrying on about my younger sister.  She was a big baby.  She weighed over nine pounds.  So, everybody was like, "Oh, my god."  The big beautiful baby and blah, blah, blah.  So, Billy [William Hill (ph.)] and I were out in the backyard and he fell asleep on the back steps.  He just, you know, fell asleep and I can remember picking him up and dragging him on the floor to my mother.  Just dropped him there.  And, said, "You see what you've done.  He's," (laughter), "he's fallen asleep outside and nobody's there to take care of him."  I was just, I was, carried on.  I was just really upset about all these intruders in my--I, what I thought was supposed to be my life.  But, that was because I was born in Chicago [Illinois] at Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County].  None of my brother's [sic.] siblings had children, and there were five of them.  And, my aunt had an apartment building on the South Side of Chicago and on every floor, there were flats, every floor was member of the Hill family.  And, they had no children.  So, for the first two years of my life, I lived in a building, three floors, plus my parents [Hope Morris Hill and Ernest Hill], there were four, only couple there that wasn't Hill was my aunt, my oldest, my father's older sister [Charlemae Hill Rollins].  She would come every day.  And, I can remember her telling me, "Your mother might've ha--might've birthed you, but we had you."  And, I was just indulged.
Story_ID: 664956
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you lived on the South Side?
Speaker 2:  	6449 South Vernon Avenue [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: 6149?
Speaker 2:  	6449.
Speaker 1: 6449, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Down, one block away from the "L" [elevated train] on 63rd Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I know exactly where it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, this, this is--
Speaker 2:  	That was my first address.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  In 1946 that would've been like the, almost the edge of the black communities push south, you know, right there at 63rd.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Just in fact, a block past it.  As people were moving slowly further south (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Further south.
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2:  	So, and I was born in Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] which was a private hospital.  Pret- you know, at that time, if people were born in Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], and you know, I didn't know any of this until I was almost grown.  And, people say, "Oh, you were born in Provident Hospital," you know, like that was something.  I didn't know.  I just took it for granted.  Anyway, I remembered that.  But, my first conscious--I, those are just like little blips.  Where my memory really begins and I can remember almost day after day of my life was when I was four.  I was sitting on the floor in the kitchen, under the kitchen table and I asked my mother [Hope Morris Hill], "How old am I?"  And, she said, "You're four."  And, I feel like I just came out from underneath that table and said, "Well, if I'm four, I'm gonna count all the days."  I'm gonna know every day from now on.  And, I, I almost can remember.  Certainly, every year I can name something from every year of my life after that day.
Story_ID: 664957
Speaker 1: That's good because the next question is: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Well, one of my big experiences growing up was, I caught polio [poliomyelitis].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, I spent time in a hospital.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2:  	I was probably four and an half.  I don't think I had started school.  It was really pretty traumatic.
Speaker 1: So, this is, this'll be 1951?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, 1951 probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is, polio is a devastating--
Speaker 2:  	Devastating (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) childhood disease.
Speaker 2:  	You could die.  You could be crippled.  You could be in an iron lung.  It was--and I remember my mother [Hope Morris Hill]--I had gotten a bicycle for Christmas and my mother said, you know, they had--I can remember the advertisements that came on television and on the radio, "Don't let your children overexert themselves."  They knew it was contagious, 'cause it is a contagious disease.  That had been figured out about it.
Speaker 1: But, what would exertion have to do with it (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I don't know.  I guess they thought that overexertion and--and would weaken your resistance.  You, if you over, you know, if you were to be overtired.  And, of course, how are you gonna restrain a child from playing.  I can remember being out riding my bike, coming in sweating, and my mother saying, "Oh, no you've," you know, "you've done too much."  And, I, I got sick and I went to the doctor.  And, he said, "I don't know.  She's got aches and, you know, she's not feeling very well.  It could be that she's got polio but we have to have her spinal fluid to know for sure.  So, why don't you take her home and we'll just see how she does."  I can remember, Dr. Tarr that was his name; T-A-R-R was the pediatrician.  And, I used to get tonsillitis all the time so I visited him frequently.  Anyway, she took me home and that night we had a lot of company at the house.  Probably just people in the neighborhood all sitting around the dining room table.  I had been sitting in a back bedroom with my brother [William Hill (ph.)] and sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] and maybe some other kids playing.  And, I, I went to get up, I couldn't get up.  I was sitting on the floor and I couldn't get up.  And, I finally got up but I couldn't straighten up.  I couldn't lift my back up.  I couldn't lift my torso.  And, I remember walking up to the dining room and I was stoop like, you know, low like below the table height.  And, I told my mother and father [Ernest Hill], "I can't, I can't get up.  I can't, I'm too weak.  I don't, I don't feel good."  And, my--everybody jumped up.  I can remember the hullabaloo.  "Get her out here.  Let's go to the hospital," you know, and they grabbed me up and threw me in the backseat of the car.  I--grown ups took all the other kids.  My father got in the car to drive.  My mother was in the backseat with me.  Somebody else was in the front seat and we drove out to big county hospital [Los Angeles County General Hospital; Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] to the emergency room.  And, they immediately took me.  I got a spinal tap, that's what they did.  I can remember having to curl up.  They put this long needle in my back and drew out fluid and I can remember them telling my mother I had polio.  And, both my parents were devastated.  My father was more upset.  My mother was crying and, you know, I was crying 'cause they had to leave me there in the hospital overnight.  And, I was in a room that, I was in one of these metal cribs, and I couldn't keep anything with me.  They couldn't take anything I had brought with me home.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you at this point?
Speaker 2:  	I was, not--I was, I don't think I was five.  I, I hadn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Between four and five?
Speaker 2:  	--gone to kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 664958
Speaker 1:  	I was scared.  I knew what that word meant.  I'd been watching the March of Dime [March of Dimes Foundation] stuff on television, you know.  So, and, I couldn't go home.  Every day I was in that hospital [Los Angeles County General Hospital; Los Angeles County + USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] and I couldn't go home.  My mother [Hope Morris Hill] would come and visit and then she'd have to leave.  Or, my music teacher.  I had started taking piano lessons.  Miss Perry [ph.] would come, and I loved her and she had to leave.  And, you know, people would bring me things.  So, my crib, I was like in this crib, and there were pictures, you know, taped all around and my cards, and animals and, you know, of course people thought it was end of the world for you.  So, everybody was sending stuff.  And, So and So's church is praying for you and all of that.  And, I did get better and it resolved.
Speaker 2: (Cough).
Speaker 1:  	And, I, and I didn't have any residual physical limitations.
Speaker 2: How long did it take?
Speaker 1:  	I don't--you know, in my memory of time, I wanna say I was in the hospital for two weeks.  But, I have no idea--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, within a year?
Speaker 1:  	--really how long.  Yeah, within a year, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1:  	Oh, absolutely.  'Cause I went to school.  I remember being in kindergarten.  And, I also remember when the vaccine came out.  My mother wanted to take me, made sure everybody had the vaccine and I would have it too, 'cause I, she didn't want this to happen again.
Speaker 2: And, it's like 1955 or so, or--
Speaker 1:  	I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) four [1954], '54 [1954], '55 [1955]?
Speaker 1:  	And, the doctor told her, you know, okay, we'll give it to her.  But, it didn't take.  You know, it didn't, I had already had, what--you get a vaccine, you have a reaction to the vaccine that shows you've been inoculated 'cause your body responses to it.  And, my body didn't respond to the vaccine.
Speaker 2: Is it because you had already it?
Speaker 1:  	I had already had polio [poliomyelitis].
Speaker 2: And, did the, did the disease remain in your system?
Speaker 1:  	No.  It just means that you won't catch it again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	You're immune to it.  So, I could go someplace where there were people who had polio, I wouldn't catch it even though I've, you know, not had the vaccines because I, I had had polio.  So, that was pretty, pretty big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wilma Rudolph who had polio.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.
Speaker 2: There were other people (simultaneous).
Speaker 1:  	(Simultaneous) Yeah, she had polio.  And--
Speaker 2: And, it was really devastating, you know--
Speaker 1:  	For her, she was crippled.  Yeah, she had problems with her legs.  So, I was lucky in that regard.  But, I, you know, I remember it.
Story_ID: 664959
Speaker 1: I have more childhood stories than we have time to go through.  In many ways despite all of the, "Who do you think you are," blah, blah, blah, all that kind of stuff, "just 'cause you light."  'Cause I didn't even know what race was.  I can remember the first time I learned that there was such a thing as race.  I was in the first grade and somebody asked me, "What are you?"  And, I said, "I'm a girl."  "No, no, no, what are you?"  And, I'm going, "I don't know what, I mean, I'm a girl.  That's all there is."  "No, are you white?"  "Well, of course, I'm not white.  Who's white?"  I didn't know what white meant.  Nobody has white skin.  Nobody, white people didn't have white skin.  So, I didn't know what white was.  I mean, I just, I really, I had no clue.  And, "So, are you colored?"  "Well, I guess so, there's color on my skin."  "No, no, no, are you a Negro?"  "What is a Negro?"  I, and really, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] was well intention by not bring it up, even when I asked her.  She said, "You just tell them, you're an individual.  That's all they need to know about you."  But, I had to come back home and say that just would not do.  There were people at school, they wanted to know.  (Laugher) You know, like, inquiring minds want to know.  And, so I went back to school and the phrase of course that was used really more at that time than anything else was colored.  And, my school wasn't at that time, the little neighborhood where we lived was black but not everybody in my school.  I didn't go to an all-black school.
Speaker 2: So, there's still some white people in the neighborhood [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 1:  	Whites, and Japanese, and Mexicans (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, this is--um-hm.
Story_ID: 664960
Speaker 1: This would be--
Speaker 2:  	I mean, it was still like farming areas.  South Central [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] was, it was, out where I lived at 132nd Street, that was a long way from--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is away from Chicago [Illinois].  You--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah.  We came to Chicago when I was two.  We came--my mother [Hope Morris Hill] left.  She was tired--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--of me being somebody else's child.  So, she was leaving.  Leave--she was, really she was leaving my father [Ernest Hill] and all his people, with her baby.  And, of course, they all got on the train and came with her to be sure that the package got here safely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I mean, your father and your mother didn't split up or anything?
Speaker 2:  	No.  They stayed married until they both died.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he came on--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, he came.
Speaker 1: --after her?  After her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No, they all got on a train.  They got on the Sky Chief [sic.], I think is what it's called.  They all got on the train together--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--and came to California.  They went back.  Mama sent them back.  But, they all came to California together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Came out on the Sky Chief?
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: And, so, when you contracted polio [poliomyelitis] you were here?
Speaker 2:  	I was living here.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, then they built Rancho Los Amigos Hospital [Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center, Downey, California].  That was the rehabilitation hospital.  I went out there for physical therapy.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) They built that af- during and after the epidemic.  That's where all the iron lung patients were and--
Story_ID: 664961
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2:  	Mark Twain Elementary School [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Mark Twain.  And, that's in South Central L.A. [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It's closed now.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) And, we lived on a, in a, in a little tract, you know, homes, it was World War II [WWII] homes that got built here in Southern California.  And, so, there were a lot of kids on the block.  It was the baby boomer generation.  And, every house had children in it.  So, my end of the block, I lived on a street called Towne Avenue.  My--
Speaker 1: Is that with an E, or?
Speaker 2:  	T-O-W-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	My end of the block where lived, 'cause we--I could only travel freely up and down that half of the block.  It went from 132nd Street to 135th Street.  And, so, I could go up as high as 133 [133rd Street] maybe, 134 [134th Street], being the first numbers in the address.  I could go up any higher than that alone, to play.  But, we, it was whole passel of kids that lived in every one of those homes.  And, it was an all, you know, a home owned, everybody was a homeowner.  And, my father had a business.  It was in East L.A. [East Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  He worked in association with two Jewish guys; Sam [ph.] and Joe [ph.], who were brothers.  And, the family across the street, he was one of the first black police officers.  Most of the people had relocated from the South.  I grew up around southern black folks from Louisiana--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	--Mississippi, Arkansas.  Mostly, working class people.
Speaker 1: That seem to be the pattern in Los Angeles [California]; Arkansas, Louisiana.
Speaker 2:  	The southern belt.  Like my parents [Hope Morris Hill and Ernest Hill] from Oklahoma, Missouri were odd lot, even though they were Arkansas people.  But, not as many, you know, nobody went to Oklahoma for the summer but us.  But, the kids who went to Louisiana, Mississippi, Texas, and Arkansas, that's quite a group.  And, there were even state clubs here.  'Cause I remember in high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California], my best friend was from Arkansas.  And, there was an Arkansas picnic every year in Griffith Park [Los Angeles, California], where all the people from Arkansas we get together.  And, the Louisiana people was a huge contingent of people from Louisiana, Creoles and nots.  But, I grew up around both; the Creoles and the non-Creoles--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--here.
Story_ID: 664962
Speaker 1: You grew up, you were in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about that off camera.  So, tell us about your experiences in Jack and Jill.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  So, my, so, in terms of my growing up experiences, I grew up on a block with a lot of kids who, we, we just had a lot of fun.  We were free to play outside, do all the different kinds of things we wanted to do.  And, our house was really Grand Central Station for the block.  So, it made it a really special place.  And, even though, if we went on vacation, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] would leave the back door unlocked.  Because if Kenny [ph.] needed to come over and make a lunch for himself or something like that.  Anybody on the block could come over and make a sandwich or sit down and watch TV while we were gone on vacation to Oklahoma.  I mean, nobody would do that today.  But, it was just, it was safe. It was, it was, it was a--we had a great time growing up.  One of the highlights of my childhood and adolescence though was not so much on the block but with Jack and Jill.  My mother along with other women who were upward aspiring chartered a chapter of Jack and Jill that still exist today.  It's called the South Los Angeles Chapter [South Los Angeles Chapter of Jack and Jill of America, Inc., Los Angeles, California].  And, all I knew about Jack and Jill was that it was a mothers club and it gave me a chance to meet other kids who were in neighborhoods that, that were near mine.  And, the kids went to different schools.  So, it just widened my circle of friends and people that I knew.  And, some of the kids, I was in third grade when we, when that chapter was chartered.
Speaker 1: Now, what is the history of Jack and Jill?
Speaker 2:  	Jack and Jill was always a mothers club formed to promote positive friendships and promotion of like interests among one's children, (laughter) their children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, do you know when it started, or?
Speaker 2:  	I think Jack in Jill was incorporated originally in the late '40s [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. Well.
Speaker 2:  	And, and there was a formula to Jack and Jill.  The Jack and Jill was divided into five groups, age groups of children, groups one through five.  And, we had to do community service.  We had monthly activities second Saturday of every month we had a Jack and Jill activity.  And, each group would have a different kind of activity.  Those activities were designed to be enriching.  It wasn't a play date.  It was something that would expand your horizons.  So, we went to the symphony or, and, and there were two required types of experiences in addition to the culture enrichment.  One was that we celebrated Negro history month.  It was Negro History Week [Black History Month]--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2:  	--when we were growing up.  So, even though we didn't have a curriculum of study in school, we had a curriculum of study in Jack and Jill around Negro history.  And, we also had to have at least one activity a year where we performed community service.  So, since I took piano lessons from the time I was four years old, where ever we did community service, I had to play the piano.
Speaker 1: So, for instance, what kind of community service (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	Well, for example, we would actually go out the Rancho Los Amigos [Rancho Los Amigos Hospital; Rancho Los Amigos National Rehabilitation Center, Downey, California] and sing Christmas carols to the kids who were there who had had polio and were still in residence at the hospital.  Or, we would go visit a senior citizens home and sing Christmas carols.  Typically, our Christmas activity included Christmas caroling some place where people were underprivileged or were not able to, to get out and enjoy themselves.
Story_ID: 664963
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about church?
Speaker 2:  	So, church was interesting.  My mother [Hope Morris Hill] and--comes from her mother [Willie Morris] who was the, like I told you, the free spirit.  'Cause I didn't tell you about my, my grandmother deciding to homestead 163 acres in the Arizona desert, and live out there by herself once her kids were grown.  She had a ranch called the Gateway Ranch.
Speaker 1: Now, this your--?
Speaker 2:  	My mother's mother.  The one who went off to Broadway when she was seventeen.  Right.  She homesteaded this ranch out in Arizona.  So, at any rate, she was a metaphysical person.  She believed, she joined Unity before it was Unity.
Speaker 1: I know they, they used to have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) They were big in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: --Unity, which was--okay.
Speaker 2:  	I was christened at the Unity Center [South Side Unity Center of Christianity] in Chicago.  So, we were Christian Scientist.  So, that was very esoteric, nobody was a Christian Sci- I didn't know one Christian Scientist in my circle of friends.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what beliefs, I guess, define a Christian Scientist?
Speaker 2:  	Well, they believe that, that your spiritual life is the most important life.  The life you live on this earth is a corporeal life.  It's just a life of the flesh, and the flesh is meaningless, you know.  It's just a vehicle for a body, you know, to exist and learn.  But, that your spiritual life was a much higher plane of existence.
Speaker 1: Now, was this, did your mother gravitate towards that?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, probably her sisters [Vera Morris and Janie Morris] too.  But, I don't think they ever joined a Christian Science church and have their children go to Sunday school every Sunday.  But, she evolved, we, you know, I got married.  My father's [Ernest Hill] family was Methodist, United Methodist.  But, we went to Christian Science Sunday school.  But, because I played the piano, I went to every church known to man except the Mormon church and the Jehovah's Witnesses.  Other than that--and the Jewish temple.  'Cause I didn't grow up around any Jews.
Speaker 1: So, were you, were you a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) I was the church pianist.
Speaker 1: --special guest church pianist?
Speaker 2:  	I was a church pianist and church organist.  That was because, "God gave you a talent.  And, if you have a talent, you must share it and you must use it or your talent will wither away."  And, this was my mother's mantra about me and the piano.  I started playing the piano when I was four years old and I played the piano until I was twenty-one years old.
Speaker 1: So, were you a prodigy (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) As a child, I would have been considered a prodigy, yes.  So, I played Rachmaninoff's [Sergei Rachmaninoff] 'Prelude in C sharp minor' [Prelude in C sharp minor, Op. 3, No. 2'] that dom, dom, dom, when I was five years old.  My hands could barely make an octave.
Speaker 1: Now, did you know about the, who was the famous prodigy, Philippa Duke Schuyler [Philippa Schuyler].  Did you know about her?  She should've been older than you by about ten years, I guess.
Speaker 2:  	No.  I knew about--
Speaker 1: She was an African American--
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, from New York [New York].
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  No, I didn't know about her.  I knew about this other woman, Crawford [ph.] was her last name.  And, actually, she was a jazz, jazz musician.
Speaker 1: Not, Ran- no.  She's a singer.
Speaker 2:  	No, no, no, way before then.
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2:  	You know, probably in between, in between my mother's generation and my generation.  I knew about her.  But, my mother was very interested in, you know, you had to learn classical music.  And, then as I got older, she wanted me to be able to play church music because she didn't want me to be aspiring to play in a juke joint or something like that, you know, so.  That's what I did.  And, my cousins, my white cousins also studied music and became very proficient.
Story_ID: 664964
Speaker 1: So, was your piano teacher very important in growing, in your upbringing (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) My first piano teacher I loved dearly, Mrs. Perry [ph.].  And, I went to her for- until I was maybe ten, ten years old.  And, she used to have recitals and so I was always her little star performer at her recitals.  And, then I went to Grays Conservatory of Music [Gray Conservatory of Music].
Speaker 1: Is that in downtown Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2:  	It was near downtown.  I think it was on Jefferson Boulevard.  And, it was black owned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but, they, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] felt they could take me to another level.  And, then Mr. Gray, there were two pe- two men there, Mr. Gray and another man.  They suggested that my mother take me to USC.  And, that's where I stayed as piano student until I went to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, at the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] they actually could teach you, I mean, could--?
Speaker 2:  	They had, they had a, called the, it was the USC preparatory and music school [Colburn School, Los Angeles, California].  And, we learned from, my, my music teacher was Madam Irene Bonya Palatay [ph.].  She was Hungarian from the Liszt's royal academy of music; Franz Liszt royal academy of music [Royal National Hungarian Academy of Music; Franz Liszt Academy of Music, Budapest, Hungary].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so, so you where, so would it be wrong to--
Speaker 2:  	So, that's how I learned about churches.  Because my church wasn't social.  I played for Sunday school.  But, I learned about church-church.  And, I learned about holy rolling rocking churches because of playing the piano and the organ.  My mother didn't, wouldn't let me work.  I wanted to work in retail.  I wanted to work in a dress shop.  You know, just like every other kid would wanna do, every other girl.  I could buy clothes and all that, "Unh-uh, no, no, no, you're not gonna do that."  So, the only way I could earn my little spending money was to play for somebody's church and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So, this is a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Playing the piano?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My degree is in music.  My undergraduate degree [from George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University] is in music.
Speaker 1: Right.  And did you--
Story_ID: 664965
Speaker 1: We're gonna pick up on it after we get you through, you know, high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California] and all that.  And, you told us about graduation already.  But, as you went through grade school, th- then was music the foremost thing on your mind in terms of career?
Speaker 2:  	No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you want to--?
Speaker 2: I took it for granted.  I, I really did take music for granted.  It, it became a burden to me later on.  I didn't love it as much because I wanted to be able to play rock and roll.  And, I mean, I wanted to be able to play the music that was exactly the opposite of what my mother [Hope Morris Hill] wanted me to play.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a script, you know.  This is a jazz singer and other, other such scripts.  But, this is--
Speaker 2:  	I mean, in another life, I would've been, I can't say I would have been, I don't know what I would have been.  But, I think if I had been given another way to express myself besides the snooty European classics, I, I probably would've stayed with music.  But, it was given that I was in this situation where I wanted to be accepted by the kids that I was around.  You know, playing all those Beethoven's [Ludwig van Beethoven] sonatas and Bach [Johann Sebastian Bach] preludes and fugues, and all that kind of stuff.  It was just like not happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is, so you wanted to play rock and roll and--
Speaker 2:  	I can remember coming home telling my mother, my favorite song was by Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland] and she about fell out in an apoplectic fit.  She was like, "What?"  Oh, my god.  And, then I loved [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson's song, 'Bad Girl.'  "She's not a bad girl."  "What do you wanna know about bad girls?  Are you--," (laughter) you know, I mean, oh, my god.  It was just a struggle, honestly.  I was a pain in the butt adolescence for my mother.  I really was a total pain.  But, it was, you know, it was the school context that I was in.  That's what was important.
Story_ID: 664966
Speaker 1: I went on this quiz show.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	In the sixth grade, called 'Quiz Down.'  And, schools competed.  And, I went on that show--
Speaker 2: This is a citywide Los Angeles [California] school type show?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Quiz--
Speaker 1:  	Well, it was a regular show.  It was syndicated quiz show.  And--
Speaker 2: So, was it showing on network television, or?
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  It was showing on regular television.  It wasn't within the school district.  I mean, it was just kids from different schools--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	--like probably all over California.  I don't know how far it went.
Speaker 2: 'Quiz Down,' huh?
Speaker 1:  	'Quiz Down.'
Speaker 2: And, so, you were, were you on as a--?
Speaker 1:  	I was a contestant.  And, I can remember the guy asking me, Bill Cullen, I think was the emcee.  And, he, and he used to do 'The Price Is Right.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1:  	And, he asked me--
Speaker 2: And, 'Password,' right?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.  What did I--that was later.  He started out with 'Quiz Down.'  What did I wanna be when I grew up?  And, I said, "I'd like to be a wife and mother.  Just like my mother [Hope Morris Hill]."  And, my mother got me after that show was over.  And, then what, "What kind of music did I like?"  And, I told her, told them, "I like popular music."  I answered every question correctly.  My school won.  I nailed it, you know, so that we won all the prizes.  The audience went wild.  The whole, you know, they chartered school buses to come to this thing.  My mother took me home and she said, "I'm glad you did well on that show.  But, I don't ever want you to tell anybody that when you grow up you wanna be a wife and mother.  You will be a research scientist or a concert pianist.  Anybody can be a wife and mother, anybody.  That is not what you are supposed to do.  That is not the plan for you."  I went, "Oh, okay.  Fine.  No problem."  You know, I mean, but I just remember her saying it.  And, then she took it a step further.  She said, "I can't believe you said that.  I can't believe you told that man after all these music lessons that you've had that you like popular music.  You must be sick.  So, I think you need to go in there and get in the bed and get a little rest."  And, all these kids came to the house, "Can Karen [HistoryMaker Karen Hill-Scott] come out and play.  We're so excited about the show."  She said, "Oh, no.  She's not well.  I think she might have the German measles or something."  I mean, she was just (laughter), I, and it's funny, I tell other grown people about that now, and they would say, "Boy, your mother was manipulative."  But, you know, she was on a mission.  We were not gonna be sidetracked by South Central Los Angeles [South Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  We were just not gonna be sidetracked.  You could not go off.  She had a bigger plan in mind for her kids.
Speaker 2: Today they call 'em tiger moms, I guess or something.
Speaker 1:  	Yeah.  She would've been a tiger mom.
Story_ID: 664967
Speaker 1: That's a lot of pressure, isn't it?
Speaker 2:  	It didn't bother me.  I knew that's what she wanted.  I knew she had a reason.  I trusted her.  I really just trusted her.  And, I could see all around me, people who were failing.  Now, that was pretty obvious.  I mean, I could see the opposite result.  I could see, you know, a man across the street who was an alcoholic.  I could see another neighbor across the street whose kids were beaten every day, you know, just for good measure to keep 'em in line.  You know, my mother never laid a hand on us.  What she did was preach to us, you know, her message.  And, my father [Ernest Hill] always told us, "You are your mother's responsibility.  I leave your education to her."  And, so, that was it.  We were on, you know, we were, Hope [Hope Morris Hill] had a plan (laughter), you know, and we, I was a--and being the first born.  And, I even knew when I went to college, I needed to get going, get in there, make good grades.  She told me, "You, you are gonna go over here to college.  And, the reason I want you to go to Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University] is they have a trimester system.  You can be done in two years and nine months.  You got a brother [William Hill (ph.)] and sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] coming up behind you and I gotta send them to school.  You need to get your show on the road.  And, you had to make grades good enough to get a fellowship for graduate school."  They give people--because my mother had gotten a fellowship.  She knew what a fellowship was.  "You have got to do that."  I got a Danforth Fellowship when I went to graduate school [at the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 664968
Speaker 1: Now, were there any special, now, you went to Mark Twain Elementary School [Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then did--was there middle school?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, called junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Junior high school.  Now, what was that one?
Speaker 2:  	Enterprise Junior High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	The biggest claim to fame for, for my junior high school was that Duke Snider, a famous Brooklyn Dodger had gone to Enterprise Junior High School [Enterprise Middle School, Compton, California].
Speaker 1: And, Duke Snider, yeah the Duke, he was the centerfielder for the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers], right.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Back, yeah.  So, there's been songs composed about Duke Snider.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, really.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Simon and Garfunkel [Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel] or somebody mentioned him in a song.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, really?
Speaker 1: But, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	I knew he was a famous ballplayer.  I mean, because at every, you know, you learn that on the first day of school.
Speaker 1: Playing along with Joe DiMaggio, and, you know, so.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  And, can tell you who, who grew up around the corner from me and who was year ahead of me in school from the first grade on was Reggie Smith who was a Los Angeles Dodger.  Who played, I forgot what position he play.  And, he married a girl from our high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California].  They got married as soon as he went, he was drafted right out of high school to the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Speaker 1: This was Reggie Smith a--Reggie Smith, right?  Not, not Reggie Jackson?  Reggie Smith?
Speaker 2:  	Reggie Smith.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, he was an outfielder for the--
Speaker 2:  	For the Dodgers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dodgers, right.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	He lived around the block.
Story_ID: 664969
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors at--?
Speaker 2:  	In elementary school at Mark Twain [Mark Twain Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], Mrs. Moore [ph.] was my third grade teacher.  She was my very favorite teacher, and she was an outstanding teacher.  I can even look back on her and recognize the depth of her ability to teach.  She was just amazing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Third grade curriculum, elementary school was great; academically.  I loved it.  I loved school.  I loved everything about it.  I remember every grade.  I know social studies unit to this day for every grade in California curriculum.  It has not changed, you know.  And, so, third grade is native peoples of the United States.  We used to call it Indians [Native American].  We built a tepee.  We did sand paintings like the Navajo.  We built a hogan like the Hopis, you know.  We, we just, the Iroquois and the, the Seminoles.  I mean, I knew every Indian tribe in the United States from the Alaskan Inuits, you know, all the way down to the Florida Seminoles.  We just--the Trail of Tears, and the Cherokee going to Oklahoma.  And, then I understood all that stuff my daddy [Ernest Hill] told me about, you know, the copperhead snakes, and water moccasins and the Indians making poultices out of various grasses.  And, if you got bit by a snake, you know, this is what the Indians would do, how they would treat the wounds and all of that stuff.  And, even when my father got sick in his later years, we had some land up in the desert, and I, I knew he was thinking about those Indians in Oklahoma, and when he said to me, "Just take me up to the desert and leave me."  Because that's what the Indians used to do when they got old.  They would go out to the wilderness to die.  You know, when they knew it was their time.  He had that, all that stuff he learned from those Indians growing up.  Because that's who he grew up, you know, that's who he--he was born there when there were reservations and stuff in Oklahoma.  That's who he grew up around, were those Indians out there in that little country town of Beggs [Oklahoma].  Anyway, all that stuff really came to life to me in the third grade.  But, in addition to that, the other things that she did that were really interesting, she taught us how to write our own will.  And, we, every child in that class wrote a will to their parents.
Speaker 1: Now, that's really interesting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) "I, Karen Hope Hill [HistoryMaker Karen Hill-Scott] being of sound mind and body," and we learned every phrase in a will and what it meant, and why it was important.  We had bank accounts, you know, we, we learned all about how you were supposed to, you know, you had that in math.  It's money changing.  You learn how to make change and all that in the third grade.  And, she just took it to the next level where we all had bank accounts, and we would have our own store.  And, we would learn how to make change.  And, we learned how to write business letters.  I learned all of that stuffs, thank you notes, all of that I learned in third grade.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.  That's really amazing.
Speaker 2:  	She was an extraordinary teacher; Miss Moore.  Fourth grade was California history.  Fifth grade was U.S. history.  Sixth grade was Latin America.  And, my sixth grade teacher was a whack job.  That woman was as crazy as she could be.  But, she also was brilliant teacher.  But, she was racist and fascist.  She spent her summers in Spain because she wanted to help Franco, is what she told me.  I had to go look up who the hell was Franco, you know.  I mean, that woman was--
Speaker 1: I know he lived a long life.  And, it seem like he's always sick or having a stroke but he always--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: --stayed alive.
Speaker 2:  	You know, "I really wanna support what the Franco regime wants to do," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Francisco Franco.
Speaker 2:  	And, I'm going, "What is she doing at--?" You know, I mean, as a grown person, I'm going, "What was she doing at Mark Twain Elementary School teaching a group of little colored kids?"  I have no idea.  But, we did huge, well, in fourth grade which was California history, we actually made a bar relief map on a four by eight plywood platform.  And, we made a papier mache three dimensional, two scale map of the State of California and mapped out the entire California water project [California State Water Project].  From the northern most damn, for all the rivers that came all the way down to the desert with the water diversion from the Colorado River to fuel California agriculture.  We made the map just so we could understand how California became the most productive--produce, you know, capital of the world.  How did irrigation actually work so that we could grow everything from lettuce to almonds in the state, in the fourth grade.  And, you know, I--it's amazing 'cause I meet grown people and they have no idea what the great Central Valley is all about.  But, I learned stuff in elementary school that stayed with me for a lifetime.  It was great.  It was wonderful.
Story_ID: 664970
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school.  Now, where, where did you go to high school (unclear)?
Speaker 2:  	I went to Centennial High School [Compton, California].  It's one of the worst--
Speaker 1: Centennial?
Speaker 2:  	It's one of the worst high school's in the State of California.
Speaker 1: Was it then?
Speaker 2:  	It was on its way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	My brother [William Hill (ph.)] and sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] didn't go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were, you got there just in time it was changing, or--?
Speaker 2:  	It was a new school.  It was probably not more than ten--what happened was, actually, Centennial got built because Compton High School [Compton, California], which is where I would have gone, was a white school.  And, they did not want black kids coming over to Compton High School.  And, so, they built a new school for this.  We lived in an unincorporated part of Los Angeles [California] that was, had an elementary school district.  It did not have a secondary school district.  And, so, for junior high and high school, I was in the Compton school district [Compton Unified School District].  And, Compton High School was the regional high school for Compton [California].  And, they built Centennial High School, I think ten, you know, eight to ten year before I got there.  But, our school was known for athletics, not for its honor society.  So, learning was just not highly valued there.
Speaker 1: Were, were there any noted athletics there when you were there?
Speaker 2:  	Reggie, Reggie Smith was there.  Mickey Cureton, he went on to play pro football.  We had quite a few pro baseball, pro football players come out of Centennial High School.  [HistoryMaker] John Carlos the high jumper, track team.
Speaker 1: Track, yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Track and football were the two big sports at Centennial.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, the state, and the school won state championships on a regular basis in both of those sports for several years.
Speaker 1: Now, did, well, so, did you find the work challenging at all at Centennial?
Speaker 2:  	The school work?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Not particularly.
Speaker 1: So, is that why your mother [Hope Morris Hill] said you had your fun now you gonna--?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: So, this wasn't a big deal to graduate from there for you--
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: --as far as she was concerned?
Speaker 2:  	Unh-uh. Unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, you were, you told leadership positions there.  You said you ran for--
Speaker 2:  	I ran for, yeah, I ran for student body offices and stuff like that.  And, I wanted to be popular, and I wanted to be a part of everything.  But, really, the--it was more, the kids who were smart were the kids who were nerds or were not well respected.  So, I was trying to navigate that line of being popular but going to college at the same time.  I mean, it just wasn't a college prep school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you wanted to be popular without being a nerd?
Speaker 2:  	Right.  Right, right.  Because the nerds were nerds.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	So, I had two sets of friends.  I had a fast girl group of friends and I had a smart girl group of friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, I had a boyfriend who was a high school dropout, you know.  And, oh, my mother was just in prayer over me all the way through high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	She just said, after I graduate, "I'm not doing this again.  Your brother and sister have to go somewhere else."  And they did.
Story_ID: 664971
Speaker 1: Now, as you were growing up, as a youth and a young, as a teen, what did you think of television?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I enjoyed television and we didn't have any restrictions on watching television in our house.  I mean, we had to do our homework, and get our projects done.  But, I would say my mother [Hope Morris Hill] was relatively permissive, you know.  TV wasn't the big boogie man that it became later on.  My mother use to think that I, what I should do in music, if I wasn't gonna be a concert pianist, I should be a composer and write jingles.  So, she used to always stress, you know, looking at the commercials not for writing anything but for writing the music.  If you could write that Alka-Seltzer commercial or if you could, you know, 'cause she knew about residuals.  That's how I ended up knowing that she had been an actress.  I mean, I was sneaking around in her cedar chest and saw these pictures of her in newspapers.  But, she knew about the idea of residuals.  That you could have creative property and that you could make money from it as long as it was on television, you know, that sort of thing because she had been an actress.  And, before she did acting herself, she had worked for actresses, Joan Crawford and Gene Tierney, people like that.
Speaker 1: Really, she had worked--okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about (laughter)--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: She shared?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  Well, both of those women were kind of unusual, you know.  Although she felt Gene Tierney was really, really, a very nice person.  And, Merle Oberon, I don't know--
Speaker 1: Merle Oberon?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she, she was, she has an ancestry that's, she has an Indian, or a Pakistani ancestry.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  She was dark.
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2:  	And, and Joan Crawford was extremely like OCD [obsessive compulsive disorder], not, not anal, very strict, very rigid, and she taught me something that Joan Crawford did to keep her clothes neat 'cause she was never ever wrinkled.  And, so, she showed me how to tuck in my blouses.  We take a piece of elastic and put a hook and eye on it and you put your blouse on and fold the darts down in the front and the back and put them under the elastic so that the darts would remain fixed all day long and your shirt would lie flat underneath your skirt, you know, all this kind of stuff.  Joan Crawford had figured, Joan Crawford figured out a lot of stuff that helped me be a neat dresser as I grew up.  Scr- tying scarfs for example which his one thing I do really well, and handling fabrics and all that stuff.  Those come from the times when my mother had worked, she worked in wardrobe before she--and she worked at the House of Westmore, which was a, an Elizabeth Arden, which is where makeups and stuff were formulated.  This is when she first came to California and started working before she actually became a part of the, the acting scene and was in these movies with Louise Beavers and Ethel Waters, and that whole group of people.  So, at any rate, we were--I digressed here.
Story_ID: 664972
Speaker 1: So, did--?
Speaker 2:  	I went to, went to college [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University], right.  We're gonna finish hi- we're finishing high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California]?
Speaker 1: We're gonna finish out.  But, I was asking you about TV as a young person.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, and TV--
Speaker 1: When do you--?
Speaker 2:  	So, I, you know, so, I knew a lot about, well, I thought I knew a lot about actors lives.  She, my mother was the one who told me, "What you read in those magazines, that's all publicity.  That not how things really are."  And, and I think the only thing negative that I ever got from my parents [Hope Morris Hill and Ernest Hill] about TV was that what you see on television is a fiction.  What you read about these people who play fiction is mostly a fiction also.  It's a part of a publicity machine designed to have you think, you know, certain people are nice when really they're awful.  They're mean people; like, W.C. Fields, for example.  Or, they're loopy in some way.  So, you can't trust anything you read about, you know, publicity is just all fake.  It's all smoke and mirrors, I remember that.  And, also that it was high risk business.  I think that was the main message I got about TV from my mom.  I mean, I think she would have liked for me to gone into the arts.  But, I think she also saw the risk reward ratio as being kind of scary for her.  And, so, at the same time she's telling me to write jingles and be a pianist and all of that, she's say, "But, maybe you should get your teaching credentials so you have some insurance."  You know, you need, you need an insurance policy of some sort.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, get your credential.
Story_ID: 664973
Speaker 1: While you were in high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California], one or two--a couple things happened, television news has increased to, from fifteen minutes to a half an hour in '63 [1963].  That the year that the March on Washington took place, JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 2:  	And, those things, of course, had a profound effect to--I mean, I am very grateful.  Like, I, I have chronophobia just like my mother [Hope Morris Hill] and her sisters [Vera Morris and Janie Morris].  So, I prefer to pick my age and not disclosure my age.  Just like when you asked me when was I born, and I go, "Oh, man."  I never, I don't, I don't deal with age.  I leave the country on my birthday that's why I was in India last week.  So, I, I have that problem with age.  But, at the same time, I'm glad I am a baby boomer.  I'm glad I'm of this era because the only thing I miss about, or that I kind of resent about the era of the kids behind me is they have even more opportunities than those that opened up for my generation.  But, I'm so glad I was born a woman, in my era, as opposed to the previous era.  I always identified with the idea of being an independent woman.  All of my life I knew I had to have my own career, my own money, my own job, that I would never, ever be dependent upon a man to take care of me.  I'm very grateful for my mother imbuing me with that consciousness and very grateful for the fact that the, the doors began to open so that I can think like that.  I mean, I will tell you, I struggled, 'cause they weren't really as opened, nothing was, nothing was as opened as it appeared to be.  When I went to college, it was a very conservative school [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University] and I could not wait to get to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And, I went to UCLA and I discovered the door is open but once you step over the threshold they're still gonna be a wall there, you know.
Story_ID: 664974
Speaker 1: Let's start with Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University].  We talked about high school graduation [from Centennial High School, Compton, California] already.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: But, and, and insignificance of that in your mother's [Hope Morris Hill] eyes.  She had arranged for you to go to Pepperdine, already paid the tuition.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: So, Pepperdine University, this is June of, or July of '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.  June, the last week of June in '64 [1964]--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2:  	--I was en- I was enrolled in speech, English and maybe history.
Speaker 1: Pepperdine has a beautiful campus.
Speaker 2:  	Now.  Yes.  They were in the city [Los Angeles, California] at that time.  But, they have a beautiful campus.  But, it was a very, very--it's a southern school.  Its roots are in the South.  And, when she enrolled me there, you know, we knew it was a Christian college, but she thought it was in the ecumenical sense of Christian.  But, Pepperdine is actually affiliated with a specific religious denomination.  And, my experience there was if you're weren't that religious denomination and if you weren't white, then you were not gonna be a happy camper at Pepperdine.
Speaker 1: Now, what denomination is there?
Speaker 2:  	It's Church of Christ.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Not Disciples of Christ, which is the liberal version of the Church of Christ.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Church of Christ.  And, this, okay, so, so--
Speaker 2:  	Hold on.  We're gonna have to hold up for a minute because my mother-in-law is coming.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2:  	But, because of Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], 'cause he made it happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we were talking--
Speaker 2:  	So, the role of television.  So, so, I would say, I was just like any other kid and that television was in my life in a very ubiquitous way.  We lived here in Los Angeles [California].  I was on that quiz show ['Quiz Down'].  I mean, I had more than passing familiarity with television.  I was on television during the news in the '60s [1960s] when the poverty programs began and I had applied a job to teach Head Start with three other girls.  And, the funds were delayed and the Head Start program couldn't get started.  And, we, we demonstrated against the poverty agency for, for not, you know, getting their stuff together and, and started the--started our own preschool in this housing project.
Speaker 1: Well, you weren't at Pepperdine then, right?  You were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were?  Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 664975
Speaker 1: Being highly inappropriate for a Pepperdine environment [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University].  But, that was neither here nor there.  I, I had been--one turning point in my life in high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California] was my mother [Hope Morris Hill] took me downtown.  I, I learned how to be a protester in high school.  So, my mother took me downtown to demonstrate against the L.A. Unified School District [Los Angeles Unified School District] because they would not integrate the public schools.  Now, I was not in, I was not a student in the L.A. Unified School District.  I was over in the Compton school district [Compton Unified School District].  But, my brother [William Hill (ph.)] and sister [Michelle Hill (ph.)] ultimately went to high school in the L.A. Unified School District.  So, I, I remember thinking, I think I would like to be on the board of education.  I would really like to change the way schools are run.  I, I can, I remember it so very clearly.  That became my only calling to education, really; was to change what happened in the schools.  And, that was in part because my high school experience with the exception of maybe three teachers was a drag (laughter).  It just wasn't, it was uninspired.  And, I'm sure those teachers would, would say, well, that was my fault.  I didn't chose to use it adequately.  But, really, I had one teacher who was bipolar.  You couldn't figure out from one day to the next what she would be like.  I had another teacher who would put stuff on the board and then go, and tell us to do the work and then he'd go back to his desk and sleep.  He would drool on his clothes while we were trying to figure out trig [trigonometry] and math analysis.  I mean, I had, there were terrible teachers in my school.  There were good teachers too, but they were few and far between from my perspective.  And, I really think if I hadn't had my fundamentals provided at home and from my elementary school education [at Mark Twain Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], I wouldn't've make it.  But, you know, I just kind of, I kind of skated through high school.  And, if we had big projects to do, I was always good at projects and I would get those done.  You know, these big integrative type projects.  So, I can remember one of my best term papers in high school was about apartheid in South Africa, you know.  I mean, I, I knew my learning, I mean, I was current on my, my learning.  But, and that teacher was really, really a very gifted teacher.  It was a special cla- it would be like AP [advanced placement] history except they didn't call it that at that time.  And--
Speaker 2: In '64 [1964], was that the year that Albert Luthuli won the Nobel Prize or something like--?
Speaker 1:  	It may have been.  I just know my pa- my awareness around race issues in terms of civil rights shot up in the eleventh grade.  But, you know, before, because when, like I said, when I turned sixteen, I went to demonstrate at this school district.  Then, my mother took us out to demonstrate for fair housing because there were restrictive covenants on housing in California.  Even though it was California and it was not the South.  And, so, we demonstrated against new housing developments that would not sell to African American families.  And, there's a girl, she lives not far from here, she was from Northern California.  But, turned out, her father was a lawyer who wrote the legislations that was on the ballot.  It was called the Rumford Act [California Fair Housing Act of 1963].  It was named after him as an attorney [William Byron Rumford].
Speaker 2: Is that Jerry Rumford [ph.]?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1:  	And, it was designed to prevent discrimination in housing because of race, color, or creed.  And, this was I think on the ballot in '63 [1963].  So, it was before the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964], which was federal and then, you know, that superseded all, all local legislation after that.
Story_ID: 664976
Speaker 1: When you get to Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University], you know, you're, you're--?
Speaker 2:  	So, then god, what an awakening for me.  I'm around all these white southerners.  I'd never, you know, this was new to me.  And, also, with my religious background being very ecumenical.  I went to Vacation Bible School with Seventh-day Adventist.  I played for Baptist, Pentecostal, United Methodist, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] churches, you know.  I thought when you say Christian, you mean all Christians.  I did not know you meant Church of Christ.  The sister college, the, what, what they called the sister colleges to Pepperdine included Bob Jones University [Greenville, South Carolina], Lubbock Christian College [Lubbock Christian University, Lubbock, Texas], Abilene Christian College [Abilene Christian University, Abilene, Texas].  They were all southern Christian schools, and people were very prejudiced.  They, they, you know, were telling us as students that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a Communist sympathizer.  They accepted donations from people how were in the John Birch Society.  I mean, I thought, where the heck am I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, why did your mother [Hope Morris Hill]--
Speaker 2:  	--at this school?
Speaker 1: And, then, did why you mother chose Pepperdine?
Speaker 2:  	Trimesters.
Speaker 1: Because of trimesters and that was it?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, well, was that useful to you in terms of getting out of Pepperdine?
Speaker 2:  	I got out.  I was, first, well first of all, there were only maybe thirty of us out of my high school graduating class of four hundred [at Centennial High School, Compton, California] and some odd student who were college bound.  That was the kind of high school I went to.  And, of that group, I was the first to graduate from college.  I was finished first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I was done in three years.  It wasn't two years, nine months.
Speaker 1: And, you majored (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) But, I graduated a year ahead of schedule.  And, I was a music major.
Speaker 1: Oh, was a music major, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Story_ID: 664977
Speaker 1: Something happens, you said, by the time you're twe- twenty-one, you don't really play anymore.
Speaker 2:  	Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So, what happened, you know?  You were--
Speaker 2:  	Because it became an obligation.  I was expected to be a music major.  I, you know, I jumped up, I got married [to Timothy Scott].  I was grown.  And, my first act as a grown person was to stop playing the piano, you know, (laughter) that was just my act of rebellion.  I took piano lessons at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] when I went to graduate school.  And, I can remember this music teacher, music professor, I took master class, classes, you know, for graduate, I was a graduate student in the school of education.  And, which I did.  I mean, I, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] said, you know, "Get your credential."  I did not get my credential.  The best part of this was all a part of, you know thinking more for myself and not, you know, I was gonna fulfill my mother's plan because I could see the wisdom in her plan of getting an education.  I mean, I used to calculate.  If I went and worked for the county as a clerk typist it would take me this many years to reach the top of the pay scale 'cause the civil service publishes the pay scale.  And, I knew that if I graduate from college and went to work for the county in some other job, I would already outstrip the pay of the person who started as a clerk typist.  I mean, I, I had the math figured out that the only way for me to earn, earn an income that would, would supersede what would be typical of, of a black person at that time would be to go to college and get my education.  That was my ticket to ride and I--and, so, fine.  I, I wasn't--that was a discipline I knew I had.  And, I knew that I could--I was ready.  I mean, I wasn't that happy during my high school years [at Centennial High School, Compton, California].  So, I was really ready for a change.  I didn't want that change to be what Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University] was.  But, I knew I was ready for a change and I said, "Fine.  If I can get outta here in three years by hook or crook, I will do it."  I wasn't happy the whole time.  I write off that experience in my life as something that had been beneficial.  I mean, I, I feel like, okay, I know how Newt Gingrich thinks, because I went to college with, with people--that, that's who I went to college with.  But, and that was its greatest benefit for me.  Beyond that, where I grew up, I grew up at UCLA.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) When I went to graduate school.
Story_ID: 664978
Speaker 1: You got married [to Timothy Scott] while you were at Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University], right?  Or, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) As soon as I graduated.
Speaker 1: --as soon as you graduate.  So, this is 1967?  Is that what year?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], then you started UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I was, I stayed out for--I went to Extension [UCLA Extension, Los Angeles, California]--I got married actually in '68 [1968].  I had, you know, you have to plan your wedding.  So, I got married in June of '68 [1968], and I went to UCLA in the fall of '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you got married first and then went to UCLA, right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you say, you grew up at UCLA.  What was going on there that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, the revolution was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	You know, I mean, I, my mother [Hope Morris Hill]--
Speaker 1: This is a--?
Speaker 2:  	I would've liked to have gone to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I think, 'cause my cousins had gone to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and they always talked about Fisk.  And, my girlfriend, my best friend from high school [Centennial High School, Compton, California] went to Fisk.  But, my mother didn't want me to go because she wanted her kids close to her, number one.  And, number two, she always, she said, "You know, if I send you down there, you will come home in a pine box because you just will not know how to comport yourself," you know.  "You think, you do these demonstrations up here and you can hot scream at people and be angry and all of that and nobody is really gonna kill you for that."  You know, "You're not gonna get in deep trouble for that.  But, you, I know, you go down south and you wanna demonstrate down south, you're gonna be arrested.  You're gonna get hurt.  Bad things will happen, and I'm just not gonna let you go."  And, so, I didn't go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I was seventeen.  I didn't, I didn't have the wherewithal to, to do much beyond what she told me to do.  So, I went to Pepperdine.
Story_ID: 664979
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] was the year the Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, now, we skipped by the, the riots in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in '65 [1965] or sixty--
Speaker 2:  	No, they were in '66 [sic. 1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2:  	That happened while I was at Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Oh, my god, white people just had a hissy conniption fit.  That's one of the reason they started working on that land out in, out in Malibu Beach [Malibu, California].  It was a gift from a, you know, an ultra right wing family, the Seaver family.
Speaker 1: Now, at Pepperdine was it well known that you were black?  Or did peop- most people not, seem not to--?
Speaker 2:  	No.  I think that, well, I made a big point of it when I found out how prejudiced they were, you know.  How prejudiced the students were and the faculty.  I, you know, I would make a big deal of it.  I don't think anybody knew, even though they ask for race on the, on the, on your application.  And, they wanted to send, wanted you to send a picture 'cause they did wanna know who was, who was what.  And, I got this job, actually, my mother [Hope Morris Hill] and the dean conspired to get me this job in the registrar's office because my mother told me that you have to earn enough money to, you know, pay for your miscellaneous expenses.  So, I always had a job as a pianist at the school, as a rehearsal pianist for the school musicals and I would play for receptions, like at the president's house.  But, I was missing chapel a little too frequently.  And, so, my mother suggested to the dean that maybe if I had a job on campus they could tell me, they could excuse me to go to chapel and I would be there on a regular basis.  So, 'cause you had to go to chapel.  So, I worked in the registrar's office.  And, oh, my god, now that was a revelation because I had access to all the transcripts, and all the grades, and all the ways that they used to find ways to identify who was black and who was not.  And, I was shocked and appalled to find out that they had pink pieces of paper, I mean, this is in an era of when these reporting requirements that we have today did not exist.  You didn't identify people by race.  Everything was supposed to be colorblind at that time.  And, so, they would surreptitiously collect data on race.  But, they would collect data on race to really--to affirm their belief that black students were inferior to everyone else.  So, I discovered in the transcript files that they had a list on pink paper called the N List.  And, it was Negroes on academic probation.  And, they tracked all the black student who were on probation.  I made up my mind right then I would never be on that list.  I would never let my grades slip.  I would never not be serious about getting my school work done.  It was a real, you know, just like when my mother said, "That chapter in your life is over.  Now you're on to a new chapter."  Then, I really go into it.  When I saw that, I went, "I will--I am--I'm not getting a C.  I am not gonna, I'm not, let alone fall below a C average.  Oh, no." Unh-uh, I know what these people think about black students.  I'm not gonna be there.  I am not going to conform to any expectation that they have for a black student.
Story_ID: 664980
Speaker 1: So, what was going on in, now this was after, you started at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] after the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is June of sixty (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right.  So, there was a lot of things happening--
Speaker 1: Fall of '68 [1968].
Speaker 2:  	Vietnam, the Vietnam War strikes were going on.  But, also, the issue of admissions, financial aid, and the creation of ethnic studies programs was taken place.  So, I got very involved at UCLA in the organizing of graduate students.  There were forty-two black graduate students at UCLA when I went there.  No, I'm sorry.  There were forty-two departments, forty--there were just over a hundred graduates, black graduate students at UCLA.  That's 1 percent of the graduate student population, spread over, I think forty-two programs.  I did the first directory of black graduate students at UCLA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, then I got a little part-time job and was, from the African American--Afro--well no, the Afro-American study center [Afro American Studies Center; Ralph J. Bunche Center for African American Studies] hadn't been that formed.  But, there was this guy who worked in the re- in the chancellor's office who got this job for me so I could identify all the graduate students and organize them into a group called the black graduate students organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	BGSA, Black Graduate Students Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2:  	And, I got, I was very active at UCLA in the, you know, that kind of student activity.  I wrote, you know, we, and I would say it was very constructive and very productive.  I mean, we didn't just organize the students, we wrote a proposal for the Graduate Advancement Program that exists to this day.  That, I mean, I sat down at the table with the chancellor and the vice chancellors and, you know, on admissions committees and you know, it was very, we did a lot of very substantial work.  And, the caliber of, of many of the students was extraordinarily high.  Including a couple of people who were advanced graduate students.  One in law, and another one in, in African history who had had real work experience at, at doing this kind of work, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were they?
Speaker 2:  	One was this guy named Hank Richardson [ph.], who was a lawyer who was, he came there with [HistoryMaker] Renee Poussaint who is Alvin Poussaint's [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint] niece, I believe, or cousin.  She was correspondent though for public television for a long time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	But, they were both Africanists.  He had been in Malawi, East Africa.  She had too.  They had met there and they came to UCLA together.  And, he was already a barred attorney who had work in, in, internationally.  And, so, he, he was very helpful in developing the charter of the graduate student association.  But, also in developing the formatting and stuff of the proposals that we wrote to create this whole new graduate admissions initiative.  That, then greatly expanded the enrollment of black students in graduate education at UCLA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, it was someone else?  Was it someone else?
Speaker 2:  	Bob Cummings [Robert Cummings] who was in the African history--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--program.  He was a Ph.D. student.  And, actually, Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] was a graduate student there at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	But, I was there during the period where the, where Ron Karenga's organization [The Organization Us] and the Panthers [Black Panther Party] were at war.  And, there were two students who were murdered on campus.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	As a result of a big argument over who was going to lead the African American study center.
Speaker 1: In those days did you have any idea that the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] had something to do with, I mean, the COINTELPRO program [Counterintelligence Program] had something to do with the conflict?
Speaker 2:  	Well, they were on the campus spying on everybody.  And, I'm certain that some of the people who I knew and some of the people who were active, you know, in and out and around politics, were actually working for the FBI.  I had that feeling even then, and or the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].  Because there were people who were there who didn't really seem to be students.  You know, they were there but you couldn't pin 'em down on what classes they were taking.  Even some of the ones who were really revolutionary, you know, claim to be serious revolutionaries, and they would carry their books around, and they'd be in the student union talking trash and all of that.  They were very suspect.
Story_ID: 664981
Speaker 1:  	And, you know, Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you want to say that again?
Speaker 1:  	No.  Karenga took a lot.  I mean, I think in many ways he was, his reputation was, was, was battered.  I would say ruined but definitely battered deeply by things--
Speaker 2: Because he has support nowadays but except you're right, everywhere he goes somebody hammers him about that.
Speaker 1:  	And, also, the female torture stuff that was in the paper, you know, like ritualistic things that were going on with his organization [The Organization Us].  I don't know if it was true or not but I, you know, I know it was very damaging.
Speaker 2: What kind of a student wa- was he?  And, we know that he was a student.
Speaker 1:  	Oh, no, he was a graduate student.  He got his Ph.D.  He still teaches at Cal State or he may be retired now.  But, he was teaching at Cal State, Long Beach [California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California].  I would assume he was a graduate student.  That he had been a good enough student to get into graduate school.  And, you know, he finished his doctorate.  I don't know if he wanted to be the director of that center.  You know, I'm not quite sure.  I had just come to campus when, when the shooting happened.  And, they, and the shootings, when I went to my first BSU meeting, Black Student Union meeting where, you know, I came in and people wanted me to leave, asked me to, to leave.
Speaker 2: They weren't sure who you were?
Speaker 1:  	Um-hm.  They, the shootings had happened and there was a director, and acting director of the, of the Afro American Studies Center [Ralph J. Bunche Center for African American Studies].  And, I ultimately went, I went to work in that center af- you know, the shoots had been.  But, people were carrying guns to campus.  They--people still had guns in briefcases and stuff like that.  On high alert at all times.  But, anyway, let's move on (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So, so, you were very active at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and--
Speaker 1:  	Right.
Story_ID: 664982
Speaker 1: And, you were pursuing a master's degree in--?
Speaker 2:  	And, a doctorate [at the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: And, okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: In--in education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) In education.  Because that gave me the freedom to take classes anywhere I wanted until I could figure out what I really wanted to do when I grew up.  And, I knew I was not going to be a school teacher because I wanted to change the schools.  I did not want to support what the schools were currently doing.  I always went to graduate school with an idea of changing the world.  That was, I was very mission driven in that regard.  How I got involved with television was, I did my master's thesis on 'Sesame Street.'  And, that was really because my mother [Hope Morris Hill] (laughter), again, and my advisor at the time both had this idea that I should do research on children's television, you know.  I don't know, they just thought I would be good at it and maybe I should, I should get involved with television and our understanding of tel- I think my advisor saw some caree- you know, promise for an academic career on the effects of television on kids and stuff like that.  So, that's really how my, my academican in--ac- academic interest in television began, with my master's thesis.
Story_ID: 664983
Speaker 1: 'Sesame Street' was relatively new at that juncture, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.  So, I went and interviewed this guy who, Yankelovich [Daniel Yankelovich], who now runs a big polling operation.  They did the first evaluation of 'Sesame Street.'  And, I had taught in Head Start also from, you know, from when I was an undergrad at Pepperdine [George Pepperdine College; Pepperdine University].  And, so, I knew that this whole business of intervention, early intervention leading to lifetime success was an idea that had, to me, it had legs.  It made sense.  That if you can get to kids early enough, you could, you could do an end run around all the problems that they would have in school later on.  Now, I know it was way more complicated than that.  But, even 'til this day, I am working in my public policy work and in my television work on trying to imbue television content with educational substance so that children who are high intensity television watchers can get--derive some benefit from what they, what they view.  So, when 'Sesame Street' came on, it was really aimed at four year olds that were gonna go to kindergarten.  And, it was a television version of Ses- of Head Start in some ways.  They were very parallel in that way.  I was interested in whether or not two year olds were watching.  Because it, it made sense that if four year olds were watching, they probably had younger brothers and sisters.  If you could make an impact even earlier than maybe your gains would last longer or they would be able to, the kids would be able to benefit even more from 'Sesame Street.'  It had implications for their curriculum in terms of when it topped out.  And, so, I did, did my thesis on children's television, on 'Sesame Street,' and that kind of got me interested in how television could change learning trajectories.  Quite honestly over the years, it's just now with iPad apps that I can truly see the power of screen media helping kids do well in school.  And, as specially low income minority kids.  Because they can learn a lot through self-direction and bypass the teacher.  In many cases, teacher who don't like them as students, and, and therefore they get positive feedback from something other than a human.  It, it, there's, there's actually evidence that a lot of kids who are doing well in school, do well with media as, as their vehicle for learning.  At any rate, that's how my interest in TV went from being a consumer to being more involved on the producing side, on the content side, and making television content better for kids.  And, in, in that vein, when I met, I had known Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] from the charter, the days of the charter chapter of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  She had gotten this job at, at NBC working in research for kids television.  And--
Speaker 1: So, you knew her from childhood?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, yeah.  I knew her from third grade.
Speaker 1: All right.  And, and just a, just--so, during the time that you were in graduate school [at the University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], you were also teaching in the L.A. [Los Angeles, California], were you doing any teaching at this point?
Speaker 2:  	No.  No.
Speaker 1: Just straight through?
Speaker 2:  	No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	I went to grad school really with the i- once I got into grad school, I knew I was gonna get a doctorate.  I wasn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--gonna stop at my master's.
Speaker 1: So, we're talking about postdoc now, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) No.  I'm in, I got my master's on Sesame--on doing this thesis on 'Sesame Street.'
Speaker 1: This is nineteen six--I mean, '70 [1970]?
Speaker 2:  	In the '70s [1970s], yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy--?
Speaker 2:  	And, '70 [1970] is when I did my, my thesis.  I finished it in '72 [1972] actually.  I really just, I let it rest for about a year and just kept going, entered the doctoral program and kept going.  And, then decided, let me close off the master's degree and finish my doctorate.  So, I finished my master's in '72 [1972], my doctorate in '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's an Ed.D. right?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Story_ID: 664984
Speaker 1: Now, with Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] did you start interacting with her around this in--before or after you got your Ph.D. [sic. Ed.D.]?
Speaker 2:  	In terms of professionally, it was after I'd gotten my doctorate.  She knew I had done this work on 'Sesame Street.'  I don't remember how we knew.  But, we kind of kept in touch over the years.  It was very, very loose.  But, she came to me directly and now I don't remember how it is that she knew to come to me.  But, maybe just because she went--maybe one of the Tuckers had told her, "Well Karen [HistoryMaker Karen Hill-Scott] has done some--." I don't remember now how she ended up coming to me directly.  But, she, she knew that I was, I was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  I as a professor at UCLA, and maybe I had some ideas.  And, it turned out, because I had done that work on 'Sesame Street,' and I had kept up with stuff in the field of early education that I was interested in continuing work and becoming a part of this Social Science Advisory Panel.  And, from that, this whole career in television, even long after Phyllis left NBC, I was, you know, I was still working with them and working with PBS shows [Public Broadcasting Service], and other shows.  And, you can see from the list of shows that I've been involved in, it just evolved into a much longer track of, within my career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you start, first start working with Phyllis in '84 [1984]?  Was that--all right, I mean in--
Speaker 2:  	I'm not quite sure if it was '84 [1984] or '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think right, from what this, from this little guide here, I think it says, eighty--that's the earliest date I see.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  When I continued--well, see I started out with them, just not actually working on all the shows but working on the concept of diversity on Saturday morning.  But, then once the shows got started--let me see, what shows do you have there?  'Mister T'?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Chipmunks' ['Alvin and the Chipmunks'] 'Mister T,' 'Gary Coleman Show'--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah, 'The Gary Coleman Show.'
Speaker 1: 'Smurfs' ['The Smurfs'].
Speaker 2:  	Those two shows, 'Mister T,' and 'The Gary Coleman Show' were shows that grew out of the work we did.  Not, 'Mister T.' 'The Gary Coleman Show.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Because he was a primetime property that they wanted to convert to a Saturday morning property.  Just like Bill Cosby was--had been a primetime property, later he was able to produce 'Fat Albert' ['Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids'].  Which was not an NBC show.  I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  CBS.
Speaker 2:  	--'Fat Albert' was a CBS show.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so, 'The Gary Coleman Show,' now this is a, is this a cartoon version of the--?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did have the same--?
Speaker 2:  	It wasn't 'Diff'rent Strokes.'  It was him as a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	And, just childhood foibles.  And, not intended to be educational.  That came much later for my work in television.  Because the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] in 1990 passed the Children's Television Act [Children's Television Act of 1990].  And, that required that the core purpose of broadcast television for children needed to have educational value.  Had to have a core purpose that was educational and informational.
Story_ID: 664985
Speaker 1: You know some of the criticisms of children television in those days, aside from 'Captain Kangaroo' and 'Sesame Street'--
Speaker 2:  	And, 'Mister Rogers' ['Mister Rogers' Neighborhood']
Speaker 1: --and PBS shows [Public Broadcasting Service] was that it was driven by a sales of toys and--
Speaker 2:  	Two things.  Violence and toys (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Cereal, you know--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --high sugar foods for kids.
Speaker 2:  	Well, the commercials continued.  But, the, the criticism was that children's television being toy based was merely advertising.  It wasn't television.  It violated, this is federal, the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] permits networks to have use of the airways for free dissemination of content to the public.  The commercials were designed to finance the development of that content.  But, the content, especially for children, it was supposed to be content.  The Action for Children's Television argued, and ultimately argued successfully, to the Federal Trade Commission was that toy based programs were programmed linked commercials for products.  And, that changed the, the advertising guidelines and the content basis for television shows.  They--after that ruling they could not be based, toy based shows.
Story_ID: 664986
Speaker 1: Action for Children's Television is a watchdog group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --a not-for-profit.
Speaker 2:  	That's right.
Speaker 1: That, that--just kind of give us a--
Speaker 2:  	Right.  So, Action for Children's Television was founded by Peggy Charren.  She was a very strong believer in the right to free speech, and did not challenge the networks on the basis to have free speech and spread information.  But, they, that she was opposed to commercials selling to children.  And, the federal government ultimately agreed with her that we shouldn't be in the business of primarily selling to children.  You sell to children only to finance the show that has some edifying content.  That then led to the content, not only not being toy driven, but it needed to be driven by educational aims.  If you were a network broadcaster which was free.  Because the free broadcast that's, the public has no choice.  In other words, you, you really need--it for children you need to, well, Minow, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Newton Minow.
Speaker 2:  	--commissioner, Minow, wrote 'Children in the Wasteland' [sic. 'Abandoned in the Wasteland: Children, Television and the First Amendment,' Newton Minow].  And, he said television was a wasteland for children.  The content wasn't edifying.  Much of it was violent.  These were programmed linked commercials.  I mean, that wasn't the pur- the main thing in his book.  But, that was Action for Children's Television had that perspective, and something needed to be done about kids TV.  And, I would say the two main concerns were the programmed length commercials and the incidents of violence.  That violence on television was promoting and begetting violence in children.
Story_ID: 664987
Speaker 1: So, there were studies, I guess, to back this up?
Speaker 2:  	There were studies.  Actually, there were conflicting studies.  But, the biggest press went to studies that documented a 10 percent, that 10 percent of the kids absorbed the violence in a way that--was--provoked violence in them.  There were also studies done that showed that violence on television actually was a corth- had a cathartic effect on children who were prone to aggression.  But, I think in the court of public opinion the, the anti-violence lobby, you know, prevailed.  And, then the issue became, what do we count as violence?  Because there are things that happen in action adventure animation, like slapstick stuff, that's--the writers would consider funny.  This is hairsplitting that went on.  They would consider Road Runner for example, when he go splat and he's flat, you know, after the steam roller rolls over him and then he pops back up to life; that's humor.  But, there's some people who would--can say, "Okay, that's a violence.  That, that's a mark against you for, for violence."  I think the intent was definitely good and that, you know, was intended to, to shelter children from exposure to too much graphic violence.  But, clearly kids have found it elsewhere, and it still exists.  Though for the most part, network television in particular, is decidedly not violent.  And, it's decidedly benign.
Story_ID: 664988
Speaker 1: So as a consultant, what was your advice and your concerns about the programming that NBC first brought to you for their children--?
Speaker 2:  	Well, when I was first brought to NBC, when Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] asked me to come and help her think through some of these issues, one of the big issues was around, when I'm looking at it from a child development prospective 'cause that was where my training was really grounded in child development.  I'm looking at social learning and identity development as being key components of things that children--I mean, I knew from my own growing up and from the research that was done, was that children learn vicariously from watching television.  That's really one of the cornerstones of social learning theory.  And, so, we didn't have diversity on Saturday morning.  And, so, black kids and brown kids and Asian kids for that matter, weren't seeing characters who reflected who they were.  Just on the visual, you know.  And, we had a lot of research that showed young black kids, you know, showing preference for white dolls, white toys, you know the whole impact of, of not having advertising, even advertising, and other content that reflected the diversity that was fast becoming what was America.  Even--and that was already present in the black, white America, was just a wrong.  It was a, it was a transgression on the development, the healthy development of children of color.  And, I, you know, I would say even my experience growing up where kids hated and liked you for the same reason about, you know, looking white had a lot to do with the fact that looking black was not valued adequately enough in magazines, in papers, and on television.  It was regarded very negatively and suspiciously.  So, I understood really where all of that came from.  And, I, I agreed with Phyllis.  It's one thing, you know, she was chocolate brown and I was a little yellow girl, I guess, it would be the best way to put it.  We both understood that, that issue in a very deep way, you know, in a very experiential way.  And, we were, I think we were equally determined to do something about it.
Story_ID: 664989
Speaker 1: What about the presence of female characters in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, the whole thing I, I, one of the, one of my two insights I gained from, from doing this work early on, it's changed a lot now.  But, when I had my first meeting with writers of television, the entire room was full of white men.  There were no women writers.  There were no writers of color.  None.  (Pause) And, so, it, it was self-explanatory.  People write television from their experience.  (Pause) A lot of writers had the position--I was, I, I know all I needed to know about child development.  I was a kid once.  I'm serious, you know.  And, I don't wanna be edited.  I remember one guy walked, I mean beat on the table and walked out of the room when we talked about, you know, editing scripts, and looking at content, and trying to help people develop content that was more relevant.  "Do you think Mark Twain had an editor?"  He--this guy was angry, as angry as Nikita Khrushchev was when he came to the UN [United Nations] and banged on the table--
Speaker 1: With his shoe?
Speaker 2:  	--with his shoe.  Yes.  This guy was pounding on the table.  He just, oh, he carried on.  But, they wrote from their experiences as guys that grew up in the Valley, in the San Fernando Valley [California], you know; 'Wayne's World.'  I mean, that was it.  Now, it's changed.  There're a lot of female writers in kids television.  But, there, there just weren't.  They weren't--there were only two roles.  There was a damsel in distress, and the wicked queen.  That was it.  That's the only roles that girls took.
Speaker 1: And there was a, I know, when we interviewed Ms. Jackson [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson], she talked about the fact that most of the female heroes in those days were blondes.  They only had blonde--
Speaker 2:  	Oh, yeah!  Blue eyes.  Even the Chipmunks' eyes got lighter as time went by, you know. It was just, these subtle cues that were there.  And, then, you know, it was very difficult to, I mean, I think what made the work very, very hard is, you know that when you're talking to a person who regards themselves as an artist and as a creator that if you say something about the work they've created, you've talked about them as a person.  So, learning to give feedback to people and helping people along so that they could come to some point of insight.  That was really shoveling snow.  That was hard, hard work.  And, I would say, all of my career in working in children's television has been at that level of hard work.  The whole--that, that feedback process of validating what everyone is doing.  And, at the same time saying, "We need to change this."  "We need to," and being able to explain why something needs to be changed.  Why things need to be modified.  How things can lay out differently in a story.  That, that's the art and science of what I've ended up doing in my consulting.
Story_ID: 664990
Speaker 1: Can you give us some victory stories on things you were able to change and, and influence?
Speaker 2:  	Well, I think over time that certainly more women writers came to the table.  I mean, this is not singularly because I was working in television.  But, when you're starting to say--well, I have to say that the Children's Television Act [Children's Television Act of 1990] probably had the most direct impact on me because it required, it required, up until 1993 any change that happened at NBC or anywhere else was completely voluntary.  It was because it was gonna maybe positively make an impact on the bottom line for a network.  But, after 1993 and then in 1996 when the three hour rule went into effect, having television that was more balanced then more educational became a requirement.  And, so, even though I was the person who was there to push to meet the requirements, it had a very, that presences had a large impact on the way people began to write their shows.  So, since that time, you know, I would say I've influenced over two thousand episodes of produced commercial children's television.  That's not a small amount of work.  It's a large body of work that's reflected in pages and pages of script notes.  All of which I would say 80 percent of the notes that I wrote were taken and incorporated into the content that I do, you know, that I, that I worked on.
Speaker 1: Now, Phyllis Jackson [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] said that you were her Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint].
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter).
Speaker 1: You're a professional consultant--
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: --to the diversity at NBC--
Story_ID: 664991
Speaker 1: I mean, an initial conversation about children's television programming and then one about primetime programming in New York [New York] that included--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --all the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --writers of--
Speaker 2: Right. Right.
Speaker 1: --of NBC.
Speaker 2:  	It's sort of inter- it's interesting how it evolved.  I was a part of this group of muckety muck social scientists who would meet.  They were mostly academics.  I became a part of that group.  I co-wrote two book chapters with the head researcher at NBC on self-regulation and children's television and the impact on audience and so on.  So, I became very active in this subspecialty niche area.  And, at first we were really just trying to get people to have an awareness.  Look at the demography. Look at what's going on.  Most corporations, not just in broadcast media but any corporation, they're, they, especially publically traded, they're looking at the bottom line all the time.  How much money are they making?  In TV, they're looking at ratings overnight, weekly, and so on.  And, they're driven by that.  Their pricing is driven by that.  It's the perfect circle of capitalism, I say, television is, because you sell the time for advertising.  The advertising dollars go into purchasing more content, you know, and it's a circle that goes on and on.  One of the things our panels did when we organized the first panel which was really just for writers.  And, then the one in New York was much broader because we, NBC invited people from the larger community, leaders from various ethnic communities to attend.  They had directors and primetime people come.  We were able to show the long view.  The census has just been taken; the 1980 census had just been taken.  You could see the projections in the population and the changes that were going to occur twenty years hence.  So, they were getting fair warning.  Look, this is not the way it's always gonna be.  And, and really the way you've always done it, is not keeping up with the here and now.  You have--we've got to diversify doing what we're doing.  And, they heard that.  I, I would say that the argument or the position that we were advocating resonated for them.  But, the hard work of actually making the change is what was long--the long tail that came after.  And, that for me, became a career point long after Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Tucker Vinson Jackson] was gone, you know.  I mean, I still am working for NBC to this day on children's content.  It's, it's been a continuing, evolving practice.  And, from there it evolved horizontally to work for Nickelodeon, for PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], for Disney [The Walt Disney Company].  I've, I've worked with many of the major producers, Canadian producers and even some Asian producers of children's content.  To imbue that content with the diversity it needs, the diversity in roles, male, female, people of color, of different ethnicities.  I've staffed up so that I have people from around the world who work for me to consult on character development and character diversity and I've spent a lot of time with writers in developing content.  Writing, even writing dialogue, script suggestions, changing plot structure so that they develop the insight to do it on their own.
Story_ID: 664992
Speaker 1: We were saying before we, we broke last time that you, you still consult with NBC.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.
Speaker 1: But the game has kind of changed a little bit hasn't it since then?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, my goodness, it's very upside down.  For example, when I started at NBC, it was the number one broadcast network.  'The Smurfs' was the number one kid's television show.  'ER' was the number one primetime show.  And, it is the oldest television network of the free broadcasting networks.  At the time I started at NBC, cable was laughable.  People didn't think it would amount to anything.  Now, NBC is owned by the cable company, Comcast [Comcast Corporation].  It's, it is a complete upside down landscape compared to--I mean, it's just the opposite, it's just the opposite of what was, everything that was important to television in the '80s [1980s].  I mean, aside from the money, everything that was important to television, the big, big audience, the, you know, the branding of a particular network, you know, for the mainstream, lowest common denominator programming, all of that has changed because cable and narrowcasting have come to the fore.  And, so, the economics of television is different.  With kids television, almost all shows have to be made for a world audience.  That also goes to them the diversity content of the shows being something that could have appeal globally because the market is, is so divided up that there is no such thing as--like, 'The Smurfs' had come in and the kind of audience that it commanded then.  All of the, the children's audience is broken up into many, niche, niche markets, and niche age groups, like six to eleven.  That's still an advertising demographic that gets sold to.  But, developmentally, children are different; six to eight.  There's nine to fourteen.  I mean, you know, they, they lump and split differently than they did.  And, in a way advertising has not caught up because they still sell to the two to eleven, and six to eleven market.  But, in fact, reality, you have babies, you have toddlers, you have preschoolers, you got primary graders, then you've got the, the, what they call tweeners, and then the adolescents, you have young and older adolescents.  So, narrowcasting is, is far more dominate, especially with the cable split.  And, all of the channels that are 100 percent kids channels that's in the double digits.  So, the broadcasters, the whole reason for the law, the Children's Television Act [Children's Television Act of 1990], was to get the three dominant broadcasters to comply with offering edu- three hours of content per week that was educational, informational.  And, now, they can't get anybody to watch television because they only have Saturday morning with those three hours.  And, Nickelodeon is twenty-four hours a day kids TV.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It used to be, I mean to the fervor about the Saturday morning cartoons, I think was--exemplified when my brother was at Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], from '60 [1960] to '64 [1964].  He said all the students would get up on Saturday morning and watch cartoons.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  They don't do that anymore.
Speaker 1: No.  These are college student (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	Were watching car- yeah, because they all grew up on them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2:  	But, Saturday morning TV is not, it's not only not--it doesn't exist.  It's not just Saturday morning.  It's anytime.  We could turn on that television in the next room right now and there's kids television on.
Speaker 1: Cartoons, and--
Speaker 2:  	Cartoons, and live action, and non-fiction, and historical, you know.  Not to mention apps and computer stuff.
Story_ID: 664993
Speaker 1: Nickelodeon might be the first full time kid's network, right?  Is that about true or cable (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Nickelodeon may have been the first cable network just for kids.  Right.
Speaker 1: I think it was, I think the Cartoon Network [Cartoon Network, Inc.]--
Speaker 2:  	And, Disney Family [sic. ABC Family; Freeform]--
Speaker 1: --Disney Family.
Speaker 2:  	--quickly on its heels.
Speaker 1: Then--
Speaker 2:  	Those were the big ones.
Speaker 1: --ABC launched a family channel at some point.
Speaker 2:  	Well, that's Disney.
Speaker 1: Is that the same thing?
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.  Disney, Disney--Cap Cities [sic. The Walt Disney Company] bought Disney and ABC [sic. Capital Cities/ ABC Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. And Discovery has a kids--
Speaker 2:  	And, Discovery has a kid's network [Discovery Kids], right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2:  	And, then there's all of the regular cable networks, like Hallmark television [Crown Media Holdings, Inc.], HBO [Home Box Office], well, Discovery Communications, they all have, they have adult programming, but they have multiple channels.  So, they have a kid's channel under the umbrella brand of what they are.  So, HBO has HBO Family.  Cartoon Network is another upstart that produces, they tend to be the least educational oriented about--and I've never worked for them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they don't even target kids per se, but they--I know kids watch it.  But, there are a lot of programming on the cartoon--there's a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) There's a lot of young adult programming on the Cartoon Network.
Speaker 1: Yeah, targeted for--
Speaker 2:  	And, teens.
Speaker 1: Or older people.
Speaker 2:  	Right, right.  They have younger kids content.  And, those younger kids are watching 'Swim' ['Adult Swim'], which is the adult content because they're just tuned in the whole time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the, on, the Saturday morning now on NBC, there are still some cartoons but I think half of its news now, I believe.
Speaker 2:  	Well, no.  On Saturday morning on NBC, the Sprout network [Universal Kids], which is a part of Comcast [Comcast Corporation] is doing the day part.  And, so, they are, they're busy doing their work.  And, hopefully, it compliments--that's the other thing is that often on the broadcast networks, the broadcast networks are aligned with a cable company in some way.  And, so, the Saturday morning cartoons echo what they've put on cable.
Story_ID: 664994
Speaker 1: And, so, it's, it's looked at and treated in that way because it's not making any money for the network.  The day part is not making any money for the network.  I mean, they don't even have a million viewers, I don't think.
Speaker 2: So, does that take kind of the teeth out of the Children's Television Act [Children's Television Act of 1990]?
Speaker 1:  	No.  It doesn't take the teeth out of it.  It's taken, it's, it's taken maybe the relevance of it.  That's what, I mean, the market has changed so the reasons for the television, Children's Television Act are still useful and important but it's not impacting the majority of the audience.  So, it's in, I mean, it doesn't take the teeth out of it.  It just makes it less relevant.
Speaker 2: Well, the law is only important to on air television or free television, right?
Speaker 1:  	Right.
Speaker 2: Not to cable?
Speaker 1:  	Not to cable.  That's right.
Speaker 2: And, if most kids are watching ca- cable then there's no--?
Speaker 1:  	Right.  Right.  But, it has had a halo effect.  And, so, most of what's on cable is at least benign and a lot of it to--makes attempts to be educational.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	So, it has had a halo effect.
Speaker 2: Have you ever been called into, well, I guess--well, 'SpongeBob' ['SpongeBob SquarePants'] is an example I guess, of--?
Speaker 1:  	No, 'SpongeBob' is not EI [educational and informational].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	It's just out and out 'Tom and Jerry.'  It's, it is a throwback.  Very popular, but it's modelled very much on the throwback sensibilities of the old Warner Brothers cartoons.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you've never had to, you never been called to consult with them about content for 'SpongeBob'?
Speaker 1:  	I worked on it a little bit when it was in development.  But, I was never attached to the show 'cause it was just not a part of that group.  Now, I have worked on other properties like 'Jimmy Neutron' ['The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius'], which isn't, which wasn't designed to be EI but just pro-social.  I worked on that property for character development and character diversity.  I worked on the script as well, but I really worked on that show to help them to find their characters and what their characters would look like.  And, I did a lot of work for Nick [Nickelodeon] on character diversity.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1:  	And, on the, the show 'Super Why!' and the Super Readers, which is a PBS show [Public Broadcasting Service].  I worked on that show for character development and character diversity.
Story_ID: 664995
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wondered are there any numbers now on about how many children watch public television for children's content to- today.
Speaker 2:  	Watch broadcast or public (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, public television, which is a broadcast TV.
Speaker 2:  	No.  Well, I call public television CPB [Corporation for Public Broadcasting], or PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].  And, broadcast television is commercial but it's free.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  I hear what you're--
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, naw, I'm referring to free networks on the air that are public broadcasting channels.
Speaker 2:  	Is there any data on how many are watching that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Yes.  But, it's almost, it's, it's very low.  Single digit, Nielsen numbers [Nielsen Media Research].
Speaker 1: To your knowledge has there been a study about what the children that grew up watching 'Sesame Street' when that was the only, you know, that was a, it was a children's alternative to watch at a time when nothing else was on for children, you know I mean, so, in some ways, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, the thing is when 'Sesame Street' came on, there was not preschool television.  So, it was first to market with the concept of preschool television.  It was very successful.  The best legacy of 'Sesame Street' was that it laid the groundwork, it's a halo effect, or its long tail effect has been that most of preschool television tends to lean toward educational.  Because it's just expected that it would be because 'Sesame Street' did that so successful well.  And, so, 'Blue's Clues' you'd have to describe as an educational.  It's play to learn, learn to play.  I mean, that was the slogan behind 'Sesame Street.'  And, a lot of preschool content that was developed at Nick [Nickelodeon], for Nick Jr. had an educational orientation to it.  And, ironically, a lot of the content that went on PBS had more of a, just a pro-social.  It was benign content but not necessarily teaching content.  In other words, everybody's happy, everybody's nice, everybody's sweet.  But, it doesn't mean anybody learned anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, a show like, well, two shows from the old days, 'Captain Kangaroo' and 'Mister Rogers,' which was just, was fresh until Mister Rogers [Fred Rogers] passed--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a few years ago.  They--would you consider them educational in a sense?
Speaker 2:  	Soft.  I would consider them soft education.  'Mister Rogers' was definitely a show that dealt with social emotional intelligence.  Really feeling good about yourself, how to overcome your fears, being kind to other people.  I mean, he was a hundred percent in the pro-social spirit and vein.  And, that is this greatest legacy to, to television.  That's what people revere him for.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, 'Captain Kangaroo'?
Speaker 2: I don't think that he has the same legacy.  I mean, he's regarded as fun and safe.  And, and they both were oriented toward preschool children.  And, so, they are the, the progenitors of all television for preschool children, you know.  They are just the ancestors to what became Nick Jr.  But, Nick Jr. in and of itself was on its own groundbreaking.  Not disrespectful of a 'Captain Kangaroo' or 'Romper Room' or 'Mister Rogers' Neighborhood.'  They just laid, they just broke new ground in, in terms of what preschool television could be.  With more of a narrative format, with stories that had a plot, we're gonna go from A to B to C.  I mean, 'Dora' ['Dora the Explorer'] is--it's not, you know, they had, they, they took the format of commercial television and, and really transformed it.
Story_ID: 664996
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite show of, I guess the show (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Of all the preschool shows?
Speaker 1: --television show for preschoolers?
Speaker 2:  	I think I've worked on far too many of them to name one as favorite.  I mean, I, I would say that 'Blue's Clues' was, was one, the only show, the first show that I worked on that was totally grounded in child development as opposed to television.  I mean, everything about the show, the pacing on the show was what will kids want to do?  What--how will kids like it?  It wasn't based on suppositions about kids but more on the ground, real research on what kids were thinking, doing, and how fast they processed information.  And, I can remember, to myself, and I'm sure the staff of the show were much more intent about it than I was, sort of praying that that show would be a hit.  Because the naysayers in television were, "If we did it your way, the way you academics say kids would, would wanna learn, the show won't be successful.  We know what makes for laughs.  We know what," you know.  In other words, our tried and true formula is the one that kids want.  And, if you put this boring educational stuff on television, nobody's gonna watch it.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2:  	That's right.  And, 'Blue's Clues' hit, and it really hit big.  And, it just, that would be the one that stands out to me of the shows I've worked on that was really tremendously significant because it was based completely on these boring--things that everybody thought would be too boring for TV.  And, when done creatively, it turned out to be evergreen, absolutely evergreen.  And, almost everybody's favorite TV show.
Story_ID: 664997
Speaker 1: What's the, the one that, I think ABC used to have they--that they used to run on Saturday mornings, the little snippets (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Oh, those are called interstitials and 'Schoolhouse Rock!'--
Speaker 1: 'Schoolhouse Rock!'
Speaker 2:  	--is the, is the granddaddy of the interstitials.  Everybody loves it.  I--they could do that again today and it would, it would really resonate with people.  And, there're many people who know what a conjunction is because of 'Schoolhouse Rock!'  They know how legislation is passed because of 'Schoolhouse Rocks!'
Speaker 1: "I'm Just a Bill" (laughter).
Speaker 2:  	"I'm Just a Bill," that's right.  "Conjunction Function" [sic. "Conjunction Junction"]."  Yeah, that, that was a big, a big hit.  I know the consultant who worked on that show, worked on those interstitials.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] have a tradition of impacting these shows (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Well, there was a professor at UCLA, Aimee Dorr, who ultimately became the dean of the school of education, who did her, that was her primary research interest, was children's television.  And, she worked on the 'Schoolhouse Rock!'
Speaker 1: And, her, is her name D- ?
Speaker 2:  	D-O-R-R.
Speaker 1: D-O-R- okay.
Speaker 2:  	A-I-M-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Aimee Dorr.
Story_ID: 664998
Speaker 1: You continue to consult, you know, for television.
Speaker 2:  	Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, I don't--there're other things that you've done and we haven't covered yet.
Speaker 2:  	Right.
Speaker 1: Your dissertation, from what I understand, lead to a project called Crystal Stairs [Crystal Stairs, Inc., Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2:  	Yes, indirectly.  I, as I told you earlier I really wanted to change the world.  I mean, I, you know, I think underneath it all, I was really about social justice and changing the world.  And, it's been hard for me to let go of that even though I've done all this work on commercial television.  So, with my roots working in that Head Start program, I really wanted to be committed to doing something of quality around very young children that would make a difference for them and their families.  Because the bottom line is, if you don't change the world for parents, they can't change the world for their kids.  And, I think I learned that really from my mother [Hope Morris Hill].  Watching her go to school as she, the more she learned, the more she knew, the more she passed on to us.  And, I also knew the importance of education and reducing inequality, income inequality, and other inequalities that exists.  And, so, I have always kept a hand in public policy so I can do some change the world activity.  And, my biggest break in that regard was when I decided to leave a tenured professorship in the public policy program at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] to create an experiment that would be real world and change, and change the world for women and their children.  And, that was Crystal Stairs.  The name Crystal Stairs comes from the Langston Hughes Poem, 'Mother to Son.'  And, that poem very much expressed our ideology where a mother says to her child, "Don't you sit down now 'cause you find it's kind of hard 'cause life for me ain't been no crystal stair."  You've got to work hard, keep climbing, going in places where it's dark and there's no carpet on the floor.  And, that--all those verses in that poem really resonated for us.  So, we wrote to the family of Langston Hughes and asked them for permission to use the poem and that phrase, Crystal Stairs for the name of this non-profit.
Story_ID: 664999
Speaker 1: Our non-profit organization, I say our 'cause--I co-founded it with one of my classmates from graduate school [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  We began with a small loan from my mother [Hope Morris Hill] of about five thousand dollars to rent office space.  And, we grew that into a $200 million a year organization that today helps twenty thousand children a month with their childcare services and with early education.  And, enables their mothers to go to work and contribute to society as self-sufficient grown people.  That was a real important fulfillment of a dream for me and it was something that I wanted to see last beyond me.  So, I developed Crystal Stairs [Crystal Stairs, Inc., Los Angeles, California] with the idea that it would become a community institution able to function without me at the helm.  And, in some ways I've been able to continue and grow my consulting career because in developing Crystal Stairs so that it would last beyond me, I could leave as the CEO, and see new generations of leadership come in and develop something else.  And, so, Crystal Stairs is now thirty years old.  It's the largest private non-profit child development organization in the State of California.  It's been cited for innovation in the Stanford University innovation business review [Stanford Social Innovation Review].  We're now embarking on a new--new ventures and social entrepreneurship to diversify the funding base of the organization.  And, I, you know, I'd say, it's a--it's something I'm very, very proud of.  And, I, I know without a doubt it's made an impact because I've had absolutely chilling personal experiences where I've meet perfect strangers who have said, "Crystal Stairs changed my life."  And, you know, there's a payoff for that, that you just don't get any other way.  I went to the bank one day, I rarely go in the bank, but I went to Bank of America one day to cash a check or make a deposit and I have to sign, you know to get cash back, and the teller looked at my signature and she said, "Are you the [HistoryMaker] Karen Hill-Scott who signs the check for my childcare?"  And, I said, "Yes."  She said, "You saved my life," you know.  I just--where do you have an experience like that, I--nothing does, I mean, it was--she said, she had moved here from another state.  She didn't know what she, I guess, had left an abusive husband.  She didn't know what she would do.  She needed to get childcare.  The bank had offered her a job.  She couldn't take the job until she could get childcare.  She called Crystal Stairs.  We found a special place, you know, where were could support her and fund her.  She showed up for work the following week.  And, she said, "My life has," you know, that was it.  "That turned my life around."  And, I, we hear of experiences like that all the time.  There are people who work at Crystal Stairs that when they got their childcare they said, "I can't wait to finish school, and to, to get to the point where I can come back to Crystal Stairs as an employee, no longer needing subsidy."  You know, no longer needing the financial assistance because it, it made a difference for that mother and for her children's future.  And, so, that's what Crystal Stairs was all about.  It was an instrument of social change, and it continues to be that to this day.
Story_ID: 665000
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you were invited to Nickerson Gardens [Los Angeles, California] by congresswoman [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters.
Speaker 2:  	Yes, she asked us to develop a childcare center at Nickerson Gardens [Nickerson Gardens SAGE Center].  That was a very difficult and challenging project.  We did get it off the ground.  It was one of the first accredited after school programs in the country.  And, it's done very, very well.  I think our bigger impact has been not just on the families, but for me because I develop me career and public policy around early intervention, I was asked to chair the state master plan for early education in California.  And, I now, you know, am very involved in the pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to three, grade three movement for educational change across the country.  So, on the public policy side or on what I call the change the world side, I've, I've had a very productive career and a lot of leadership responsibility for changes that have occurred there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	You know, I've testified before [U.S.] Congress, you know, those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: The state master plan was--?
Speaker 2:  	In 2002.
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002], right, right, right.
Speaker 2:  	And, I incubated the universal preschool system for, for Los Angeles [Los Angeles Universal Preschool, Inc.].  Those are all, you know, that's ten thousand children in preschool that wouldn't otherwise be there.
Story_ID: 665001
Speaker 1: And you worked on early education master plans for six strategically selected California counties (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Yes.  Right.  All of these are institutional change things that have now primed the pump for, in the coming year with the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] initiative on early education for California to step up and, and really take on highly innovative efforts in the area of integrating learning from age three to age eight.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The secretary of education, Arne Duncan has been explicit about, you know, one thing if nothing else, and that's that early childhood education--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --works.
Speaker 2:  	Right.  So, it's been a long haul to get to this point where everybody, somehow, now everybody has this collective insight that these are the years that, that make, you know, they're the fulcrum for later years.  Every year of childhood is important.  But, we know for sure that if you aren't reading proficiently by the age of three, it's highly unlikely you're gonna finish high school.
Story_ID: 665002
Speaker 1: Is there any, are there, is there any voice or set of voices that argue against that, today?  I mean, I just wonder if there's any opposition (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) What they argue about is how to do something about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, funding.
Speaker 2:  	What should be done about it.  Right.  And, they argue about test scores not measuring.  But, I, what I say on the test score piece is I agree that test scores do not measure everything there is that, they don't measure any capacity to learn.  They measure what you have learned and, and maybe in many instances they're not really measuring the things that a lot of African American kids might learn that other kids aren't learning.  You know, because they're keyed into a certain standard.  But, when it comes to reading proficiency when only 15 percent of African American kids in this country are reading proficiently.  That's a test score that is telling you something is seriously wrong in the institutional--in the institutions that serve those children.  We know that black children are not defective children, you know.  I mean, there's just, there's, there's--those test scores tell us something's wrong with the system.  And, when you think about that void, I'm on the board--I was on the board at the Foundation for Child Development and we have a graph that we show called, America's Vanishing Potential [America's Vanishing Potential: The Case for PreK-3rd Education]. I think if every black parent understood that 85 percent of the black kids in this country cannot read at grade level, it, there would be a huge uproar.  But, I don't think parents, I'm certain that parents don't really know that.  And, they don't know what to do about it, and how to change it.  But, I'm hoping that this inter- this movement to do this educational continuity from age three to grade three will make a difference in what those reading scores look like.  That's our only hope.  Otherwise, I can tell you that the future for African American children in this country is very, very bleak.  And, because the country has become increasingly diverse with regard to multiple ethnic groups, there's no one ethnic group to have guilt, collective guilt about.
Story_ID: 665003
Speaker 1: You mentioned the board of the Foundation For Child Development [New York, New York].  But, you're also on the Parsons Foundation board [Ralph M. Parsons Foundation, Los Angeles, California], GreatSchools.org [Oakland, California] and of course, Crystal Stairs [Crystal Stairs, Inc., Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) The Crystal Stairs board.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2:  	Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2:  	I'm on these four boards because they're all about foundations who wanna make a real contribution to changing the world.  The Foundation For Child Development really created the paradigm of three to three, age three to grade three.  And, that idea of working with children through that trajectory now has legs in a very short amount of time.  So, I, my, my board relationships, like I said, are around changing the world.  Crystal Stairs I think is changing the world locally in its own way, and being a role model I hope for other private non-profit organizations to see how they can endure the founder syndrome and create legacies of high level executive leadership that can go forward and, and improve quality of life in low income communities.  GreatSchools.org I really like because it is oriented toward parents.  And, that's where, to me, my bottom line is today.
Story_ID: 665004
Speaker 1: I would like to spend the rest of my career finding different ways to communicate directly with parents about the things that they can do to change the world for their children.  To change their child's trajectory.  To change the opportunity structure for their child.  Because institutional programs alone don't do it.  And, parents are far too important in a child's life to not be the leader and to not be instrumental in where their children are headed.  They cannot rely on the program to get their child from point A to point B.  So, you know, this last third of my--you know, I feel like I'm gonna have three careers.  One was as a professor and doing public policy.  The second was as a consultant and working with mass media and communications.  And, I would like for my third wave to be in changing the way people think about how they raise their kids.  And, I think it, it can only be achieved through popular culture.  I mean, I think that that's what my having done the public policy, and also the work in television.  Those are the two, that's the two things I've learned.  That parents are most important and popular culture is the way to reach them.  If they will watch the Kardashians maybe they will listen to or watch someone else who has another message about, about doing what is their first job and their most important job which is raising their children.  And, I, I feel very strongly about it.  Especially, for, for black kids and Latino kids because what they're experiencing is not getting them to a place where there will be successful.  And, between black and Latino kids, you have a third of all the future adults in this country.  And, where will the nation be?  Where will my own grandchildren be, if, if they're not successful with, with what they're able to do, what they--with, with their own innate potential.  I--the country itself will be in trouble.  You know, so, I think that my idea at this point is that we have to, all of us who are grown and over forty must be about the business.  Not just of making it every day as best we can, but of creating legacy.  And, I, I don't see enough of that going on around me.  The self-absorption of my generation has, has left many kids, when you look at young kids today, not just the little ones, but young adults today, they are feeling--I mean, I think we have good genera- you know, I don't complain about the youth of today.  I see the youth of today as aiming to be productive but they're also only aiming for what's in it for me because they do feel left behind in some ways.  And, I, I am hoping in, in, through my work in television and through any of the writing that I can do in the last wave of my career, that I can have an impact on parenting and, and managing yourself as an adult so that our kids have a chance for the future.  'Cause the jobs are leaving this country.  Our kids are not gonna be competitive.  It's very, very bifurcated.  And, and it--very much what's happening to children in this country is very much an extension of the income inequality that we see with adults.  We're really about to flush away a generation of kids into an abyss of dependence on public resources, public dole.  It's really, I mean, it's quite, quite frightening when you think about it.  And, so, maybe instead of change the world, now I'm in more of a save the world mode with the last, the last wave of my career.  And, I can hope I can begin with my own family.  I have four children and ten grandchildren.  And, that's all an extension of my investment in what I've done in my regular career is creating legacy for them so that they can be successful adults 'cause if it doesn't happen at home, there's no institutional support to make it happen otherwise.
Story_ID: 665005
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children and grandchildren.
Speaker 2:  	Well, I'd say, by in large, 90 percent of the time, I'm sort of in love with all of them.  I think they're all doing really well.  I'm very proud of my children.  They, they all stayed on program.  A few deviations here and there but no failures, I guess, would be the best way to put it.  I'm really grateful for that.  I know many people often wanna gloat over their children's accomplishments.  And, I think I can gloat about mine.  But, I'm, I'm mainly grateful that they are grown productive citizens who, who remain gainfully employed, who do what they're supposed to do, who are very invested in their own children and provide service to their community.  You know, if there were an ideal as to what a person should be when they grow up, I think my children, every single one of them, embodies that.  And, my grandchildren are just amazing.  They're wonderful, wonderful kids.  And, some of them are here in Los Angeles [California].  So, I just hope the goofy dust that's in the water and in the air here doesn't get to them.  It's very hard to raise a kid in this city, very hard.  And, and I do think there is something in the water with the male population.  They're really, really struggling.  It's being documented nationwide that, you know, boys are struggling.  Females outnumber men in colleges for all races.  You know, where their future direction is headed, I do not know.  But, I know I've got five grandsons and I've gotta put the time in for them so that they can find their own way and can be very directed in being self-sufficient themselves when they grow up without worrying about driving while black because that's, that's a real issue still in this country.  But, I've, you know, if you wanna say what brings me the most joy in my life, it's my family, and, and my kids--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	--they're really the bread and butter of it all.
Story_ID: 665006
Speaker 1: Have you drawn on your mother's model or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2:  	(Simultaneous) Absolutely.  She sends me postcards every day from up above, as they say.  Sometimes my friends eve- even will say to me, "Okay, Hope that's enough," (laughter) you know.  Because they knew her, and I know her.  But, I mean, I--you know, and I, and my, I heard my daughter, both of my daughters, I have heard them tell their friends and it sounds just like me talking about my mother.  Like my youngest daughter who used to say to me, "Oh, you're too strict and you don't understand," and blah, blah, blah.  She was a party girl, you know.  I was in Illinois with her and she was saying, I was there at the table and four of her friends were over and she says, "Well, I will tell you, my mother told me when I was sixteen years old, you wanna be sexually active, you need to have a job to pay for your own birth control cause that's the level of responsibility it's gonna take," you know.  And, she said, "I just thought that was crazy.  What you do mean, you won't just take me to the doctor?"  "Because, you need to understand what it means."  And, she said, "And, I get it now.  She was right.  You need to be, you know, you have--if you're gonna be sexually active, you gotta be responsible for the outcome."  And, so, I, you know, I definitely hear it in myself in talking to them.  But, now I heard them in talking to their children.  And, my oldest daughter who has a little girl of her own who's now thirteen, she quotes me all the time.  And, she will quote me to myself, "I remember you telling me," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So, some people call 'em postcards.  I have friends who call them mommy tapes, you know the video tape that's laid in your brain, where you hear your mother's voice talking to you.  But, I, I think to be a parent it's really important to be clear, to have clarity.  And, I can say, I had lots and lots of doubts but the few things I knew that I was clear on, Hope Hill [Hope Morris Hill] was clear on those things with me.  And, I, I know I've passed that down.  You can't be ambiguous and be a parent.  If you're not clear and you don't lay out the expectations your kids have, they don't have a way to figure it out, you know.  And, so, I do, I do, I see what I did with my kids.  I see the outcome it produced.  I can't take credit for everything that they do that they do well.  But, I also see them respecting and being grateful for that, that experience that they had.  And, I, I see it reflected in the way that they lead their own families, the way they lead their children.
Story_ID: 665007
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would go back and change if you could?
Speaker 2:  	Oh, I have a written list of regrets, I'm sorry to say.  And, I know most people say, "I have no regrets."  But, I feel like I'm a project and there are things that with more experience and more courage as I have grown that if I was that person that I am today then, I would've done differently.  But, I can't look back and ruminate on it.  I can only know what those things are and be sure that going forward I do exactly what I have set for myself to do in the future.  So, in that regard, I have no regrets because I can't change that.  Regret, you know, it depends on what regrets are for.  Regrets to guide me and instruct me for the future, I think those are positive regrets; they're affirming.  And, I, I move forward in that regard.  But, you know, are there things that--opportunities I wish I could've had, or opportunities that I could've availed, you know, to a better extent, absolutely.  I think anybody who, I think anybody who's really honest with themselves knows they missed a boat here and there, somewhere along the way.  And, they can be sure they don't miss the next boat when it comes their way.  And, that's how I look, look at that.  And, what's on that list, is that what you're saying?  I think I could've perhaps not bifurcated my career.  But, I know who I am and it, that's just, that is what it is.  I would like to have been able to travel more around the world.  Starting, I would've like to have been a world traveler earlier in my life.  Because looking at other cultures and understanding how things get done in other parts of the world is very illuminating.  It makes you grateful for being an American.  It makes you--I'm grateful for being in my generation.  I'm grateful for being a woman in this society as opposed to somewhere else.  And, I'm also grateful though for seeing the interesting ways that people lead their lives when they're about a purpose that's so deep within them.  You know, living out a life with more concern for the natural world for example.  Things like that.  And, I'm glad I don't have to live through some of the things that I find shocking that I see in other countries.  Where I feel completely alien, like 'The Brother from Another Planet.'  I don't know if you ever saw that movie.  But, I have those experiences some times and go, "Wow, there's no blending in here.  This place is just way too different for me," you know.
Story_ID: 665008
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consid- consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2:  	My primary legacy I think is to my family.  I think I've been as good a mother as I could've been giving my ambitions to be more than a mother.  To, I, I when my mother [Hope Morris Hill] said, "Anybody can be a wife and mother, and you better say research scientist, or concert pianist."  That, that left a mark on me.  And, so, I knew I had to be more than that.  And, not to take away or demean the role of a mother.  But, I do believe that having an ambition that is separate from what is your family makes you a much more effective leader in your family.  Because you're leading them toward something, a destination that will support them for the rest of their lives.  But, I do see my, my children and my family and my grands [grandchildren], that whole little constellation, my little tribe as my, my most instrumental legacy.  Beyond that, I think that helping people through Crystal Stairs [Crystal Stairs, Inc., Los Angeles, California] and through the other programs that I've created is certainly a legacy of developing, developing a type of organization and developing services that have a very lasting, deep, instrumental impact on people's lives.  So, I'm grateful for that, and you know, I'll be done with Crystal Stairs two years from now.  That will be the end of my term as chair of the board.  And, I will, I will leave it completely to its own devices.  I've never interfered with the successive generations of leadership.  But, when I was asked to chair the board I thought, okay, this will round it out.  I can tie off that package that is Crystal Stairs and let them go off into the, into the sunset and, and really make an inst- you know, they're, they're an institution just like the public schools.  They, they serve more children than many school districts serve.  So, I think that's definitely something that's a legacy that has spider webs of impact.  But, I think my greatest professional impact is yet to come.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	It's not done yet.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2:  	What shape will that take?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2:  	Well, I think we will see.  I'm hoping that I am able to have this bigger impact on how women in particular, but how families themselves can structure and, and organize their lives so that they have a maximum impact on their children's future.
Story_ID: 665009
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we need to talk about that we have not discussed thus far--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) before I ask my last questions?
Speaker 2:  	No. Unh-uh. No. Unh-uh.  If you have one more question I can't imagine what it will be.  But, I think, you know, I've been really open with you.  With--unreserved and unguarded with what I've had to say.  I haven't talked this much about the white people in my family in years, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2:  	(Laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy.  Actually, some people think it's the same thing but it's a little different.  Ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2:  	I would like to be remembered as insightful, intelligent, forward thinking, and passionate.  Because those are the words I think describe me the most.  Without trying to sound self-congratulatory.  I'm trying to learn how to brag.  I'm not very good at it.  But, I think those things mean, those are things that I prize highly, in people.  I mean, the work ethic I have, I didn't mention that.  But, I do have a good work ethic.  But, I think it's how I've use my capacities and those are my strongest ca- capacities; being insightful, intelligent, passionate.  What was the fourth one?  See, I've already forgotten it.
Speaker 1: And.
Speaker 2:  	Insightful, intelligent--
Speaker 1: Well, diligent, I guess would be a word to describe--
Speaker 2:  	No, I didn't, that wasn't, you'll have look--did he record?  Did you record it?  I don't remember--
Speaker 1: He did.
Speaker 2:  	--the fourth word.
Speaker 1: It wasn't, you didn't use that word but you said you had good work ethic.
Speaker 2:  	No.  I said, that goes without saying (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Without saying.  Okay.  All right.  So, this is--
Speaker 2:  	Insightful, insight and intelligence I know.  Forward thinking.
Speaker 1: Forward thinking.  Okay.
Speaker 2:  	Forward thinking.  'Cause I always wanna skip a step and go, go further.  Take things further than they are right now.  Because if you don't move forward, you lose ground.  You actually regress.  Companies that don't grow, shrink.  They don't stay.  You know, like people say I wanna get to this level and just hold things steady.  There's no such thing.  If you don't keep moving forward, what you think you're holding steady is shrinking.  It will shrivel up and die.  And, I, you know, I, you see it in business.  That's why business, they're always trying to gobble up other businesses.  They know to stagnate is death because the other people around you are chomping things up and digesting them and, and you know, and trying to grow.  And, so, if you aren't growing physically, to try to grow mentally, I always just wanna be forward thinking. That was the third thing that was on my list.  So, that's it.
