Story_ID: 337794
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson, the interviewer.  This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.  We're from The HistoryMakers, have you just start by stating your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: Sure, my name is Andy Ingraham [HistoryMaker Andrew Ingraham].  A-N-D-Y.  Ingraham is I-N-G-R-A-H-A-M and I'm the president of the National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.].  And also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And before you go on, I'm gonna just--your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight, twenty, fifty-four [August 20, 1954], Nassau, Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: March 2, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Hilton Short Hills [Short Hills, New Jersey] in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am the president of the hotel association otherwise known as a hotel developer.
Story_ID: 337795
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start with sort of five People magazine type pop culture questions.  These questions also, the answers appear on our website with your biography.  So, your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fish.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year I guess is Christmas.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: Favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Ah, Anguilla.  It's gonna get me in trouble, being from the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: We can get it done.
Story_ID: 337796
Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna start with your oral history, sort of your past, your, your background.  Can you give me your mother's name and your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mother's name is Doris Ingraham.  Place of birth is a place called Tarpum Bay, Eleuthera, which is in the Bahamas.  Date of birth, I don't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thereabouts, when do you think your mother was born?
Speaker 2: Boy, that's a tough one.  Let's see.
Speaker 1: Not sure?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, '20s [1920s]?  No?
Speaker 1: In the '20s [1920s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, '23 [1923] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was born in the--during the Depression [Great Depression] era for this country.
Speaker 2: Probably in this country, yes, but--I think it was the Depression, you know what it's nineteen sixty--what is this?  Nineteen--2006.
Speaker 1: Two thousand six [2006].
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: So can you just spell the name of the town she grew up in and was born in?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Tarpum Bay, Eleuthera.  T-A-R-P-U-M.  Bay, B-A-Y.  Eleuthera, E-L-E-T-H-U-R-I-A [sic.], and that's in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about your mother's background?
Speaker 2: Well, hopefully everything.  Born in the Bahamas in Tarpum Bay, grew up in a small village, which is the village that we call home, my father [Arlington Ingraham] is also from Tarpum Bay, and spent most of life as a little girl living on the island prior to going to finish school in Nassau [Bahamas].  But pretty much after that, she was a shop owner in the Bahamas.  We owned a couple of stores and today, she's retired.
Speaker 1: So what type of stores did she own?
Speaker 2: We own dry good stores, I guess it's a clothing store there and also owned a couple of hairdressing shops while the--we were in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Now, is your mother a hairdresser also?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was your mother's occupation, just shop owner?
Speaker 2: Shop owner.
Speaker 1: Now, did she--go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, shop owner.
Speaker 1: Did she ever relate any stories to you about what her childhood had been like?  What it had been like--like, did she grow up working?  I mean, and you to give me a sense of, of the Bahamas, you know, you--what, what jobs would've been available to her as a child during her childhood or what would she have done for work?
Speaker 2: Good question.  Shopkeeper, obviously, during that time, probably menial jobs.  I mean, a lot of times, tourist destination prior to independence of the island, prior to majority rule, prior to having a black government, for the best part, most men would be fishermen, farmers.  My grandfather and my--actually, my grandfather--my great-grandfather was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Now, are these your pater- maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my mother--
Speaker 1: Then, let me just when you mention them, let's just get their names and if you, if--and their dates of birth if you know them.
Speaker 2: Date of birth, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't--just, just when we introduce them.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Good, okay.
Speaker 1: So you were telling me about your great, great-grandfather, what was his name?
Speaker 2: My great, great-grandfather was Mike Cartwright [ph.], lived to be about 106, but he was a farmer in Tarpum Bay, Eleuthera.  And pretty much the only industry that was available during that period of time when they were growing up I'm sure was either farming or fishing.  There weren't a whole lot--because you gotta remember, at that time, there was probably no telephones, you got there by boat.  Today, there's telephones and it's a little bit changed.
Speaker 1: So your great-grandfather was a fisherman, you were assuming.
Speaker 2: He was a farmer.
Speaker 1: A farmer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what would he have farmed?
Speaker 2: Watermelons, pineapples.  Eleuthera's very famous for pineapples, tomatoes, lemon.  A lot of the stuff that--during that time that was, that was farmed in the Bahamas eventually made its way to Florida.  Today, we import everything back from Florida, so quite a reverse.
Speaker 1: So you're then--then, then that was your, your grandfather's father.  What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Ralph Spence [ph.].  He was a shopkeeper; I guess I come from a long line of shopkeepers.  Ralph Spence was a shopkeeper.  Part-time, he--well, actually no, he worked as a teacher at the Boys' Industrial School in Nassau, which is interesting.  The Boys' Industrial School was a school where kids went when they got in trouble and he was a teacher there.  During that time, he had a shop and essentially when he retired from the teaching, he ran that shop full-time with my grandmother.  It was a grocery store, what we call a small petty shop.  These--I guess today--they're the forerunners of today's 7-Eleven [The Southland Corporation; 7-Eleven, Inc.] in the U.S.  But remember this was in the Bahamas, so we had no 7-Elevens.
Story_ID: 337797
Speaker 1: So before we move on to your father's [Arlington Ingraham] side of the family, with your mother's [Doris Ingraham] side of the family, were there any stories about legends in the family that you can remember that were passed on down to you about people who had done great things prior to you being born?
Speaker 2: I guess just surviving.  No, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, but just give me the quick--a brief history of, of slavery in the Bahamas 'cause I'm not really clear on it.  They were--would any of your forebearers have been slaves?
Speaker 2: Not, you know, not really.  And, and I'm ashamed because I haven't traced it back, but slavery was not--even though it was prevalent, but you have to remember that eleuthera is called--is--means freedom.  And primarily it [Eleuthera, Bahamas] was settled initially from settlers that came from Bermuda that wanted freedom and, of course when the slaves came, they were pretty much free.  But suffice to say that in the Bahamas, particularly in Nassau [Bahamas], which, which is the capital, New Providence, Nassau, is the capital, New Providence--but most people of color lived what we called over the hill, and over the hill means that you had places like Fox Hill [Bahamas] that today celebrates emancipation, Adelaide Village [Bahamas], Bain Town [Bahamas].  Because when we say over the hill, if at that time white English--because we were a British colony, obviously, so white English folks that lived near the beach, near the port, near the downtown area, and they would have been serviced by--I, I, I guess there would be slaves, but the local black population.  Slavery was not really a huge thing because typically there was--I guess the British had--even though they were slavers to some degree, we had much more of a liberal--and I like to say that because my wife always argue with me and she's from Long Island [New York], not far from here [Short Hills, New Jersey], and she said I don't understand slavery and all this other stuff, which I do.  But no, we--there was nothing that's memorable about my mother saying that, "Gee, your great-grandfather [Mike Cartwright (ph.)] was a slave."  I don't recall him being a slave.  And I think for the best part, we know that there's some tolerance.  Now, there was a rigid class system.  That is, I remember as a, as child living in Nassau and not being able to go to the theater.  I believe it was called the Savoy [Savoy Theater, Nassau, Bahamas], which was located on Bay Street in Nassau, and it was not readily open to people of color; I remember that as a boy.  But as a kid, you just really never thought about it because it was not that pervasive, and I suspect because of that is--you know, most times you have your own neighborhoods and--that was not as rigid as you would have in the U.S. because you lived in a black country.  You would typically--you would see black people.  You really didn't draw any parallels between they, they were black or white.  You did know that downtown behind the wall in that gated community, there was some rich white people.  But there was really no correlation.
Speaker 1: And at the time, they played no importance in your lives?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.
Story_ID: 337798
Speaker 1: So, to your father's side of the family.  Your father's name?  Your father's date of birth?  Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth.  I--I'm really having trouble with that.  I don't know my father's date of birth.  I know he's older than my mother [Doris Ingraham], but--
Speaker 1: So we'll say the teens, nineteen teens [1910s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the teens [1910s].  My father is Arlington Mark Ingraham [Arlington Ingraham] who is deceased, but he was born, again, in Tarpum Bay, Eleuthera [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: Now, just spell Arlington for me so we get the spelling right on his name?
Speaker 2: Arlington, my middle name, great.  A-R-L-I-N-G-T-O-N, Arlington Ingraham, just like the cemetery [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia].  And my father emigrated to the U.S.; we all emigrated to the U.S.  But my father during the time at home was a, was a fireman for the Royal Bahamas Fire Department, subsequently became a gas station owner and a shop owner, and I guess long lines of shop owners.  And then subsequently decided--had a, had a very interesting history.  This is something that we talk what is called the contract.  And what the contract was years ago, and I see it today with other groups--in the Bahamas when things got tough during the depression, huge numbers of Bahamians would come over to this country and would work in the fields in Florida, picking fruit, and it was one way that at that time they used to send money back home.  So my father learning from that history that he spent, I believe, a year on what we called the contract.  It's a very, very common occurrence, so common that a lot of people that emigrated from the Bahamas in the early years that came to work on the contract never returned, unlike my father once he fulfilled his, I believe, a year of obligation, there was some rumor that he got in trouble, got in a fight, and had to be sent back home.  But they typ- this was only--the only way of employing because obviously there's a depression here and no tourist came to the Bahamas.  And at that time, we were a small, emerging country, still under the British colonial system.  Tourism was still big.  Taxi cab drivers, fishermen, and farmers were the key--or small shopkeepers catering to the local community.  We did not have Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.] and Neiman Marcus, as a matter of fact, still don't.
Story_ID: 337799
Speaker 1: So your father's father, what was his name?  Your grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father [sic. grandfather]--
Speaker 1: --on your paternal side.
Speaker 2: --was called Wilberforce Ingraham, again, grew up in Tarpum Bay, Eleuthera [Bahamas], lived in Tarpum Bay, Eleuthera.  He was a farmer in Tarpum Bay.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he farm?
Speaker 2: Same fruit, watermelon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Citrus.
Speaker 2: --watermelon--
Speaker 1: Lemons.
Speaker 2: --yeah, lemons.  But watermelons--
Speaker 1: Orange.
Speaker 2: --was a big thing, watermelons and peppers.
Speaker 1: Now, did you see any of these farms when you grew up as a kid?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what did a--what did the watermelon farm look like?  I mean, is it just vines of watermelons all over the ground--
Speaker 2: Huge--
Speaker 1: --as far as the eye could see?
Speaker 2: --vines of watermelons--
Story_ID: 337800
Speaker 1: --As a matter of fact, it is typical that during the summer months, even though we lived in Nassau [Bahamas], what our parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham] would pack us up and do every summer, like clockwork, we have a thing called the mail boat.  Mail boat is interesting, called the mail boat because the only way to get letters between Nassau--and remember in the Bahamas, we have 700 islands, Nassau being the smallest and the most popular at this point, but Eleuthera [Bahamas] being a very large island, so the only way to get mail growing up in the Bahamas was to put it on these little small boats that would also take passengers and also cargo to the island.  So every summer, my parents would pack us up and away we went to our aunts and uncles and whoever was there, our grandparents, our great-grandparents, and we spent the whole summer there.  Now, what did we do?  We went to the farm to help grandfather [Ingraham's paternal grandfather, Wilberforce Ingraham] or aunt or uncle to help him farm, which was actually boring and I hate it, or we spent more time--spending in the sea.  We called it going to the beach; I can remember that.  But the typical things that you--spent all the first part of the morning on the farm and the second rest of the day you spent on the beach.  What was lunch?  Watermelon, whatever you found.  There was no McDonald's [McDonald's System, Inc.; McDonald's].  And we had spring water, which I always found interesting today, is go to a spring, put your head in and drink.  So it was interesting growing up in the Bahamas.  With 700 islands and, and if--the Bahamas has an interesting trait.  My family--and you can tell where most people are from the Bahamas by their last name.  The Ingraham family is from Eleuthera, the Careys [ph.], the Knowles [ph.].  And so if you were a Rolle [ph.] and you, you lived in Nassau, then the Rolles would send their kids to Exuma, Rolle were, Exuma.  So we had 700 islands, about 24, 28 inhabited, so that's where the bulk of the people would go.  And that's growing up during the summer.
Speaker 2: And which--what was the name of the island that you were always sent to?
Speaker 1: Eleuthera.
Speaker 2: Eleuthera.  That's--you lived on Eleuthera, though--
Speaker 1: I lived in Nassau.
Speaker 2: You lived in Nassau.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My parents were from Eleuthera (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eleuthera, so you'd be sent back to Eleuthera to work--
Speaker 1: During the summer.
Speaker 2: --on the farms and to beach (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Actually--
Speaker 2: --to lie on the beach.
Speaker 1: --it was, it was like what you do on vacation.  Your parents send the kids off to the grandparents or to the aunts and uncles, and you saw your cousins and you had a great time.  And they gave you a great big box of grocery and cornflakes and all that good stuff.  And at that time, you know, we had--my grandparents had chickens all over the place and you get fresh eggs, and on the weekends we--actually fish was prevalent; that's why I eat a lot of fish today, I guess.
Speaker 2: Did you fish?
Speaker 1: You know what?  I never learned how to fish.  I had a bunch of cousins that fished and so it was fairly easy to just go out to the dock and they would come in with the boat, we got fish, took it--I never learned how to clean the fish either.
Speaker 2: How many sib- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I certainly learned how to eat it.
Story_ID: 337801
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have three brothers and two sisters, six of us.
Speaker 1: What are their--can you--can we get their names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure.
Speaker 1: --and the, and the rank, I mean, you know, the order--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --including yourself, how they fall.
Speaker 2: All right, well let's start at the--who's the youngest.  Debbie [Debbie Ingraham] is the youngest.  Debbie is currently--well, she's not married.  She's divorced, has three kids.  Then it is Dennis [Dennis Knowles].  Dennis is still living in Nassau [Bahamas].  And then Dian [Dian Ingraham] who has one kid and she's divorced, a young lady by name of Christine [ph.].  And then under--right above Dian is Philip [Philip Ingraham].  Philip lives in Miami [Florida]--
Story_ID: 337802
Speaker 1: --He [Ingraham's brother, Philip Ingraham] runs our restaurants.  We have--when my father [Arlington Ingraham] migrated to the U.S., he started a string of restaurants, and they became very popular in the Florida area because our typical menu was a Bahamian menu.  What does that mean?  That means on Sunday morning--Saturday morning when he first started, the day we perfected that every morning in Miami [Florida], that you can get boiled fish, grits, and johnnycake.  That is a staple diet in the Bahamas.  And if you ever had peas and grits, that's also a staple that if you go to Nassau [Bahamas], any restaurant in the Bahamas that is a Bahamian restaurant, local restaurant, will have fresh grouper, you get boiled, fried, steamed, or conch.
Speaker 2: What's conched?
Speaker 1: Conch is--you ever have the big shell that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --put up--
Speaker 2: --with the, with the--okay, yes.
Speaker 1: If you pull the thing that's out there, is a huge staple in Bahamian diet.  We eat conch fritters, fried conch, cracked conch, conch soup, conch for breakfast.  And by the way, when you grew up on the island, said it was a staple diet.  Fish was prevalent because it was available.  Conch was available.  You very--chicken was available very cheap, which it is today, but you really didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, Phillip is in Miami.
Speaker 1: Phillip--
Speaker 2: --is in Miami.
Speaker 1: --is in Miami.  Phillip runs--
Speaker 2: How many restaurants are there in Miami now?
Speaker 1: We have two restaurants in Miami called Bahamian Connection [Bahamian Connection Restaurant and Bahamian Connection Grill, Miami, Florida].  They're very well known in our local community.  And I think going back to the contract that I mentioned earlier that my father came in, Miami, Coconut Grove [Miami, Florida], was settled by Bahamians many years ago that came to Miami looking for work and to help build the Florida railroad [Florida East Coast Railway], and they settled in Coconut Grove.  But during the contract years, a lot of them came in, lived in the Liberty City [Miami, Florida], Hollywood [Florida].  And today when you go back, you find large populations with names that are similar to what we have in the Bahamas, the Dorsetts [ph.], the Coakleys [ph.], and once you begin to research back even though the young kids may not have been to the Bahamas before, their grandparents migrated over to, over to the U.S. many years ago.  So, our two restaurants that are in Miami--
Speaker 2: Serve the Bahamian community.
Speaker 1: And we've had people there from--the prime minister of our country visits there very often.  The funniest thing is when you have secret service that has to come in first because of dignitaries.  Most of the political officials meet at our restaurant.  When my father ran the restaurant, he was extremely popular and I think my brother's taken all right from him, didn't miss a beat.
Speaker 2: So have you served Jeb Bush?
Speaker 1: We haven't served Jeb Bush yet.
Speaker 2: I was joking (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, that's interesting.  I'm sure we'll get him there before he leaves.  I don't believe we--we've served Malcolm X's daughter, we've served Muhammad Ali.  We've, we've served a lot of famous people there, and it's interesting.
Story_ID: 337803
Speaker 1: So that was Philip [Philip Ingraham].  After Philip must be you?
Speaker 2: No.  Philip, then we have Richard [Richard Ingraham] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're the oldest then.
Speaker 2: Richard.  Yeah, Richard.  Yeah, okay, Philip, then Richard, who is a real estate broker, lives in Florida, not too far from me as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: What part of Florida is he in?
Speaker 2: He is in Pompano Beach, Florida, which is right outside of Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  And me, of course, and I live in Coral Springs, Florida, which is the suburbs of Fort Lauderdale.
Story_ID: 337804
Speaker 1: So what are your earliest memories of growing up in the Bahamas?
Speaker 2: Well, fond memories, loved it.  I--while I didn't enjoy going to the farm, I certainly enjoyed spending summers in Eleuthera [Bahamas] because you spent all time swimming and having a good time running into cousins.  And at that time, it was a--and still is to some degree, it's a small, rural settlement as we call 'em for lack of--for comparison, people call them villages, but we call 'em settlements in the Bahamas.  And there were no traffic lights, no McDonald's [McDonald's System, Inc.; McDonald's].  Even today, if a dog decides to go to street [sic. sleep] in the middle of the road, he could, and traffic is almost nonexistent, unlike some other place that I've lived and visited.  But, you know, I remember the sort of camaraderie of family.  I remember that everybody in the village knew who your grandmother was and they would stop you, "Are you Maybelle's [ph.] boy?"
Speaker 1: How would they know that?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting.  During the summer, it was such a close-knit community that they would've seen my father [Arlington Ingraham] grow up and my mother [Doris Ingraham] grow up and, of course, coming back there, you know, the word gets out that, you know, Links--my father's nickname was Link, and they said, you know, "Doris and Links' boys are here."  And of course, during the course of the social--you know, we didn't have theaters back then obviously, and so on the weekends, what do you do?  We probably went down and had beach parties.  I should take that back because you can't call them beach parties.  But because--we would go down on the dock when the boat comes in, that was a big thing because every time the mail boat comes in, years ago, most people go down to the mail boat to get their mail or to get food stuff that people were sending in from Nassau [Bahamas].  So when you came off the boat, the word spread very quickly that, "Those Ingraham boys are back in and their grandparents or their aunt--and the Carey [ph.] boys are in," because typical names were Careys, Ingraham, Sands [ph.], Cartwrights [ph.], all from the same island.  So, you know, at that period of time growing up in Nassau, spending my summers in Eleuthera but growing up in Nassau, I thought that was the world.  I had no idea that I would be in the United States.
Story_ID: 337805
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you even have a concept or an--a sense of the United States at that time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Never had a concept of the United States and never--and, as a matter of fact, the first real reference to the United States I had was in 19--when the President Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot, I was playing soccer in Nassau [Bahamas] in a field and we had a priest, and I was actually waiting for confirmation class, which is something we do in the Catholic faith.  I remember the priest coming on the field and asking us to take a moment of silence, that President Kennedy of the United States has been shot and we--United States?  That's no bearing to us.  So I had just no correlations.  I mean, when you live--even though we're less than fifty miles off the coast of Florida, at that time, very British, at that time limited TV.  At that time, mode of entertainment was the radio.  Even today, I really enjoy listening to radio and radio shows versus watching TV, but had no inkling.  I believe that the first time I came to the United States, I was in high school.  I came with my parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham], here for a few days, and left.  We came--because typically when you come from the Bahamas to the United States, you come here to shop, because of shopping and goods, and so forth, which we--weren't available in the Bahamas.  Obviously, everything is, is imported.  At that time, it was imported from Canada, London [England], and of course America being very close.
Story_ID: 337806
Speaker 1: So can you talk to me then about, I mean, I'm sure there were some cultural differences between African Americans and Bahamian, Bahamian Americans.
Speaker 2: Bahamian Americans.  Well--
Speaker 1: But I wanna talk about those cultural differences before you even knew we--the United States existed.  For example, when you talked about the food, the--sort of the staple.  What were--what was a traditional Christmas like?  What was a traditional Easter like?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, what--?
Speaker 2: You know, Christmas from a food standpoint was the same, turkey and ham, staple.
Speaker 1: But did you believe like there was this white guy, Santa Claus, and he was gonna come to the Bahamas and drop presents off to you?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I don't know whether we had a concept of a white guy and--I think we had a concept of Santa Claus.  And you know what's interesting when I think about it, we did not give a whole lot of thought that he was a white guy.  It's interesting that you would even mention that because when you look back on it, there was no point of reference that he was a white guy.  And so, I mean, I smile when I think about it, is that--and that's probably the cultural differences.  We just never had that point of reference.  And I remember having my first Burger King, my first Whopper in the Bahamas, coming in from (unclear) with my parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham] picking us up and we said, gee, a Whopper is such a huge thing, but it was so foreign to us because it was an American concept.  So Christmas, a typical Christmas with Santa Claus--Christmas for us was huge because we have what we call Junkanoo.  Junkanoo is like, you have a West Indian Carnival in New York [New York] and in Brazil you have Carnival.  To us, Junkanoo is where groups got together and compete for the best costume, best music and, to us, that was the--that was Christmas.  That's what everybody waited for.  And the food was a byproduct because for most Bahamians at that time, what was typical?  You went from house, to house, to relative house, to relative house, to friend's house.  You had food, you had drinks, and that was, you know, growing up as a young kid and then as a young adult, those are the things that you did.  So Santa Claus growing up was just a guy until we discovered it was my parents.
Story_ID: 360475
Speaker 1: J-U-N-K-A-N-O-O, Junkanoo.
Speaker 2: Junkanoo.  And the history of Junkanoo?
Speaker 1: Slaves celebrating--
Speaker 2: Celebrating what?
Speaker 1: --celebrating Christmas and coming together once a year to celebrate competing against different groups that live in different parts of the island.  For example, the Saxons was a Junkanoo group that lived in one part of the island [New Providence, Bahamas].  You had one family that lived in Fox Hill [Bahamas].  So it was like neighborhood rivalry, friendly rivalry who had the best music, the best costumes.  And these would be during that time maybe as many as three hundred people, young people, old people dressing up and dancing in the street that started roughly at two a.m. in the morning and ended at--
Speaker 2: Two a.m.?
Speaker 1: Two a.m.  The, the rule is that you'd go to church first and then you'd go to Junkanoo at two a.m. and then stayed there until the sun came up.
Speaker 2: And what about today, does that still exist?
Speaker 1: Today, it's interesting.  Today, it still exists in that form except now they start earlier at night, some eight o'clock at night.  They have bleachers today.  Then, you just stood up all night.  When your parents took you, it was a little bit--from a, from a, from a participant standpoint, it was a little bit disorganized or I should say not as organized as it is today where you have--you can buy tickets today, unheard of.  You can sit in the VIP section, unheard of.  So it has certainly been refined.
Speaker 2: Now, why would the slaves have chosen Christmastime for this celebration?
Speaker 1: That's a good point.  I don't know.  I think that it was a festival time.  The whole country celebrated Christmas and I think this, this was their time to just have a good time celebrating the Christmas holiday, but I--
Speaker 2: So this tradition probably has nothing to do with the Bahamas as much as these were the people who ended up in the Bahamas who had come from Africa.
Speaker 1: A long time ago from Africa (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So this is probably something that dates back to life in Africa.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And as a matter of fact, and you can tell by the dancing, it is, it is--it has all the markings of tribal dancing and so forth, so yes, it is.
Story_ID: 360476
Speaker 1: So you talked about the priest coming to tell you that Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had been assassinated.  So you were raised Catholic--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and in the Catholic church.  So do you know why (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As an altar boy too.
Speaker 1: --you were raised--as an altar boy?
Speaker 2: And I was, I was hopefully right at a--where I wasn't--didn't come to the U.S. and get involved in tourism, I would probably be a priest.
Speaker 1: So why do--why was it that you guys studied Catholicism as opposed to being Protestant if you, if, if you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--that's a good question.
Speaker 1: --came from the church (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I went to the church that my parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham] said I should go to.  I, you know, honestly don't know.  I think Catholic--the Catholic religion is a huge religion in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Today even.
Speaker 2: Today.  And I know that growing up Catholic--but when I went off to boarding school in Jamaica, I ended up going to a Seventh-day Adventist school.  No correlation except that most Bahamian families send their kids off to school in--boarding school in Jamaica or London [England] or Canada.  I mean, before we started today, most of our kids now come to the United States.
Speaker 1: So when you were a kid and you went to Catholic school and you had the, the priest--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you were still in Bahamas, did, did you ever--I mean, I'm just asking, did you know that you guys were different skin colors or it never even mattered?  Like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--it didn't--
Speaker 1: --how did you see this guy?  How did you see the priest?
Speaker 2: We saw him as the priest and we clearly understood--
Speaker 1: But he was somebody you wanted to be like, you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --because he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you were going to be a priest if you didn't--
Speaker 2: Father Marcian Peters who--as a matter of fact, he was an American if I remember correctly, and he spent many, many years in the Bahamas.  And to be quite frank, we were so connected to Father Marcian Peters that my early days of going to Our Lady's Catholic school [Our Lady's Catholic Primary School, Nassau, Bahamas] and church [Our Lady's Catholic Church, Nassau, Bahamas], when Father Marcian Peters moved to St. Joseph [St. Joseph's Parish, Nassau, Bahamas], my family moved our membership to St. Joseph, and as an altar boy in St. Joseph.  And Father Marcian Peters decided he would start a new church called Holy Family [Holy Family Catholic Church, Nassau, Bahamas], we moved our membership with him to Holy Family where I, again, served as an altar boy.  So I, I don't think there was ever a--I don't think we ever felt that there was a difference even though today looking at it, I clearly know it's a difference, but as a kid growing up, I can't think of--that we would think that anything was different.  He was Father Marcian Peters.
Story_ID: 360477
Speaker 1: Although you were a kid, like you were born in '54 [1954], you know, Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, four years later, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, but that still had no bearings on your life in the Bahamas.  You still weren't aware that blacks in America were treated far differently than what you were being treated in the Bahamas.
Speaker 2: Quite frankly, no we did not.  And because, again, my wife will argue this point, too, that even though there were white people there, the contact was probably not as great as it would be in the U.S.  You know, our, our communities were all black, even though the governor was white, because it was not until 1972 [sic. 1973] that we became an independent country and became majority rule.  So, yes, early in life we realized that we were under the--well, prior to '72 [1972], we knew that as a kid growing up, again, that we wanted independent.  We knew that we were white rule in a, in a black country.  And I remember our first prime minister, Lynden O. Pindling [Lynden Pindling], who became our first premier.
Speaker 1: And what year was that, that he became prime minister?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972] we became independent, so he became prime minister then.  But prior to that, I remember him as a young attorney returning from London [England] and seeking to figure out why--started in, I guess around '67 [1967] I would say--make sure, I would think.  But I would remember early on our black leaders trying to figure out: how come we weren't running our country?  And I believe the consciousness started there, and I remember as a kid and as a Boy Scout, us supporting the, the black party, which is the Progressive Liberal Party [PLP] under leadership of Lynden Oscar Pindling, saying we want now to have a black government.  Now, was it a direct impact from politics all over the world, I'm sure it is.  But our leaders at that time saw fit that the people that were governing us were a minority group with a majority of country being black.  And I think there was a huge movement that today still was--still has an impact in that in '72 [1972] when the PLP took over and began to control everything in the Bahamas, it is still applicable today, and it's applicable from a standpoint of independency and getting rid of the British system.  So it's interesting.  Was it racist?  Probably, absolutely, most people would say.  But we saw it as colonialism, which to some degree today you'll argue is a form of racism.  Again, it, it tends to harness another group through colonization as they did in India and so forth.  But again, independence gave us the sort of to be, not even proud probably at that point to be a person of color black.  But again, once you became independent, there was no point of reference of racism because now the premier first and the prime minister looked like you, members of the cabinet looked like you.
Speaker 1: But that wasn't until 1972.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972].  You know, so, you've gotta remember that prior--let's say from '67 [1967], '65 [1965], I don't exactly remember when the prime minister--after going to school in London, came back home and as a young attorney and then subsequently wanting to run for an elected office, and subsequently challenging the ruling party, that back then, our governor was white when you look at it then.  Today, our--even though we're still a commonwealth in the Bahamas, today, our governor general is a black Bahamian.  Our first governor general was Milo Butler who is now a national hero.  Why is he a national hero?  He was one of those guys that fought for independence, and, again, he was a shopkeeper (laughter).  So--
Story_ID: 360478
Speaker 1: So what role were your parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham] playing in, in '67 [1967] when, when--
Speaker 2: Independence.
Speaker 1: --when this independence started because they were shopkeepers(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were--
Speaker 1: --so were they also involved?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: And what did you call this movement?  What was this movement called?
Speaker 2: It was just really an independent movement.  I think--
Speaker 1: Independent movement.
Speaker 2: --people called almost like--I think one of the first--real act in the independence movement was interesting and, you know, the role my parents played as shopkeepers and my grandparents played is that they gave moral support to a movement of a group of individuals for independency.  And I remember as a boy, Milo Butler, who became a national hero, his store was not far from my [maternal] grandfather's [Ralph Spence (ph.)] store.  Today, his picture is on the money.  But I remember that Lynden Pindling, a young elected official at that time, threw what we called the mace.  In the House of Assembly, there is a ceremonial mace that represents the queen, and we were talking about let's vote and majority should rule, and Mr. Pindling threw the mace out of the window.  People were horrified, black people and white people, and they wanted to put him in jail.  And a crowd that had been gathered outside the House of Assembly, you know, said, "No, it's not gonna happen."  But that was the first defining movement, moment that this country was heading towards independence when you challenge that sort of rule.  And over the time leading up to 1972, you saw that happening.  My parents' role as shopkeepers--
Speaker 1: Let's stop for just a moment.  I'm gonna, I'm gonna close that door.  This is happening--
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 2: Actually, '72 [1972] was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, '72 [1972], okay.
Speaker 2: --the independence [sic. 1973].  So leading up, this would probably be around early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And the--you were going to tell me the role your parents played as shopkeepers.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I think they played more of a supportive role.  I mean, there weren't mass protests.
Speaker 1: There were not mass protests.
Speaker 2: No, I mean there were some protests, but it wasn't mass.  I--
Speaker 1: Were, were you there the day he threw the mace out the window?
Speaker 2: I was in Nassau [Bahamas] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were in Nassau but not actually--
Speaker 2: --but I was not at any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --protest.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't believe my parents were either.  I think at that time, the effort was, was led by trade unionists, even though--I don't know how big they were, but--
Speaker 1: So you said it was mainly a class society.  What class of people were doing the most agitating at this moment to make these--in this independence movement?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a class society then because you had the white class and the black class, but the class that was doing the most agitating is just typically a bunch of black individuals who typically--and parents were just like my parents at that point or my grandparents, they were farmers, fishermen, and taxi cab drivers.  In the case of our prime--our former prime minister, Mr. Pindling, he had gone off to school, so he came back and, and so you could say that he was an enlightened individual who was now an attorney, trained in London [England], back home, and still saw the inequities as the discussion led of: in my own country, I'm still not in charge.  And so, you know, it was a bloodless, you know, revolution, I guess you could say.  We didn't have to undergo what you saw in America with dogs and so forth.  Again, I think that, A, the British was probably wanting to get rid of and reduce its empire and its cost, so independence came rather quickly.
Story_ID: 360479
Speaker 1: So I will keep moving.  I wanna talk about your school.  Your--can you--the first grade.  Was the first grade Catholic school also?  Were you educated throughout?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were they Jesuits?
Speaker 2: Jesuits.  No.  When you say Jesuits, they're Catholic.  No, they weren't Jesuits, I don't think.  Interesting.  I remember--well, first of all, we don't use grade systems.  We use--I gotta figure that.  We use forms.
Speaker 1: So what, what, what's the form system?
Speaker 2: It's a British system.  Let me just figure--form five because I--when I--in Jamaica, I was in form four and five, which--okay, Nassau [Bahamas]--it's interesting that my first classroom was probably under an almond tree.
Speaker 1: And how old would've you have been?
Speaker 2: I would probably have been five or six.  I remember attending kindergarten at St. Barnabas church [St. Barnabas Parish, Nassau, Bahamas].  And I remember Nassau School [ph.] is there today.  The, the building has changed.  That almond tree is still there.  Wulff Road Primary [ph.] I think it is I went, and I remember our classrooms were underneath the almond tree.  We didn't have cafeterias.  I'm always amazed today with my, my kids in school here and they have buses and cafeterias and so forth, and huge structures.  We had in some cases an open room, and St. Barnabas was just one big open room that was divided.
Speaker 1: And how many people would've--how many levels would've been taught in that one room?  Were you in school with, with kids who were like five years older than you or were you all--
Speaker 2: All the same--
Speaker 1: --you know, you know what I'm asking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the same level because you went from primary to junior and then from junior to secondary and from secondary to high school.  One of the challenges that you have in a society that I grew up in, is that if your parents didn't have money to send you off to school, you typically didn't get a chance to go--in my case, I went to boarding school in Jamaica.  But you went from--because education is free, as most places it is.  But you went from primary school to junior school to secondary school, which were all government schoolings.  And if your parents had their wherewithal, they would put you in private schools.  And I know that it's amazing as the--I went to a school called John F. Kennedy [John F. Kennedy High School; H.O. Nash Junior High School, Nassau, Bahamas] and--which was a, which was a secondary school prior to leaving to go to boarding school in Jamaica.  Again, the American influence come in at a later period of time.  And I believe Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was very fond of the Bahamas and had vacationed in the Bahamas, which is how I'm sure there was some correlation.  But I remember that--you know, growing up in the Bahamas, it was--going to school, it's very, very interesting in the fact that it was a very open community; everybody knew each other.  You know, the typical stuff--if you were bad in school and the teacher gave you a beating, you know that they would tell your parents and they'd give you another beating.  When I went to a school called Oakes Field Junior [Oakes Field Junior High School, Nassau, Bahamas], we had a principal called Miss Keniger and Miss Keniger must've taught probably half of the Bahamas.  And she was well known for the type of beatings she would give you, and I got my fair share of those.  And then, of course--I guess that was Oakes Field Primary [Oakes Field Primary School; Eva Hilton Primary School, Nassau, Bahamas].  Oakes Field Junior, which was right down the road, and I lived in an area called Oakes Field in the Bahamas, which is a--an area on the way to the airport.
Speaker 1: Do you know why they called it Oakes Field?
Speaker 2: Sir Harry Oakes at one point owned all the property in that area.
Speaker 1: And who was he?
Speaker 2: Sir Harry Oakes was a, a British individual that was a large white land owner in the Bahamas and owned large parcels of land and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --obviously they sold off some and that area became known as Oakes Field and it had an airport and so forth and so on.  But when I went to junior school at Oakes Field Junior, it's amazing that during that period of time, remember we were under British rule and, therefore, as a result, the government was a white government.  It's interesting that my junior high school principal was our first--became our first woman--what do you call that?  I just called it a minute ago--governor general, which means that she represented the queen in a commonwealth.  So we didn't have a governor because we're now independent.  Mrs. Ivy Dumont became our first woman, and just maybe three months ago, retired, but she represented the queen.
Story_ID: 360480
Speaker 1: And then, of course, my parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham] sent my brother [Richard Ingraham] and I, the two oldest, to Jamaica to a boarding school.
Speaker 2: What was the name of that school?
Speaker 1: West Indies College [Northern Caribbean University, Mandeville, Jamaica].
Speaker 2: West Indian?
Speaker 1: West Indies College.
Speaker 2: West Indies.
Speaker 1: Today, it is now called Northern Caribbean University.  And West Indies College had an interesting setup.  You can go there from elementary school through high school, through college, and it was a religious school; in this case it was a Seventh-day Adventist school.  Now, I wasn't Seventh-day Adventist.  I got there because I had a relative that was Seventh-day Adventist who had gone to school there and my--and convinced my parents that I would get a great education going to school there versus going to school in London [England].  And so my parents packed us up, put us on an airplane, sent us to Jamaica.  When we got there, the first thing they would do is take your passport and your ticket because for the first month, you probably cried all day because you were, you were a, a high school student in a foreign country.  Even though the diets are to some degree the same, very different, living in a dormitory with kids from all over the Caribbean and all over the country, some as far away as Hong Kong, so it's very strange.  But on hindsight, it was my first taste of internationalism and the people that I would meet that would impact my life.  And today, my--one of the guys that--a number of guys that were from all over the world, El Salvador, from, from Jamaica, Bermuda, the United States--there was a couple of kids from United States.
Speaker 2: Who would you say were the teachers there that made an impact on who you are today?
Speaker 1: Old lady by the name of Miss Keniger.  Miss Keniger was Miss K-I-N, K-I-N no, K-E-N-I-G-E-R.  Miss Keniger was an English literature teacher, no nonsense, made me read a book that I still have today, a book called 'I Love Books' [ph.].  It's a--she made us read.  She made us read English literature because obviously we were of British influence; we think we are still today, drink a lot of tea.  But she had a profound impact, so profound, that on weekends, we would go--she, she lived off the campus.  We would go on weekends and spend our time helping out at the local church, building houses, doing stuff that students would do.  Of course, they build hotels, it's interesting.  But, you know, at that time, again, Miss Keniger was just no nonsense and, and, I, I used to like English literature and English history, and that was what she taught.
Speaker 2: So what type of a student were you?
Speaker 1: She would probably say an awful student.  You know what?  Being a student is tough.  And was I a good student?  Hey, probably--loved school, probably would stay there forever if my parents would keep me there but no--you know, I think I was a kind of average student.  You know, I don't, I don't think I--
Speaker 2: Were you quiet, rambunctious?
Speaker 1: No, I was not quiet (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loud?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  I was--I spent a lot of time trying to figure out how to break and bend the rules, how to get off campus, how probably to do a lot of things I wasn't supposed to do.  I had my share of punishment.
Story_ID: 360481
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you play any sports?  Any music?
Speaker 2: No music.  I played soccer, cricket, and I ran track.  It's--
Speaker 1: All very British or very--
Speaker 2: Oh, they are?
Speaker 1: Well, those sports--cricket, soccer--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I mean, they're not so American.
Speaker 2: Well, as you will remember, we had very little American influence.  And of course in Jamaica, this is in Mandeville, Jamaica, which is in a parish called Manchester.  So this was in a up-scale community in the middle of Jamaica.  And I don't think we had a basketball court on campus.  I don't recall one being there.  I think later on, you know, with Americans coming to school, they brought basketballs and eventually I, I did see basketball go up.  But, I mean, our typical weekends we spent all our time in church, in study hall, and I know on Sunday, we'd run these marathons, you know--that I think about it, you'd run these twenty-five marathons and you'd go, oh, go play soccer and cricket afterwards.  Today, I'd die.  So, but there was nothing else to do.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were attending West Indies College [Northern Caribbean University, Mandeville, Jamaica], did you attend their Seventh-day Adventist church on Saturdays?
Speaker 2: You had no choice.  It was a requirement.  That's what I told you, I spent a lot of time bending the rules.
Story_ID: 360482
Speaker 1: Let me just ask you and you can give me a brief answer.  What's the difference between being Catholic and being Seven-day Advantage [sic. Seventh-day Adventist]?
Speaker 2: Night and day.  Yeah.  The whole way that they create their sermon.  Catholics are very conservative.  That's why today when I go to a, a African American church, a Baptist, I'm absolutely amazed at the activity that goes on--
Speaker 1: At the feeling that they have in the church.
Speaker 2: --at the feeling.  In a Catholic church, you know, it's very docile.  Of course, today it's changing, but growing up in the Catholic church at that time was different.
Speaker 1: And what was the--what's the--what do you call the seven--what do they call it?  They don't call it a mass, the Seven-day Advantage.  What is that service called on Sundays--I mean, on Saturdays?  Does it have a name?
Speaker 2: Service.
Speaker 1: Service?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Sabbath.
Speaker 1: Sabbath.
Speaker 2: Sabbath.
Speaker 1: Now, what is their ritual like?  Is it like the Catholics, kind of quiet and conservative?  Or more like the--
Speaker 2: Seventh-day Adventist, yeah, well they do a lot of singing.
Speaker 1: A lot of singing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They're a little bit--not as conservatives as Catholics, but--
Speaker 1: Not as rambunctious as the Baptists.
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.  Yeah, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--what year then did you finish this Jamaica--the West Indies College [Northern Caribbean University, Mandeville, Jamaica] or did you go through college?
Speaker 2: I actually finished there in 1972, I think.  And--
Speaker 1: So just in time to get back home [Bahamas] for the revolution.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or not the revolution, but--
Speaker 2: For independence.
Speaker 1: Independence.
Speaker 2: Except at that time, I went to the United States.
Story_ID: 337815
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-two [1972], you graduated West Indies College [Northern Caribbean University, Mandeville, Jamaica], which was really your high school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you come to Miami Dade College [Miami-Dade Junior College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida] on a scholarship.
Speaker 2: Track scholarship.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Thought I was an athlete, figured I could run, but boy was I wrong.  You know, you come to the United States and I remember going up to the first training session and I thought, you gotta be kidding me.  Of course, when you look at it, the difference is I was in Florida, hot, humid, coming from Mandeville, Jamaica, cool climate, different weather type.  Sad to say, I got smoked a number of times and then I realized that, hey, this is a problem.  Of course, Coach Richardson [ph.] realized it too.  So I think I lasted probably a year, less than a year on the track team.  One of our guys [Danny Smith], though, went--I don't remember his name, but one of the guys went ahead to be an Olympic athlete that I went to school with in Jamaica.
Story_ID: 337816
Speaker 1: So before we move forward to you finishing school at Miami Dade [Miami-Dade Junior College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida], what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up in Nassau in the Bahamas, today?
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds, and smells takes you right back to being at home?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, obviously living in Miami [Florida], the climate, the weather, sad to say the hurricanes, you know, growing up in the hurricane belt in the Bahamas, some of the foods.
Speaker 1: Which foods?
Speaker 2: Obviously the Bahamian food that the restaurants have.  Now you have a little bit more Bahamian restaurants.
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds?  Some of the music in, in--in Florida, we have a huge Caribbean interest and sometimes you hear the songs, but even today, I pick up the radio stations from Nassau.  I listen to the news.  I read the local paper but I'm in Nassau fairly often.  But, I can always catch the news on my car radio while driving, so.
Story_ID: 337817
Speaker 1: So when you were at Miami Dade College [Miami-Dade Junior College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida]--that was 1972.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972], '73 [1973].  I was there for two years, I believe, two years, a little over two years.
Speaker 1: And, and that was the hotbed of--well, kind of the hotbed of like the Black Panther Party movement here in this country.  What was--what became your awareness of being--like, how did you become aware of what our struggle had been as black Americans versus what yours had been as a black Bahamian?
Speaker 2: At Miami Dade.  Well, I could say I discovered myself and decided to join the Black Panther--no, I didn't.  And it's interesting, that crew of people--at that time when I was there, there was a number of other Bahamian students there.  We had a Bahamian students association.  You know, I don't think we did anything different.  We spent a lot of time with each other, making new friends, getting used to Miami [Florida].  You know, from that crew that was there, I--one of the young ladies that attended school with me there rose to became speaker of the house and--
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: I don't remember her name--Johnson--
Speaker 1: Was she black?
Speaker 2: Black.  Well, yeah, speaker of the house in the Bahamas.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Not here, okay.  Sam Haven [Samuel Haven] rose to become the president of Lloyds Bank [Lloyds Banking International] in the Bahamas.  You know, growing up in Miami, I think it was just a normal college experience for kids.  We had a foreign student association from the Bahamas.  I don't think--and I'm just trying to make sure that we had any, any inkling of--and, of course, we weren't blind.  We, we read well, so we clearly knew that we were different.  And I'll tell you how I knew I was different, because in the Bahamas and Jamaica when you went someplace, you just stuck your finger out and caught a ride, and people pick you up.  As a kid, you know, when we--in, in Jamaica, for example, go back for a moment, in high school [West Indies College; Northern Caribbean University, Mandeville, Jamaica]  when I wanted to go to the beach, the beach was almost a day away because we had to, you know, find the best way there.  And so we would, we would travel from Mandeville [Jamaica] to St. Elizabeth--I'm sorry to, to Discovery Bay [Jamaica].  We would spend the night at the police station, sleep, because we had no money for hotels at that time.  And we walked and we caught thumb rides all the way to the beach and back.  So in Miami, you know, I wanted to go someplace, I'd just go and put my finger--I didn't know how to catch the bus 'cause we didn't have a bus system growing up.  We had jitneys, small bus systems in Jamaica and, of course, in the Bahamas, but I was not comfortable catching the bus.  I would just thumb rides and people said you don't do that in Miami.  And, and I'm sure today it's changed, but that was my reference of that.  "How come this guy didn't pick me up?"  And, of course, you got to know that as you rolled down the highway, for the first time, you saw a lot of people that weren't the same color that you were.
Speaker 1: So that was, I guess, an awakening for you to be in a community in which you were no longer the majority.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  But, you know what?  Again, as students, did, did it have a profound impact?  No.  I, I think--
Speaker 1: Well, what were the defining moments for you when you were at Miami Dade College?  What were they and, and how did they come about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  Anything memorable--at Miami Dade, black students--you know what?  I did join the black student union, but it was an identifiable thing.  And I guess you begin to read and hear a lot of stuff and you figure, you know, geez, you're black, you live in Miami, and you try to blend in, and that was the thing to do.
Speaker 1: Did you find it hard to think of yourself the way they thought of themselves?  Or I don't even know how they thought of themselves, but I'm asking--I guess you dropped your guard and says, okay I'm black, I'm gonna join this black student union.  Why?
Speaker 2: Because of obviously physical identification and, of course, you know, commonality; you didn't stick out.  And when you come to Miami, it's interesting, or United States, but there as a student, you automatically knew that if you were at Miami Dade with thousands of kids and you walked down the hallway for the first time, everybody didn't look like you.  So it became an identifiable thing.  Black students are over there, you gravitate.  You know, we played soccer, because a lot of foreign students there.  And so, you know, that's the--I, I'm thinking of my Miami Dade experience, but that's about it.  There was no big deal.
Story_ID: 337818
Speaker 1: So you left Miami Dade [Miami-Dade Junior College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida] in what year?
Speaker 2: I went to--I believe I was there for two years and then I transferred to FAU [Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida] or FIU [Florida International University, Miami, Florida]--wait a minute, I went to FAU and FIU, Florida Atlantic University.  I went to Florida Atlantic University and that's where I really got a rude awakening in Boca Raton, again in Florida.  But I remember going there--I got some--I got aid to go there and they were again giving me money--I think I was gonna play soccer.  But I remember going there and being the only person of color on the first floor of the dormitory.  I saw another black guy who lived on the second floor and I could not believe my roommate was white; that was strange.  My dorm mates were white and that was the first defining moment.  I remember just having--being in Boca Raton at that point--was interesting at that school.
Speaker 1: Well you'd probably still be the only black person in Boca Raton (laughter).
Speaker 2: Not today.
Speaker 1: No, not today, it's changed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Today--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --today it's changed.  I was--
Speaker 1: Okay, but I was just joking.  Going back to you were the only--your, your dorm mate was white, your roommates were white.
Speaker 2: Everybody was white.
Speaker 1: Everybody was white.  And you were gonna tell me--
Speaker 2: And we found, though, that people just had a problem because you're black.  I couldn't believe it.  I dated a girl at that time--
Speaker 1: Black or white?
Speaker 2: I think she was light-skinned (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Light-skinned black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I dated--
Speaker 1: --or dark-skinned white?
Speaker 2: No, I dated a, a white girl at that point and people had real problems with that.  I remember that in my dorm room, people would, would--somebody threw a rock through my window.  I used to, I used to have a car then, bought a car, and I always had this thing that the police would--the, the, the school police would, you know, harass you where you parked.  And I had a real issue in the theater where we were going to the school theater and somebody said to the young lady, "How come you like niggers?"  And it was interesting and, of course, I went into my car, I had a little baseball bat.  I remember coming back and there was a black police officer, said, "Hey man, you're gonna get yourself in trouble.  You know, just take it easy and why don't you guys just leave?"  And, you know, it was kind of a wakeup for me.  And, of course, I left that school because it's--it had never happened and I just couldn't--I, I, I'm sure I stayed there for a little bit longer, but I know that it was just one of those challenging things in Boca Raton.  And I have very seldom been back to--even to this day to FA--even though I was at a school three weeks ago that's not too far from there.  But Boca Raton, quite frankly, is a very affluent community, a lot of millionaires.  I guess when I was going to school there, it was crazy.
Story_ID: 337819
Speaker 1: Then, I went to FIU; I transferred to FIU and--
Speaker 2: What's FIU?
Speaker 1: Florida International University [Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: And that's where you finished?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Miami [Florida].  I actually--when I left FAU, which is Florida Atlantic University [Boca Raton, Florida], went to FIU, you--I spent a lot of time taking classes, never quite graduating because I just figured, you'll be a student forever.  Because I started off--I thought I eventually wanted to be a, a political science major studying Middle East and North African affairs, had no idea nor did I--and business of course--nor did I study for the hospitality industry.
Speaker 2: You did not?
Speaker 1: No.  People--you know, it's interesting.  I studied business, political science.  I, I found the Middle Eastern and North, North African affairs, and that's what I thought I wanted to do.  Figured I'd go home [Bahamas] and become, I guess, an ambassador somewhere.
Story_ID: 337820
Speaker 1: What was your first real job in the United States after you left Florida International University [Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: I like to tell people I was a dishwasher, no.  Actually, my first real job--I think I was a dishwasher.  I think I, I wanted a job and I, I went to work--all during school, I went to work at the International House of Pancakes [IHOP] as a dishwasher.  I actually thought I was being hired as a bus boy and then the very--I caught the bus--how'd I get to work?  I probably caught the bus.  Did I have a car?  How'd I get to work?  Actually, when I was at Miami Dade [Miami-Dade Junior College; Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida], I think I went to, to get a job at IHOP as a bus boy.  And then, the next day they said, "Well you're washing dishes."  Well, the third day I didn't go back to work 'cause I figured that's something I didn't wanna do.  I then--I, I went to work, I went to work for the phone company and my first job at, at the phone company--this is interesting.  I was there for a couple of months, but I was a overseas operator and--where you had the cords that you plug into the board, and that was my first job.  And of course I worked for the phone company for a number of years.
Speaker 1: How many years did you work for the phone company?
Speaker 2: I was there part-time, and then I would work during the day and went to school--no, no, wait a minute--I worked during the day and went to school in the night.  Yeah, that's right.  I worked there for almost nine years.
Story_ID: 337821
Speaker 1: So how did you get into the hospitality industry?
Speaker 2: It's interesting.  My last stint at the, at the phone company, I was in marketing and, of course, I'd studied business.  And just looking at marketing trends, and I had this idea that people always went to the Caribbean for vacation.  I had this idea that in the Bahamas, we came to Miami [Florida], but we didn't come to vacation.  We came to Miami to shop.  So I was talking to a group of friends and I said, "Listen guys.  I've got this great idea to sell packages to Bahamians, travel agents in the Bahamas so they can come to Miami."  And I remember one of the guys, Tony Wright [ph.] who today is one of my partners, very good friend, saying, that's bizarre, but of course he was a Bahamian.  His parents were Bahamian but he was born in the United States.  And I said, if I can raise some money, I can create a--and I went out and had some friends invest in my idea to develop a travel program for Bahamians coming from the Bahamas to Miami--
Speaker 1: To shop.
Speaker 2: --to shop.  So unlike a vacation, I didn't need a beachfront hotel.  I needed some place to be near a shopping area.  I needed them to rent a car.  And at that time, I convinced the--it may have been Alamo [Alamo Rent A Car; Alamo], maybe Dollar [Dollar Rent A Car, Inc.], one of the car rental companies, to give me a cheap rate on a car, and I put a package together to sell.  Come to Miami for $99 for the day, and you get a car and you have--you spend the day shopping.  And at that time, I believe that that was my first foray in looking at tourism.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh God.
Speaker 1: Because I wanna put that in--that's, that's a good one.
Speaker 2: The first--
Speaker 1: When you put this package together.
Speaker 2: What year was that?  Geez, I have to go back.
Speaker 1: Is that the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Had to be--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty--'70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: --late, late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Not the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Nineties [1990s].  Yeah, maybe you're right.  In the '80s [1980s].  I can go back and figure it out.
Story_ID: 337822
Speaker 1: And then of course as I began to look at travel, I began to notice that there was a huge market.  And, again, the bulk of Bahamians coming here were black Bahamians, and I began to think about a market here called minority markets, black markets, and so forth.  And what started off as a, as a--trying to build a company to, to take in Bahamian travelers here, I began to look at the U.S. marketplace, and at that time, I was living in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] in Hollywood [Florida] maybe.  But began to think about, gee, what about getting black people to come to Florida?
Speaker 2: The United States black people to come to Florida?  Or?
Speaker 1: The United States black people to come to Florida.  Because--
Speaker 2: Was--were black people not visiting Florida at a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, remember--
Speaker 2: --great rate?
Speaker 1: --in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s], there were no efforts to go after the sort of expenditure that black people were doing in traveling.  And so we began to look at--I discovered that when I created the program for the Bahamas, that it had some limitations, X amount of people traveling, a lot of people travel.  And so as an extension, I started doing other--looking at developing small travel programs here in the U.S.  And I'm trying to remember how I became--because even during--was I doing that part-time?  I think in the beginning I started doing it part-time and eventually struck out on my own.  But, let me just make sure.  Because once I started the travel program, started looking at the market from an African American perspective traveling, and then trying to convince the convention and visitors bureau [Broward County Convention and Visitors Bureau; Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention and Visitors Bureau, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] first in Fort Lauderdale that you ought to look at to see how you can bring more black people to Broward County, Fort Lauderdale--
Story_ID: 337823
Speaker 1: That had to be--I'm trying to remember when the--we had the first tourism boycott.
Speaker 2: That was in 1993.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-three [1993].
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if that was the first one, but that was the one that happened as a result of Nelson Mandela--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --coming.  Was that the first one?
Speaker 1: That was the first one.
Speaker 2: So that was 1993.
Speaker 1: Perfect.  Then, let me, let me go back then.  So prior to 1993, I had been working into the tourism field.
Speaker 2: So you may be right.  It may be in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay, go ahead.  So you'd been working in the tourism--
Speaker 1: In the tourism field working with black groups to put on conventions and meetings.  And that, that's a good point how you--that's good how you reminded me.  And when--so in addition to developing my program for travel, then I decided that let me expand this.  So I begin to look at--and how it germinated is that when groups--when people started coming over, people started saying, "Well, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Ingraham], I've got a group of people that want to come to Miami [Florida].  Can you find us a hotel?"  And of course after you're in the business for quite a while, you said, gee, if I can do this in the Bahamas, let me see if can do it here in the U.S.  And so I started working with groups, the black firefighters, the black, black narcotics agents, creating meetings for them and conventions, and so forth.  And I remember one year right before the tourism boycott when H.T. Smith had called for the tourism boycott, and I'm sure I'm missing some things, I was trying to put--and I believe it's the black firefighters in Miami, the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] was coming into Miami and I remember that we could not pull out and support the boycott because we had an agreement with the hotel, and the group would be sued.  So what I did, working with the association, is to--I--we, we said, all right, since we have to do business with the hotel, we'd move the lot of our business outside of the hotel to black restaurants and other black small facilities that can handle, not clearly understanding with the exception of a place called Miami (unclear) Miami Nights.  It was a collection of club entertainment facility that we put all of our events there.  We--it was black managed; it wasn't black owned, but it was away from the beach.  So all during that time, we were--I was honing my skills, learning about tourism and practicing that I essentially became a consultant for the Broward County Convention and Visitors Bureau [Greater Fort Lauderdale Convention and Visitors Bureau, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] to help them develop.  Because during the tourism boycott, everybody began to be sensitive towards blacks and black travel.  All of the business that left Miami either went to Palm Beach County [Florida] or came up to Broward County [Florida], which is Fort Lauderdale [Florida].  And so, therefore, it created an opportunity for me to begin to dig deeper and to help the cities identify how to get more African American business.
Story_ID: 337824
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So let's just go back because I want people--I wanna get your perspective on the boycott because you are the first person that I have talked to, to that knew--that knows about it from the inside because you were in Miami [Florida].  And although I say late '80s [1980s], I'm thinking late '80s [1980s] were yesterday.  When I think about it, that's almost twenty years ago.
Speaker 2: Quite a long time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, so what happened?
Speaker 2: The, the--well what happened as a result of the boycott--
Speaker 1: No, but what, what brought the boycott on?
Speaker 2: Well obviously--
Speaker 1: I mean was it, was it the Nelson Mandela?
Speaker 2: Nelson Mandela being snubbed by the elected officials because he supported and associated with Cuba, Cuba, with Castro [Fidel Castro], and people like Gaddafi [Muammar Gaddafi], but--and so when he visited Miami, instead of them welcoming him to Miami, they snubbed him.
Speaker 1: And who were they?
Speaker 2: The elected officials, primarily the Cuban elected officials and the City of Miami elected officials.
Speaker 1: So they were city officials that snubbed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) City officials.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And so a group in Miami led by H.T. Smith and Marilyn Holifield.
Speaker 1: And who were H.T. Smith and Marilyn Holifield?
Speaker 2: H.T. Smith was an attorney, still is today, and Marilyn Holifield was an attorney with a, with a firm called Holland and Knight [Holland and Knight LLP].  As a matter of fact, she was the first black partner, woman partner, with Holland and Knight.  But they led a group to ask the city to reverse their snubbing of Mr. Nelson Mandela and to give him the welcome fitting of a visiting head of state or dignitary.  The powers that be refused.  And so, they looked around to see how could they make them pay?  And one of the things is the tourism was a big business and H.T. Smith and the group decided that they will ask black people not to come to Miami.  They will ask black conventionists not to come to Miami.
Speaker 1: So if I were a part of any organization that was having a convention in Miami, didn't have to be a black convention--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they would ask me to stay away being black and let the convention go on, but all the black people involved in the convention should stay away.
Speaker 2: Well, they even asked conventions because a lot of white conventions adhered to the boycott.  A lot of white groups supported the, the, the issue of the snubbing of Nelson Mandela.
Story_ID: 337825
Speaker 1: But then we began--when, when that issue came up and H.T. Smith and the boycott group called Boycott Miami began to look at, gee, there's a lot of inequities in this industry of tourism.  There weren't any black managers.  There were very few blacks at any level in the industry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When you say managers, you mean hotel managers?
Speaker 1: Hotel managers.
Speaker 2: What about travel agents?
Speaker 1: There--I'm sure--there were some, but I don't--we tried--I shouldn't say we--but the boycott focused on businesses that directly--that were owned by whites, which were the owners at that point, and directly had a huge impact on bringing and servicing people to Miami [Florida], primarily the hotels.
Speaker 2: Which is why they would come to you and ask you not to have your black firefighters come.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Because you were, in essence, a travel agent--a package (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A meeting planner.
Speaker 2: A meeting planner.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A meeting planner planning conventions and they were into the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] and H.T. Smith went all over the country.  And one of the events, I--at that time, I was a member of the National Association of Black Meeting Planners [National Coalition of Black Meeting Planners], and I remember that H.T. Smith came to our group in San Francisco [California] and played the video calling, calling for the boycott about groups--
Speaker 2: What's the video?
Speaker 1: The Boycott Miami.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Why shouldn't you come to Miami?  Yes, they snubbed Mandela [Nelson Mandela], but as you look at it, there was nothing for African Americans there.  You know, they--there weren't any opportunities, it was doing no business.  And let me just say this, H.T. Smith and that effort of that boycott was the defining moment for me and for what we do today in taking stock in ownership because he was the first group to say, "Why don't we have black-owned hotels as part of the boycott settlement?"  And so, therefore, he said to the City of Miami Beach [Florida] that you should have a black-owned hotel.
Speaker 2: And they didn't have one black-owned hotel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They didn't have one--
Speaker 2: --in Miami Beach?
Speaker 1: --black-owned hotel in Miami Beach.  Now, today I always make this reference, is that when you talk about hotels post-integration, black people could not stay at Miami Beach, whether you were Muhammad Ali, whether you were Sammy Davis, Jr., you could perform on the beach, but after your performance or your fight was over, you had to go over the bridge into the Liberty City [Miami, Florida], Overtown [Miami, Florida] and you stayed at the St. John hotels [sic. Sir John Hotel, Miami, Florida], and that happens all over the country.  In the case of--you know, black people at that point just weren't allowed to sit on the beach, so part of the boycott was we want a hotel, we want scholarship money for kids to go to school, and they had a whole list of demands.  And I know that when I met H.T. Smith, I was so impressed with the concept that I said, "Well, H.T., Miami is not the only city that did not--that don't have anything for black people.  Fort Lauderdale [Florida] is just as bad."  And, mind you, I lived in Fort Lauderdale.  So I invited H.T. Smith to come up to Fort Lauderdale to speak to a group that I'd pulled together of local people and we met at the Elks.
Story_ID: 337826
Speaker 1: So you were telling me about bringing H.T. [H.T. Smith] down to Fort Lauderdale [Florida].
Speaker 2: Bringing H.T. in, have him speak to a local group and said, "Gee, H.T., if you can make that sort of impact in Miami [Florida], can you help us do the same thing in Fort Lauderdale?"  I remember what H.T. said to me.  He said, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Ingraham], you are in this business.  You can help us understand the business, and as a direct result, what we're doing is trying to help people like you that can't get an opportunity."  And today, H.T. and I are still friends, as a matter of fact, and, you know, what we've done is we've put an H.T. Smith scholarship fund together with NABHOOD [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.].  Because what he did in, in calling for that boycott and clearly understanding what you should get in return--and say in a hotel--I mean think about it.  No hotels in Miami at that point.  No branded hotels that black people owned.  And so--and then having a hotel in Miami Beach [Florida].  Goodness, if you look at South Beach [Miami Beach, Florida] today and what it does in terms of numbers, it's incredible.  And, of course, what came out of that is the first African American owned hotel owned by Donahue Peebles [HistoryMaker R. Donahue Peebles] built at a cost of $60--67 million and sold three years later at $125 million.
Speaker 1: But what was most impressive about that, it was the Royal Palm Crowne Plaza [Royal Palm Crowne Plaza Resort; Royal Palm South Beach Miami, Miami, Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Which is a hotel that came about.
Speaker 1: Which is a hotel that came about.  Is that the--like, it is beachfront.  It (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 14th [sic.]--
Speaker 1: --is a fabulous hotel--
Speaker 2: --and Ocean [Drive] right on the beach.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But, you know--
Speaker 1: I was most impressed with that, though, that they--that that could be pulled off.  And when they told me, oh a black man put this together, I'm like, you're kidding?
Speaker 2: Donahue Peebles.  Not only that, he's building a $300 million development less than three miles away on the beach.  And guess what?  Again, thanks to H.T. Smith is that when Donahue looked at the hotel business, he had never built a hotel his entire life.
Speaker 1: And he was the first black to own a luxury resort in the Miami Beach area.
Speaker 2: First black person to own a luxury resort.  Subsequently, when he built the--
Speaker 1: That was--go ahead, I'm sorry--when he built--
Speaker 2: --when he built the, The Bath Club [Miami Beach, Florida], he was the first black person to join The Bath Club in Miami Beach.  Today, he owns it and is putting a $300 million deal there.  So I, I think that, you know, the tourism boycott started me thinking of how we can look at this industry.  And I remember saying when H.T. Smith started talking about hotels, how come we don't have hotels?
Speaker 1: And what was his answer?  What was your answer?  What was the, what was the answer?
Speaker 2: Nobody knew.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you discover after this research?
Speaker 2: After the research, I discovered that we were spending a lot of money, meeting--
Speaker 1: Seven point five billion annually.
Speaker 2: --meeting--and today it's now $40 billion annually in travel.  But I discovered that we were spending a lot of money meeting all over this country and had nothing to show except a memory once we left that city.
Story_ID: 337827
Speaker 1: At that time, I'd started doing--I, I'd gone to Washington, D.C.  And by the way, prior to that, I'd gone to visit--to do a meeting at the Howard Inn on Howard University [Washington, D.C.] campus.
Speaker 2: Is it black owned?
Speaker 1: It was owned by Howard University at that point in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought--okay, I was confusing it with the Howard Johnson, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: The Howard Inn.
Speaker 1: The Howard Inn used to be called the Harambee House [Washington, D.C.] owned by Howard University.  It's no longer there but I remember having a meeting there with Romeo Spaulding who at that time was the president of the international association of black firefighters [International Association of Black Professional Firefighters], and saying to Romeo that, you know, "Miami [Florida]--we're gonna have to make a change, dah, dah, dah, dah."  But when I--I, I happened to be there on a Sunday and it was the first time since living in the U.S. that I'd seen black people middle age having breakfast in a hotel, even though it's a small hotel.  And so, as I begin to work in the field of meeting planning and study tourism and subsequently became a consultant for Fort Lauderdale [Florida] right after the boycott--as a matter of fact, right when the boycott happened in Miami, Fort Lauderdale and other cities began to look and examine their plan and put together at that time a black committee who had a budget of thirty thousand dollars, which they used to hire me to help them not only understand tourism, to get more tourism in the city, but also to figure out how we can create an infrastructure that local business can make money from tourism.
Speaker 2: How can you create one?
Speaker 1: Easy.  One is through ownership, but more importantly is looking at restaurants that were black, having them understand the convention business when we have what we call FAM trips.  Instead of just taking them to the hotels in other white-owned facilities, let's take 'em into a--to Betty's [For Lauderdale, Florida], which was a black-owned restaurant in the city that had done extremely well.  Let's take 'em to the Caribbean part of town where they had Jamaican restaurant.  And so I started doing FAM trips and meetings.  Let's advertise in black publications.  At that time, there was the Black Traveler [Black Traveler, LLC] owned by Sol Herbert [HistoryMaker Solomon Herbert] who today now has Black Meetings and Tourism who is--who at that time was my friend.  Today, he is one of my founding partners at the National Association of Black Hotels [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.].
Story_ID: 337828
Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask you this.  With, with black ownership, why has the move been to--and I'm just asking and you can correct me if I'm wrong.  Why has the move been to put, to put black owners in mainstream hotels as opposed to putting let's say a black hotel in a Caribbean neighborhood to whereas you move that, you know, that FAM vacation, they--they're right there in the black community?  I mean--
Speaker 2: It's a good point.  The typical is, the model for success in business is to create a good business model, number one.  Number two is that if I put a hotel--if I put Andy's Hotel in the black neighborhood in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], chances are a lot of folks aren't gonna come, be they're black and white.  Because at the end of the day, travelers need some basic comforts.  They like the ambiance of a great hotel, love great furniture, and the most important thing is that they will never be able to find me because I couldn't afford to spend enough money to tell a guy in Detroit [Michigan] that there are three black hotels that call Andy, Tom, and Tony's Hotel.  However, with a partnership with Hilton [Hilton Worldwide] and Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.], I tap into an existing structure, I create wealth in the black community through ownership, and I'm able to change the whole industry by hiring and buying black people.  And for the first time, other folks can see that if I invest in a hotel that have a history, my investment is a little bit safer, even still risky, but it's a little bit safer to make money.  If I do it in Joe's Motel, chances are I'm not gonna do real well.  So, you know, yes we aren't putting hotels in any areas where it doesn't make sense, but when you look at the Hilton hotel--Hampton Inn [Hampton Inn and Suites Boston Crosstown Center] in Roxbury, Boston [Massachusetts], built by an African American [HistoryMaker Kirk Anthony Sykes], built in an area where for five or ten or fifteen years, the property stood vacant because of the riots that they had that nobody wanted.  Today, it's a thriving $140 million development built by an African American that about 80 percent--82 percent of the people in that hotel are hired from that immediate neighborhood, changing the whole demographic.  So, yes, there's a different model that works.  The model that works is that to work with the major brands, the Hiltons and the Marriotts, to build a hotel that is black owned.  Now, why is it black owned?  When the Royal Palm Crowne Plaza [Royal Palm Crowne Plaza Resort; Royal Palm South Beach Miami, Miami, Florida] opened in Miami Beach [Florida], it had a black general manager.  No other hotel in Miami Beach had that.  It also did more business with black people than all the hotels combined--I mean, more business with black firms than all the hotels combined on Miami Beach because it had a black general manager, it had a black director of operation, it had a black sales manager, and you still got the same experience as you walked in the Crowne Plaza [Hamilton Crowne Plaza] in Washington, D.C. or New York [New York] or Miami Beach because the quality was there.
Story_ID: 337829
Speaker 1: Let me ask you before we move on.  I wanna just talk about Miami [Florida] a little more because you had been able to secure the black film festival [American Black Film Festival, Miami Beach, Florida], which usually took place in Acapulco [Mexico].  How did that come about?  How as a tourist planner did you get them to come from there to Miami?
Speaker 2: Very easy, because once we began to look at hotel ownership, I knew that we had to find these institutions that black go--that black people attended that had a lot of disposable income that were two things.  They were either potential investors or just visitors.  I had--I knew [HistoryMaker] Byron Lewis who at that time and still is the owner and president of UniWorld [UniWorld Group, Inc.] who owned the film festival, had spoken with Byron Lewis about the black tourism market.  Obviously, he was an ad agency and he, he had, had studied and looked at the black market.  And of course, when I was a consultant for Fort Lauderdale [Florida] and then subsequently became the tourism consultant for the island of St. Maarten, the Dutch side, again, helping them to understand African American, attract African American business, I said to Byron, "Why not consider going to Miami?"  In the past, he had no interest because he wanted to create a cool destination.  He thought most black people wanted to go someplace for vacation and so he had looked at the Bahamas, had looked at some other Caribbean destinations and had, had settled in Acapulco.  Well, we built a hotel.  I knew that in order to continue this whole thing going with hotel ownership, that that Royal Palm hotel [Royal Palm Crowne Plaza Resort; Royal Palm South Beach Miami, Miami, Florida] had to be successful, it had to be talked about by everything in the market.  And, quite frankly, we did more interviews at that hotel about that hotel, and according to the Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau [Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau, Miami, Florida], that hotel got more publicity, more impressions that they can ever afford to buy.  And so when I approached Byron, I said, "Byron, would you consider coming to Miami or Fort Lauderdale?" He said, "No."  I said, "Well, we have a black owned hotel and we will give you some incentives to come to our city."  And in fairness to Miami and Fort Lauderdale, is I asked Miami and I asked Fort Lauderdale to accompany me to Acapulco to talk to Byron Lewis.  Commissioner Eggelletion [Josephus Eggelletion] at that time who was--was he an elected official?  Commissioner Eggelletion would--had--was a black county commissioner and Karen Jackson, the senior vice president of Greater Miami Convention, and I flew to Acapulco.  And I said to Byron, here is the difference.  You're going to come to a black-owned hotel.  And he said, "You're kidding?"  Thus, the black film festival came in.  In fairness, I had him come, come, come back down to Miami and Fort Lauderdale.  Obviously, I had somebody from Fort Lauderdale there, so I said, you should visit Fort Lauderdale.  He didn't like Fort Lauderdale, felt that blacks wouldn't be comfortable there.  There was nothing black there, but he felt that he can build a concession once he saw the hotel, met the principals.  And here's the beauty; once you become an owner of these tourism facilities, you can now go to the people in your city that market these things and say, listen, I'm now a stakeholder.  Let's turn a change.  We encouraged the owner of that hotel to become active in the city convention and visitors bureau.  For the first time, Mr. Peebles [HistoryMaker R. Donahue Peebles] became the first black chairman of the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau.  That changed the complexion.  It allowed us to get more help from the bureau in recruiting more African American business.
Story_ID: 337830
Speaker 1: Then let me just flip that on the other side.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Why is it that we as African Americans and I'm including myself and you and everybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Say again--I didn't understand the question.
Speaker 1: Why is it that--let me--why is it that then the black kids, students, still are made to feel uncomfortable at spring break in Miami [Florida]?  I still don't see a welcoming face for black college students to spring break in Miami.  Why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think Miami tries to do a good job at welcoming all visitors including black visitors.  I think the fact is that--
Speaker 1: Well, I'm talking about the overall face of it.  It still appears that black students are not welcome in Florida, I should say.
Speaker 2: Because we don't have the sort of widespread ownership of a product that can cater.  You know, quite frankly, when you walk into a hotel and you see a friendly face, as when you and I met, that conference that you talk about (unclear), when I first started attending that conference, there were three black people that attend that out of eighteen hundred people.  And so, you're right.  You and I spoke because we had a commonality.  We had a commonality because we were both black.
Speaker 1: But there were only six black people probably total of the thirteen or eighteen hundred that were there when you and I were there.
Speaker 2: Oh, no question.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it's not--
Speaker 2: But I'm happy to report this year, though, that it's probably now eleven or twelve black people there--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --that attend.  But no, in fairness that I, I don't believe Miami consciously make an effort to make the experience of the visitor that are black unpleasant.  I think the nature of the make of that market indicates that there's not a whole lot of black people that own anything, so you can't create programs whether you're a restaurant or a night club or a hotel.  And so, therefore, the tolerance level because of the experience of people that live in Miami, that work in Miami, may have some negative condonations[AB1] of us as black people and, therefore, expect the worse.  They expect a Freaknik [Atlanta, Georgia] and some of the other bad experiences they've, they've had.  And so that's a trickle down.  Yes, is Miami trying to improve?  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So when you see something like a Freaknik, like the Atlanta [Georgia] spring break party, what do you think?  You see it on TV just as everyone else in the country does.  Do you look at it and you say--and you hang your head in shame?  Do you look at it and say, oh, we just need black venues for, for, for black people to participate in a greater role and have a better experience.  How do you look at the incident of Freaknik?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I, I think that I look at any event--if I invited those same folks in my living room, would I want them to act in some of the--with some of the behavior that they've had?  And the answer would've been, I would require them or require of them to--if you're visiting my city, act as if I'm visiting your house.  And, you're right.  Some of the impressions that we see on TV may not be completely fair or reflective of a whole race of people.  And I think that's what happens because, you know, I hosted the FUBU Y2G event in St. Maarten.  I didn't have a bad experience.  I hosted Impact Super Summit in Disney--at Disney World [Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida].  I didn't have that experience.  I think black people by and large--and by the way, I don't feel embarrassed because one black person pretends to be pretty stupid about their behavior.  And I think that, yes, black people ought not to be ashamed of that.  I think there's some people out there, whether you're white, black or otherwise--
Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask you--go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Sure.  But my point is that when I see those, I see them as opportunities, that if I can get the best out of them and create an environment that we would say as we did with, with FUBU Y2G, here's what we're going to tolerate.  Period.  I don't want anybody to come in any one of the hotels that we have and destroy it.  I don't want you then to destroy the other guests.  And by the way, the hotels that we own may be black owned, but they welcome all guests.
Story_ID: 337831
Speaker 1: FUBU Y2G.  What was it?
Speaker 2: FUBU Y2G was a huge party sponsored by FUBU, Def Jam [Def Jam Recordings, New York, New York], and the whole industry, kicking off an event in the Caribbean.  All the celebrities came down.  The ET did a couple of shows, Star Jones and Vivica Fox [Vivica A. Fox] did some shows, but FUBU wanted to hold a concert and celebrate the, the success, and [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales, at that time I believe was with Vibe, approached me and asked if I can put together a deal for them in the Caribbean.  And at that, at that time, I was, I was a consultant for the island of St. Maarten so, therefore, I picked that, St. Maarten.  I think they spent a million dollars on that deal.
Story_ID: 337832
Speaker 1: So you are also the president of the National Association of Black Hotel Owners and Operators and Developers [sic. National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.] currently.
Speaker 2: Founder and president, yes.
Speaker 1: Founder and president.  So you founded that company in what year?
Speaker 2: Let's see, 2000--it's 2006.  Ninety--I think we started the idea around '97 [1997].  We began--right after the boycott, we began to discuss it and remember I was doing multicultural tourism conferences, and out of that germinated an idea to own hotels.  So I would think [HistoryMaker] Solomon Herbert and I, who is the publisher of Black Meetings and Tourism, probably talked about this and I, I have the history somewhere.  I should remember this.
Speaker 1: Well, can you send us a copy of the history?
Speaker 2: I certainly can.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But go ahead and tell me what you know.
Speaker 2: But--yeah, we started it around ninety--when was the boycott again?
Speaker 1: Ninety-three [1993]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --it started.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I don't know when it ended, though.
Speaker 2: It ended somewhere around ninety--I think it ended--lasted four or five years, and it ended when we had an agreement for the hotel.
Speaker 1: Wow.  You guys held out for an agreement for the hotel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's how the hotel was built in Royal Palm [Royal Palm Crowne Plaza Resort; Royal Palm South Beach Miami, Miami, Florida].  The Royal Palm Hotel was a result of the boycott settlement.
Speaker 1: You said it was a result, but I didn't realize it was a direct result.
Speaker 2: Direct result.  A $10 million low interest--below ground rent on the property and a, and a $10 million loan that we got--
Speaker 1: Where did the other $64 million come from or where--
Speaker 2: Financing.
Speaker 1: Financing.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Financing and partnering with (unclear) who--as an investment.  And a group--I mean, there were several attempts made from a local standpoint to build that hotel right after the boycott was finished.  It couldn't happen, didn't happen until Donahue [HistoryMaker R. Donahue Peebles] came in and hired and, and a lot of other companies bidded on the project, but Donahue won in a partnership with InterContinental [Intercontinental Hotels Group PLC] and that's why it became a Crowne Plaza.
Speaker 1: So you--in 1997, then, you founded NABHOOD [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997], I founded NABHOOD.  We officially incorporate--incorporated I believe in 2001.
Speaker 1: So, September 11th, into that same year?
Speaker 2: No.  September 11th--
Speaker 1: Was--happened in 2001.
Speaker 2: It did?
Speaker 1: September 2001 was September 11th.
Speaker 2: That's when we had the--
Speaker 1: The World Trade Center [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: So you were formed before that.
Speaker 2: Before that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm almost sure we were.
Speaker 1: So, 1999.
Speaker 2: Probably 1999.  No, 2001.  No, 1999 I think we were formed.  A group of us--well, first as I began to talk to people, I said--I began to ask the question and to look at the data that we were meeting all over the country.  And I remember talking to a very influential individual, head of a major organization in this country including an industry organization, and I said to him, why can't we look at buying and building our own hotels?  And I said, you know, we're working with Donahue Peebles to build a hotel in Miami Beach [Florida] and we hope that you guys will support this hotel.  And his, his response said, "You folks will only have--," and he said it kind of distastefully, but, "You'll only have one hotel.  What do you expect for us to do?  Keep meeting at the same hotel every year?"  Well, that was back then.  Today, we're now close to two hundred hotels and our game plan as we said last year said in the next five years, we'll have an additional five hundred hotels and we're well on our way.
Speaker 1: Black owned.
Speaker 2: Black owned.
Story_ID: 337833
Speaker 1: But, okay, let me just--tell me how it works, though.  So R. Donahue [HistoryMaker R. Donahue Peebles] built the hotel [Royal Palm Crowne Plaza Resort; Royal Palm South Beach Miami, Miami, Florida], but then he sells the hotel.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But that hotel then no longer remains a, a black-owned hotel--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --but it has this reputation as having been one, so in the public's eye, it still carries on--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the same?  No?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not.
Speaker 1: No?  No, no.  Okay.
Speaker 2: We--our website [for the National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.] will give you a list of all the black-owned hotels around the country, but no.  You know, buying a hotel is like any business.  You buy and you sell depending on the market, but let me tell you what it did.  Today, there's another multi- the project will probably exceed $100 million hotel being contemplated for Miami [Florida].  One of the small investors in Donahue hotel is leading that chart to build another hotel in Overtown [Miami, Florida], of all places, the center of black life years ago.  Now, suffice to say that Overtown with the growth of Miami in the downtown area design center is growing by leaps and bounds.  Off Biscayne Boulevard [U.S. Route 1] and that area will be more hotels than you can ever imagine.  But when Donahue sells as when Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] buys and sells, anybody buys and sells, it's a business transaction.  And the beauty is that Donahue is now looking for other hotel opportunities, both domestically and internationally.  So while in some cases the public may see him selling that hotel, what I, what I hope for someday is to see maybe three or four hotels on the Miami Beach [Florida] corridor because it's a very successful tourism destination.  Now, is it expensive to buy and build a hotel in Miami Beach, absolutely.  And, but if we can make a profit as Mr. Peebles did in his sale, that all he did is sell one asset to buy another.  I mean, take for example the hotel that's being built downtown--I'm sorry, on the beach in Fort Lauderdale, close to 200 or $300 million W Hotel and Residence [W Fort Lauderdale, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] built by Lawrence Duprey or the hotel [Hampton Inn and Suites Boston Crosstown Center] that was built in Boston, Massachusetts, $140 million hotel built by Kirk Sykes [HistoryMaker Kirk Anthony Sykes], all African Americans, all after Donahue Peebles.  So, yes, we're gonna continue to buy and sell hotels.
Speaker 1: So he opened--he helped open doors with that hotel?
Speaker 2: I think he clearly indicated to people--
Speaker 1: They could do it.
Speaker 2: --that they can do it.  Just like Bob Johnson just bought almost one hundred hotels at a cost of $1.6 billion.  He went out last year and raised $313 million.  Guess what?  People were thinking I can't do that.  I mean, today in this hotel downstairs from us, I've got fifteen to twenty Hispanics and African American women and men sitting in a room working with Hilton hotel corporation [Hilton Worldwide] teaching them how they can become hotel owners.  Ten years ago, would we do that?  Absolutely not.  Today, it becomes another strategy for us to continue to expand the market.
Story_ID: 337834
Speaker 1: You spoke about Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson], but I'd like to speak about his wife [HistoryMaker Sheila C. Johnson] if you--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --if you're with me, because she's done what is considered to be the first African American woman to take on such a project.
Speaker 2: Well, she's building the Salamander Inns [sic. Salamander Resort and Spa, Middleburg, Virginia] right in Virginia right outside Washington, D.C., which is gonna be an upscale--
Speaker 1: Spa?
Speaker 2: --spa, as you know that are becoming very popular, exquisite restaurant, and it's going to be a very high end hospitality hotel establishment that I think will grow--will do very well.  My understanding is that's gonna be probably the first of many Salamander Inns that she hopes to build.  I certainly think that it's a great market and I think she'll do well.
Speaker 1: So let me ask you about this, then, what about branding?  If Mr. Johnson has 100 hotels, is it possible for him to start branding 'em, to put his name on them so that they all become like BET [Black Entertainment Television] hotel?  Like--he--like what he did for BET. Is that in the realm or, or what, what about that?
Speaker 2: I think, I think--I'm sure Mr. Johnson may have--may think, but I know my chairman [for National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.], Mike Roberts [Michael Roberts], that started off with one hotel a couple years ago when we brought him into the business, today he has five hotels, and he had talked about doing the same thing.  But, I mean, let's not forget, you know, yes, we're building a legacy and, and that's the reason why we got into the hotel business, because we wanted to create wealth in the black community.  Now, have we picked up some world class partners with Hilton [Hilton Worldwide] and Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.]?  Absolutely.  Now, do we want to continue to, to establish our brand?  We probably do.  But at this point, you know, I don't think you're gonna find many people looking at that because at the end of the day, it takes a tremendous amount of capital to begin to turn and develop another brand.  I mean, think about it.  Hilton and Marriott are almost like household words, you know, and I think that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're gonna stop here and--
Story_ID: 337835
Speaker 1: I'm just gonna start with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] report card, came out and ranked the Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.] as the number one hotel with minority owned properties, I guess?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If you can give me some of the cities, states in which these properties exist, who are some of the people who own these properties?
Speaker 2: Sure.  NAACP report card very significant because now the hotel industry is really beginning to look seriously at ownership and other supplier diversity initiatives, but important, they don't wanna be on the bad side of the NAACP.  For us and the association [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.] as owners, it's a good thing.  Cities, Miami [Florida] obviously with Donahue Peebles [HistoryMaker R. Donahue Peebles] is no longer there, but Fort Lauderdale [Florida], Chicago [Illinois], one of Bob Johnson's [Robert L. Johnson] hotels coming up in Norfolk, Virginia, Daytona Beach [Florida], you know, Detroit [Michigan], Bakersfield [California], Modesto [California], Annapolis [Maryland], Washington, D.C.  What is happening with the industry is that the market is great.  There's a great opportunity to buy hotels.  There's a lot of money in the market.  Mr. Johnson went out and raised a lot of money.  Kirk Sykes [HistoryMaker Kirk Anthony Sykes], who built a hotel [Hampton Inn and Suites Boston Crosstown Center] in Boston [Massachusetts] raised a lot of money.  But today, you know, Lawrence Duprey, building a $300 million hotel in Fort Lauderdale, W Hotel resident [W Fort Lauderdale, Fort Lauderdale, Florida].  Hank Thomas [HistoryMaker Henry "Hank" Thomas] owns three hotels, just broke ground on the fourth hotel.  And Hank Thomas, an interesting case, guy sat on my board of directors, but he was the original Freedom Rider, the thirteenth freedom rider in this country, first person, his family to own a business, first person's family to go to college.  Today, he's making a difference employing people.  Mike Roberts [Michael Roberts], my chairman, started one hotel; he's up to five hotels.  But one of our best cases is James Guillory, a twenty-seven, twenty-eight-year-old accountant, Houston, Texas, three years ago opened up his first Hilton Hampton Inn [Hampton Inn Houston Deer Park Ship Area, Deer Park, Texas] and now looking to build several other hotels in Phoenix [Arizona], New Mexico, and then again in Houston, Texas.  But, to show you how the market has changed, yes, H.T. Smith boycott, yes, the NAACP report card.  But just downstairs, we have a group of African American that are here to learn about the hotel industry, and in that room is the first African American woman hotel owner in the Hilton [Hilton Worldwide] system.  Marriott has a young lady that owns a hotel in Sterling, Virginia.  So our goal, real simple, is to look at opportunities all over the country.  It just happens that a lot of the growth that we have are in the inner cities or in the urban areas where there's regentrification.  Property's still cheap, we're converting old bank buildings.  So it continues to be an opportunity.  Athletes--when I put together the deal in Norfolk, Virginia, I partnered William Fuller, a former professional football player, with Bob Johnson.
Story_ID: 337836
Speaker 1: I formed a relationship with the Asian American Hotel Owners Association.  The largest minority owners of hotels in this country are Asian Americans or Indian owners.  They own out of the 48,000 hotels in this country, they own roughly about 20,000 hotels.  They employ a million people.  They--their value of those hotels are roughly about $40 billion.  And they own roughly 32, 33 percent of the industry.  When we started looking at ownership, I started working with them, partnering with those guys because they had the experience.  That experience has transposed itself into a relationship with our organization [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.] and our members that, today, we have a very, very close relationship in that they are now investing with African Americans, they're selling hotels to African Americans, they're partnering with African Americans, they're financing hotels.  And then recently, I encouraged the Hispanics to get into the hotel business, and I'm happy to report as of today, a new association called the Hispanic Hotel Owners Association, again, who we will partner with in--at our summit in Atlanta [Georgia]--we bring all these folks together to look at opportunities.
Story_ID: 337837
Speaker 1: So you talked about the woman downstairs being a Hilton [Hilton Worldwide] owner.  Has--is Hilton at the top of the list of people that are, that are promoting minority ownership?
Speaker 2: No.  When you look at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] report card and you look at where the industry is going, all of the major hotel chains are now looking to develop programs to encourage African Americans and other minorities.  Hilton obviously is at the top along with Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.], InterCon [InterContinental Hotels Group PLC] that owns the Holiday Inn, Starwood [Starwood Hotels and Resorts] that owns the W [W Hotels], these are the guys that are all looking to partner and to increase ownership.  You know, at the end of the day, they're going to make money from a new hotel whether it's owned by a minority or non-minority.  We just think that as the market changes, it would make sense to have their ownership base reflect what the nation's base is.
Story_ID: 337838
Speaker 1: I know earlier you spoke about a scholarship fund that you and H.T [H.T. Smith] had set up.  Now, is this scholarship fund to promote blacks and minorities to move into the hospitality industry so that they will own hotels?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Well, you know, first of all, we want them to work in the industry, in the industry.  When the tourism boycott ended, part of the settlement was a scholarship fund set up in Miami-Dade [Miami-Dade County, Florida] to encourage and to help kids in the hospitality industry, therefore, making them employable.  We've gone a step further.  We partnering with historically black colleges [HBCUs].  We partnering with the Hilton [Hilton Worldwide], Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.] and other brands to build hotels on historically black colleges' campus.  We're looking to build hotels in Harlem [New York, New York] because it makes good business sense.  You can't get a good decent rate at--rate at a hotel in New York [New York] because the demand is so great that we've gotta look at Harlem, look at Brooklyn [New York], look at the Bronx [New York].  But the scholarship fund that we did with H.T. Smith is to encourage African Americans in the inner cities to go to school for hospitality, therefore, to work in the industry there at some point to become owners as you see people not only managing but owning hotels.  It's, it's significant.
Story_ID: 337839
Speaker 1: Let's just segue a little bit so we can start putting like a, a perspective on just what your contributions have been--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --overall.  And I wanna just ask you, is it difficult for you personally, being a Republican and being so connected to the black community, to be doing so much for the black community on one end and then to be perceived as a Republican, it seems like what, what do you call that?  Is--I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so what do you call that?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What do you call that?
Speaker 2: I, I think it's called progress, but you know what?  I think whether my political beliefs is one or the other, I think what people honestly want is folks to do something to help a community.  And when you help a black community, you help a larger community, whether it's Fort Lauderdale [Florida], whether it's--where are we?  New Jersey.  But you help the nation in general because I think that as a hotelier and as an association [National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.], and as folks encouraging other folks to get into hotel market, I think--it's like the restaurant owner that when I first started putting together black heritage tours in Fort Lauderdale, when I wanted to make sure that the people that visited Fort Lauderdale had an opportunity to go out of the hotels and into the black community and to look at the black history and to go into black restaurant.  And I remember a restaurant owner saying to me, "Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Ingraham], we never see tourists and if you're going to bring tourists to my restaurant to have them have lunch, then you've got my support."  And I think, you know, when people look at what we do, what they see is that how we can make life better for them and their business.  In the hotel business, that's what it's all about.  If I can build, develop or buy a hotel, your chances of getting a job with me if you are a minority increases.  Your chance of doing business with me if you're a minority increases because I as an owner, and hopefully most of the employees in my hotel that are in the executive position, clearly would reflect my views of doing business and helping the community.  They may not and don't have to reflect my voting views, and that's fine.
Story_ID: 337840
Speaker 1: So when you were appointed on the White House's tourism council, what, what, what was it called?  It's--
Speaker 2: White House Conference on Tourism [White House Conference on Travel and Tourism].  I was appointed by Congressman Alcee Hastings.  I was one of the few appointees in south Florida market, white or black, and obviously one of the few blacks appointed there.  But I think that Congressman Hastings had worked with us and, by the way, was instrumental in us putting the first hotel and tourism ownership conference at the Congressional Black Caucus.  But I think that it gave me an appreciation to sit at the White House Conference of Tourism and to understand the bigger picture beyond Fort Lauderdale [Florida], but to have people from all over the country with some of the same concerns with tourism, whether it's white or black, but knowing how much it spans.  As a matter of fact, I heard a statistic about two weeks ago when I attended a dinner in Dallas [Texas] where the chairman of the Carlson Hotel [Carlson Rezidor Hotel Group] spoke, and she said that $60 million is spent every hour on tourism.  It's a lot of money, $60 million.  And, so I think that from our standpoint and being appointed--and I am happy and honored to be appointed by Congressman Hastings to the White House Conference of Tourism, White House Conference on Tourism, and I think that I learned a lot there.
Speaker 1: What year were you appointed? What year did that happen (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, that must have been, was it 2000, I believe?  When was it?  I don't even remember.  Who was in--
Speaker 1: Was it a Bush White House, a Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] White House?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was a Clinton White House.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it had to be before, yeah.
Speaker 2: Or maybe it was a Bush White House; I don't remember.  It's probably a Clinton White House.  It was before the current administration [President George Walker Bush].  Good research.  I mean, I, I don't even remember this stuff.
Story_ID: 337841
Speaker 1: Sort of to, to round this all out, when you look back over what you're doing, what you're trying to do, what stands out most for you?
Speaker 2: I think the sort of response we get from hotel companies that when we first started [the National Association of Black Hotel Owners, Operators and Developers, Inc.], nobody wanted or had any interest.  And I think what's so gratifying is that our owners that are here now that started off not understanding or knowing anything about the hotel business and to see the sort of response that we get every time an article comes out, people that now have an interest in hotel ownership, and just to look at the wide-range support that we're getting from all sectors of the industry.  I think that makes our job easier.  I can remember the days that I had to try to figure how to get into a conference and try to figure how to speak to a VP.
Speaker 1: What do you mean how to get into a conference?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we couldn't afford to all--to go to some of these conferences and, you know, because we were just starting; it was just an idea.  A group of us got together in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] and said let's form an association and I said, anybody that's interested in owning a hotel, stay behind.  And of course, you know, when we finally, you know, put--each one of us put our hands in our pocket and formed the association because we wanted to be--it to be something that we had done as a group.  Well, today when you look at the landscaping, you see these hotels coming up and you see young people coming to you and say, gee, you know, "How can we get a job?  How can we be like you?"  It helps us clearly understand that for us, that there are so many other opportunities beyond the standard thing of owning a night club, which is great, playing sports, which is great, but a whole new longer career exists in the industry through hotel ownership or through general managers.  Because, remember, our goal is hotel ownership, but it's also supplier diversity, getting more people to sell carpets to the hotel.  It's also executive employees getting more general managers, more directive sales.  Now that we are writing these large checks to these brands, I think the respect, and I think the appreciation tends to be very different.  And, you know, we can have dinner with a president of a brand where five, ten years ago, I don't know whether that's quite possible.  But I think overall, the industry is, is becoming more and more acceptive to diversity and ownership.  Because at the end of the day, we're gonna write a check to brand a Hilton [Hilton Worldwide] or Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.] that's no different than any other race of people, any other class of people, and it's gonna be successful because we have some great partners in the brand.
Story_ID: 337842
Speaker 1: So history has shown that we've gone from not being able to even sleep in them.  I mean, Sammy Davis, Jr., could sing on stage but--
Speaker 2: Couldn't sleep in 'em.
Speaker 1: Couldn't sleep in 'em.
Speaker 2: Now we can sleep in 'em and own 'em.
Speaker 1: Now you can sleep in 'em and own 'em.  What do you see being next?  What's after that?  After you sleep in 'em, own 'em, what could possibly be the next step?
Speaker 2: Maybe that idea of us forming our own brand?  It's a good idea.  No, I think that--there're forty-eight thousand hotels.  We own less than 1 percent.  I think parity would help us to become more impactful, owning more hotels, finding more investors, looking for additional people, or just us buying more hotels.  I think I see that.  I think I see that because the rate of return on this investment is so overwhelming; it's incredible.  You know, very, very few hotels, you know, go under, and if they do, there's somebody waiting to buy it.  We like to say when we buy a hotel that's underperforming, we get a better deal and then switch it around and make it perform well.  So what I see is just that, both domestically and internationally, that young people today clearly understanding and wanting to come into this industry knowing quite well that you can, as I did as a dishwasher and many other people, that you can go to the ownership--to the owner's suite, you can own a hotel, you can manage a hotel, whereas years ago, we had a glass ceiling.  We hopefully have broken the glass ceiling.
Story_ID: 337843
Speaker 1: So what organizations are you a member of these days?  Affiliated with (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do I have time?
Speaker 1: We have time, I mean--
Speaker 2: I'm a member of the Asian American Hotel Owners Association, the American Hotel and Lodging Association, a lot of industry associations.  I'm sure there's some other ones that--still a member of the Urban League, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I mean--you know, this business for us is, is, is so--you know, we're so grateful to work in a business where there's so many people that are truly hospitable, and it's almost like it's not work.  So the associations that we have (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: So I, you know, I have to keep looking to see--I mean the problem with, with having not a whole lot of time is you have to turn down a lot more opportunities to serve on different associations, but, you know, I try to be cognizant of that.
Story_ID: 337844
Speaker 1: Now that you consider yourself African American--I'm joking.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: But, but, but what are your hopes for the, for the community as a whole?
Speaker 2: You know, I think we become larger stakeholders in the tourism industry.  I don't--you know, I see the tourism industry growing by leaps and bounds.
Speaker 1: But even beyond your industry, I want you to pontificate on some other areas.  So just, what are your overall hopes for the African American community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, I think that the fact that we can really do anything that we want to.  I think it's, it's endless opportunity.  I mean, I've traveled from West Africa to the Caribbean.  I've traveled from New York City [New York, New York] to Portland, Oregon.  And what I see is a wide open space where there's nothing that's impossible, whether it's my industry, whether it's any other industry.
Speaker 1: Within your industry, what would you like to see happen?
Speaker 2: More hotels, more of us owning hotels, more money available for us to buy hotels.  Would I want a brand or not?  I don't think that is as relevant to us as it is to have an investment that pays great dividends.  Because I think if we're successful, we can do more good for more people.  And I think--we wanna do well by doing good.  And I think that our motto as owners is to continue to challenge ourselves, look at opportunities, bring more people to the table, and keep expanding.  It's silly for--to, to just own one hotel; let's own a hundred.
Story_ID: 337845
Speaker 1: But I think it's inevitable that we--that, that a brand will be created.  I think it'll either come out of like the hip hop arena, like a Sean Combs or a FUBU or, you know, Rocawear, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons, and I think eventually, some of those guys perhaps will team up with you and, hence a brand (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and I think you're right.  I think--
Speaker 1: Or, yeah--go ahead.  Like the, like the Hard Rock Cafe [Hard Rock Cafe International, Inc.], you know, maybe there will be a hip-hop brand, you know, hotel.
Speaker 2: A hot brand, as they say.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, we've had discussions with a lot of pop culture icons and continue to talk with them, as we've had discussions with football players.  I think you're absolutely right.  The hotel industry is extremely segmented.  The Ritz-Carlton [The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company, LLC] is on one end as a luxury hotel, the Homewood [Homewood Suites by Hilton] or the Hilton Garden is another brand.  I think you're going to see a market being developed for a hip W [W Hotels] or Indigo hotel [Hotel Indigo] that may gravitate towards some of these boutique--like, when you go to South Beach [Miami Beach, Florida], the National [National Hotel, South Beach, Florida] and all these hotels are hot, are hot.
Speaker 1: The Delano [Delano South Beach, Florida].
Speaker 2: The Delano.  The challenge with doing something like that, it is vastly expensive and your return may not be as good as owning the Hilton Garden Inn.
Speaker 1: Now, the Shore Club [South Beach, Florida], is that a--the Shore Club in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a boutique (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a boutique, okay.
Speaker 2: --boutique hotel.  It's, it's like the (unclear).  It's an independent brand; it's not part of hotels--wait, but I should say something to that, though, because Hotel Victor [Hotel Victor South Beach, Miami Beach, Florida] is a Hyatt [Hyatt Hotels Corporation] managed hotel.  Yet, when you go into the hotel today, you'll not see anything that says Hyatt.  So some of the brands are looking to get in and take advantage of the pop culture depending on where they are.  I think for, for many African Americans, when you begin to look at that, that's a vastly costly endeavor.  But the greatest performing segment of the industry is where we are now; that's in the limited service market hotels.
Speaker 1: But one of the great thing--I mean, this just popped in my mind but one--you know--and not all churches are segregated, but a lot of churches are still segregated just by choice today.  And I think a lot of comfort lies in going into a place where you know what to expect.  Let's say like in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --black church and there's black people.  And I think perhaps it may--you know, you talked about the Crowne Plaza [Royal Palm Crowne Plaza Resort; Royal Palm South Beach Miami, Miami, Florida], how they did so much more business among black people than others because there's something--you know, you know what to--it's almost as if you're given an, an opportunity to exhale and let your hair down, and the man ain't going be watching me.  I can be, you know, (laughter), all these things.  So I think inevitably, we--there may be a brand that caters to this and be extremely successful.
Speaker 2: Well, the man is now you and I--
Speaker 1: The man, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: --and we're gonna be watching our customer base to keep increasing it (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 337846
Speaker 1: My last question.  What do you want your legacy to be?  When you are no longer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My legacy?
Speaker 1: --walking on this earth--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: Well, he's too young but--
Speaker 1: I'm too young for a legacy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Well, okay, twenty years from now.
Speaker 2: Twenty years from now, I hope that people remember me as a guy that had an idea that came to this country as a student, learned to love it, and to create opportunities that more people can take advantage of that my parents [Doris Ingraham and Arlington Ingraham] would've even never thought to be possible, and that we would've created some new ideas, and that other folks would take it much further than I did.  And I would just be part of that team that made it possible for me such as my parents did and the folks that had such an impact including my priest, Father Marcian Peters, and of course my wife and my family that supported that whole effort and just take it another step further.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much for being a part of The HistoryMakers and--
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
