Story_ID: 333114
Speaker 1: Good morning, we are rolling.  We're The HistoryMakers.  I'm Shawn Wilson the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea the videographer, and Rosie--Rosie, say that again.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Cubero [Rosie Cubero].
Speaker 1: Cubero observing.  And today we are interviewing Mr. Watson [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], so Solomon, if you will introduce yourself to me and spell out your name for me.
Speaker 2: I am Solomon B. Watson, IV; the B stands for Brown.  Solomon is S-O-L-O-M-O-N, Brown is B-R-O-W-N, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Is October 27th--
Speaker 1: And the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) 2005.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and five [2005].  The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is at The New York Times Company, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, New York, 10036.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 333115
Speaker 1: So, the basic questions are five very basic pop culture questions.  Your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fish.
Speaker 1: What type of fish?
Speaker 2: Any freshly-caught fish.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: My favorite color is my middle name, brown.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year.
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is any time of year that I can go fishing.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] followed closely by Key West [Florida].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase, or saying.
Speaker 2: Always the same, never changing.  That's what I say when people ask me how I am.
Speaker 1: Excellent. So, we will start to the--by, by talking about your family history.  But I wanna say something because I thought you looked very familiar to me.  I think I saw you this summer on Martha's Vineyard.  Maybe not, but were you there this summer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When were you there?  What time?
Speaker 1: I was there like for a couple weeks in August.
Speaker 2: The last two weeks of August?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I was there, and I may have seen you there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and maybe you knew the people we were staying with because they're from D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and, and I vaguely remember you passing by and speak--anyway, we'll, we'll talk about it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was that?
Speaker 1: Anyway, we'll talk about it after. We'll talk about when we're done.
Story_ID: 333116
Speaker 1: So, today we're gonna start by talking about your, your family, and we will start with your mother's side of the family.  First, we'll talk about them separately, and then we'll talk about your father's [S. Brown Watson, Jr.] side of the family as much as you can remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, what was your mother's name, and give us her date of birth and spell out her name for us.
Speaker 2: Mom's name was Denise, D-E-N-I-S-E, middle name Amelia, A-M-E-L-I-A, maiden name, I believe, was Jones, J-O-N-E--J-O-N-E-S, and I believe mom [Denise Jones Watson] was born in July of 1920--it could have been July 30th, as I recall.  She passed away some time ago, so some of those dates have slipped out of my mind.
Speaker 1: Now, where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, in Woodstown, New Jersey, which is where my siblings and I were born.  Woodstown is a small town in southern New Jersey; the closest large city is Wilmington, Delaware.
Speaker 1: So your mom was born during the Depression [Great Depression] era.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about your--did your mom talk about her life as a child when you were, when you were growing up?  Did she ever speak about what life was like for her as a child?
Speaker 2: She spoke about it very little.  I knew that my mom didn't have a particularly good time growing up.  Her mother, Myrtle Lewis, my grandmother, also was around my family when I was a child.  I had a large number of strong women in my family when I was a kid, including my mom, my grandmom, and of course--Fannie Jackson [Frances Jackson] was my great-grandmom, my grandmother's mother, and Gram, as we called her, was a--was kind of the catalyst of the family for the first fifteen or twenty years of my life.
Speaker 1: And by that, you mean what?  What was her role (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she was a, she was a--the strongest figure and role model in the family, she was a person of authority, she was not a strict disciplinarian but she made sure that her daughter, my grandmother, and her granddaughter, my mother, were folks who believed in God, went to church, worked hard, and tried to raise their families well.  For some portion of my life, maybe before I went to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], we lived in Gram's house for maybe fifteen--fourteen or fifteen of those, of those eighteen years before I went away to college.
Speaker 1: So, what did Grams do for a living?  How did she--?
Speaker 2: Grams was actually an interesting person; she was, as was the case with many people of her generation--she was born in 1887--she was a domestic worker.  The, the population of Woodstown, just a small town--when I was a kid, the population was about twenty-five hundred, and there was an, an, an economic divide and a, a race divide, and by-and-large in terms of just the way things balanced out, people of color were on the lower part of the economic divide, so both my great-grandmother and my grandmother spent some time as domestic workers in the houses of people higher on the economic scale.
Speaker 1: So, your great-grandmother was a domestic--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother was as well--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and your mother?
Speaker 2: And my, my mother was more of a skilled laborer; she worked at a number of places for a while.  She was a worker at a local Howard Johnson's, she was also a worker at a place called Anchor Hockings [Anchor Hocking Company], which made glass.  In those days they were--made glassware in a town nearby, so she worked there as well.  One thing about my great-grandmother I should mention is that she was kind of a self-ordained minister of the local church, having had one of those epiphanies early in her life where, when God came to her, as the story went, she grabbed the red hot stove and was not burned; she talked a little bit about that.  As a child, one doesn't always know what to believe about those experiences, but that was Gram's moment, so she was a terrific church lady.
Speaker 1: What happened to--I'm gonna ask this, and then I wanna go back to talking about your mom specifically.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But your, your great-grandmother, her husband--who was he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was a--
Speaker 1: Did he disappear early on?
Speaker 2: When I was a kid, probably up until about six or seventh grade, my great-grandfather, James Jackson, was alive.  He died.  Grandad was a good guy; a little bit dominated by Gram, but not in a negative sense, but allegedly he was Gram's third or fourth husband.  Grandad was, I think, eighty-four when he died.  What I got from him was how to make a hot toddy; Grandad used to toss 'em down every now and then, in a benevolent sense, and not in an abusive way, so I remember him.  He was a, he was a good guy.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't think Grandad was working when I was a kid, yeah.
Story_ID: 333117
Speaker 1: Now, your great-grandmother [Frances Jackson] was the matriarch of the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --for this number of years.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she own her house?  Was she renting the house that you guys lived in?
Speaker 2: Well, the house--Gram owned the house; it was--her house was on a street called Railroad Avenue, which was about--it ran parallel to the, to the local railroad, and it was about two hundred yards down off the main street, so our house was at the end of a lane, Railroad Avenue, and for the first maybe eight or nine years, we didn't have electricity; we had neither electricity nor running water, so I can remember fondly--sometimes fondly--oil lamps, and reading a little bit by oil lamps.  I remember when friends of our family first got their first TV and I think that was '53 [1953] or '54 [1954], and then later on-- we had electricity at the time, but not, not a TV, so we were able to afford a TV a little bit later on.  I remember when we got our first telephones, and then there were party lines; you could have kind of conversations with other people, or listen in on their conversations.
Speaker 1: Can you describe for me Railroad Avenue?  Was it paved?  Was it unpaved?  What were the--the homes looked like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Railroad Avenue, Railroad Avenue was a, a dirt lane; there may have been a little oil put over the top of the dirt and packed down stone and gravel, it was about two hundred yards long and there were--it ran perpendicular to a street called Bailey Street [Woodstown, New Jersey]; Bailey Street was kind of the main street in my part of town called Bailey Town, but in any event there were about six houses going down Railroad Avenue, and Gram's house--my house--was the next to the last house.  Our house was maybe thirty feet, forty feet from the railroad; it was a small, old wood frame house.
Speaker 1: Was it shotgun?
Speaker 2: It was not shotgun as such.  It was multi-story, and it had a little kind of like shed appendage on the back.  It was, it was an interesting house, nice old house.  It--I think we moved out of the house--as a family, we probably moved out of that house in 1961 or '62 [1962], and at the max then, I lived in that house for a couple of years, but that was the first house that we'd owned that had running water.
Speaker 1: So, when, when the house did not have electricity or running water, did it have an in--indoor--like where did you use the bathroom?
Speaker 2: Outside.
Speaker 1: Outside.
Speaker 2: Outhouse.
Speaker 1: Has an out--and now what years are we talking about?
Speaker 2: We're talking--let's see, I was born in '44 [1944], so we're talking late--yeah, late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s].  I started elementary school in '50 [1950], so in some of my elementary school years I was, you know, living in this--in the house--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --most of my years, as a matter of fact--
Story_ID: 333118
Speaker 1: So your mother [Denise Jones Watson] never had the opportunity to go to school, I'm assuming.
Speaker 2: Mom did go to school; she went to eleventh grade, I don't think she graduated.
Speaker 1: Now, where did she go, let's say, to elementary school?  Was it like a one-room school someplace in Woodstown [New Jersey] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Interesting question. On Bailey Street [Woodstown, New Jersey] there was a school that black folks went to, and they went to that school up until they were in eighth grade, then they went to the integrated high school uptown, uptown being about a mile or a mile and a half away.  Mom went to that school, my older brother Johnny [John Watson, Sr.], who's two years older than I, started--he spent his first two years in elementary school in that school, what I'd call the Bailey Town school [School for Colored Children, Woodstown, New Jersey].  My high school class in Woodstown High School [Woodstown, New Jersey], which graduated in 1962, was the first elementary school class to be wholly integrated.  The black school was shut down, and my neighbor--my neighbors and I were the first fully integrated first grade class in Woodstown High School--which turned out to be Woodstown High School.
Speaker 1: You say your mother--you said your mother went to--they would start at Bailey school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bailey Street, yes.
Speaker 1: Bailey Street.  But then that she went to a school that was integrated?
Speaker 2: There was a school--yeah, uptown, the, the school uptown was integrated from grades, from grades eight on.
Speaker 1: But this is very early on for integration--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Because your mom was born in 1920, so we're assuming this is the '40s [1940s]--
Speaker 2: In--that was '40s [1940s]--my class--I can back into it from my class.  My class started in 1950 in the fully integrated school system.  Brown versus the Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was the decision of the [U.S.] Supreme Court for school integration in '54 [1954], but in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s], New Jersey had agreed for voluntary integration.  So, mom may--mom didn't benefit from that but my brother benefitted from it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did--
Story_ID: 333119
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did your mom [Denise Jones Watson] ever talk about segregation or integration or race?  How did she talk about race at home?
Speaker 2: It wasn't talked--interesting; that's a good question.  It wasn't talked about very much because it was just in the nature of things.  There are some people who would argue, or would posit that Woods [Woodstown, New Jersey]--that southern New Jersey is in fact in part below the Mason-Dixon Line, and whether that's true or not, I don't know, but it was a clear--there was a clear history of segregation in the town that I grew up in until, to some extent, the late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s].  For example, there was a lake, Woodstown Lake [Memorial Lake].  The better part of the lake was where white people swam.  The less good part of the lake was where black people swam.  Over a period of time, black people began migrating to the better part of the lake, and then someone in the town built a pool--there was a pool association they had; there was an economic dues--payment to become a member, and most black people couldn't afford that, so until sometime, I think, in the later '60s [1960s], the pool association was, was de facto segregated.  The, the local theater, the Grand Theatre [Woodstown, New Jersey], as I recall, was segregated; there was three sections of it: a right, a middle, and the left.  And when I was maybe late elementary school, junior high school, the black folks were supposed to sit on the left; over a period of time, we began to migrate throughout the, throughout the theater.  There, there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there was no balcony; it was left and right.
Speaker 2: Left, right, middle.  And so there was--there were incidents of segregation, and to some extent, when folks grew up with it, it wasn't something that was railed against, it was just something that was accepted as part of our, our existence, and my sense is that there was really little activism--social activism in, in my hometown area until the '60s [1960s], mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: So, on the lake, how would you know which side was the black side and which side was the white side?  Were there signs?
Speaker 2: There, there--well, there were no signs as such.  One would grow up knowing it.  There was the--down by the dam, the deeper, more dang- the deeper and more dangerous water is where black folks would go to learn to swim, that's just in the nature of things, that's--you, you grow up in a town, you want to go swimming, you go swimming down by the dam.
Speaker 1: So there were no signs saying, Colored Only, Whites Only?
Speaker 2: There, there--no, not, not for the lake, and, and I don't have a strong recollection of seeing those signs anywhere in my hometown, but folks knew where they were to go.  If you go to the movies, you sit on the left, if you go swimming in the lake, you swim down at that end and, you know, if you're--depending on the year we're talking about, and if you're gonna go to school, you're gonna go to the black school [School for Colored Children, Woodstown, New Jersey].  It wasn't until 1950 that black folks and white folks went to an integrated school in Woodstown.
Speaker 1: So, when your mother needed--or--and your great-grandmother [Frances Jackson] and your grandmother [Myrtle Lewis]--when they needed medical attention or when you were delivered, who did that?  Were there black doctors?  Were there midwives?
Speaker 2: They, they--we were--I think all of--myself and all, all my siblings were delivered in a hospital in a town called Salem [New Jersey].  Salem is the, the county seat of Salem County [New Jersey].  Good medical treatment.  There were--I don't recall (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were the doctors black or white?
Speaker 2: I don't recall any--seeing or hearing of any black doctors at that hospital, and certainly while we were children.
Speaker 1: So, you were born--I mean you were born in a hospital by a doctor; there was no midwife, you were not born (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I think--and I think all of my brothers and sisters were born in a hospital.
Story_ID: 333120
Speaker 1: And how many brothers and sisters do you have?  Let's list them now, in the order in which they were born.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I have an older brother Johnny [John Watson, Sr.], he's a couple years older than I.  He still resides down in Salem County in Salem [New Jersey]. I have a sister Stephanie [Stephanie Watson] who's couple years younger than I, a brother Ernest [Ernest Watson, Sr.] who's a couple years younger than Stephanie.  I have a sister Masolete [Masolete Watson], who is four or five years younger than, than Ernest, and I had a brother Marvin [Marvin Watson] who, I think, was maybe the youngest, but he was killed in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: So he--where do you fit in? You were--?
Speaker 2: I'm the second oldest.
Speaker 1: Second oldest.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was the youngest that was killed in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was the youngest or second youngest; I just can't remember anymore.
Story_ID: 333121
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your father and your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Terrific--the--my father was a good guy.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Solomon Brown Watson.  He (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The III?
Speaker 2: No.  He actually went--he styled himself S. Brown Watson, Jr.  He wasn't into this III and IV stuff as I am, and in fact, he was known as Brown Watson, as was his father, Grandpop Brown [Solomon Brown Watson, Jr.].  Brown was a--my father was--good guy, fairly hard-working guy, worked when I was a kid, at a local factory in Salem [New Jersey] called Mannington Mills [Mannington Mills, Inc.], which made then linoleum, and now has branched out into a lot of floor coverings.  Good guy, hard-working, good with his hands, could make a kite, taught us how to make kites.  I could do a lot of crafts things because he did a lot of crafts things.  He was not a great hunter, as I've turned out to be on my own, but, but a good guy.  Left the family sometime in the mid-'50s [1950s], as I recall.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: With a theory--he and some other folks were laid off from Mannington Mills.  He had a brother in Detroit [Michigan] who was working in the auto industry, so the theory was that Brown would go out and get a job in the auto industry and send for the family.  The fact was Brown went out and got a job in the auto industry and did not send for the family, so for a large part of my life, I was sort of, you know--my mother [Denise Jones Watson] was kind of a single parent.  With that being said, I still have fond memories of Brown; he was just a, a victim of circumstances beyond his control--good guy.  His father, Grandpop Brown, was a florist; he worked--didn't own the floral shop but worked for the local florist, I think, Rayburn's Florist [ph.] in Woodstown [New Jersey]; very creative and artistic.  Both Grandpop Brown--father's side, and Granddad [James Jackson] on my mother's side, were gentlemen.  They were very: "Hello, Mrs. So-and-So.  Hello, Mrs. So-and-So."  And Grandpop Brown used to wear a hat and he'd say, "Hello Mrs. Jones," and tip his hat.  And I hung out with older people and used to wear a hat, and Grandpop Brown would say, "Hello, Miss Handy," tip his hat.  I would do the same thing, and when I became a teenager, I stopped wearing hats, but I'd say, "Hello, Mrs. Handy," and my hand would go up automatically, so--good guy.  They're both good guys, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what--where--did, did they have the opportunity to go to school--either of--the father or the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, my, my sense is that, that Brown finished school in, in Rochester; I think he was from Rochester, New York, and he and his family--parts of his family were already in Woodstown, but I think he finished school in Rochester, New York--not a 100 percent certain about that, but both mom and Brown were--
Speaker 1: Brown being your dad.
Speaker 2: My dad--Brown being my dad--kind of insisted that we all do as well in school as, as we could do.  I mean they weren't hawks on that, but they valued--they understand--they understood education.
Story_ID: 333122
Speaker 1: Woodstown [New Jersey] is--was in the--it was--is in an agricultural area, so there weren't very many manufacturing jobs.  The way to get out was through education, and--in fact, Brown [S. Brown Watson, Jr.], my father, had a sister, Aunt Mildred [ph.], who was an elementary school teacher; she had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and in terms of family influence, she was the most influential person on my desire to go to school and all that stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk about her.  Where was she born, and what year was she born?
Speaker 1: She was born--Aunt Mildred was born, I think, in Rochester [New York].  She was older--I think she was--she may have been a year or two older than Brown, or a year or two younger, I'm just not sure where she fits.  But she was an elementary school teacher.
Speaker 2: Was she the first in the family to have access to college?
Speaker 1: To my knowledge, yes.
Speaker 2: And she graduated Howard University in what year?
Speaker 1: It must have been sometime in the '40s [1940s]; could have been the early '50s [1950s], but I think it was probably in the '40s [1940s].  Elementary school teacher, and there were couple of other women--Miss Howard [ph.] and Miss Ransom [ph.], who were black teachers.  They taught initially at the elementary school [School for Colored Children, Woodstown, New Jersey], the segregated elementary school, and then Miss (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But not Bailey's Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at, at Bailey
Speaker 2: They taught at Bailey Street.
Speaker 1: They taught at Bailey, at the segregated school, and then Miss Howard and Miss Ransom went to the--to the big school, integrated school, and Aunt Mildred taught down in Mannington [Mannington Township, New Jersey], which was down the Salem (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you said Aunt Mildred had a big influence on you wanting to pursue academics or to go to school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: How so?  What do you remember about her?
Speaker 1: Well, she, she, she always talked to me about how important learning was.
Speaker 2: What did she say to you?
Speaker 1: Well, learning is important; you can--
Speaker 2: Because?
Speaker 1: Learn--you can learn things, it can help you get a good job, learning can't be taken away from you.  I can't remember the precise words now, but she was--at some level she was middle-class.  She never said, "Well, if you, if you go to school and get a degree you can go up in, in, in terms of your economic well-being," but that, that was kind of implicit.  She had a car.  My family didn't have a car for many years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What type of--what kind of car did she have?
Speaker 1: She had an Oldsmobile station wagon, and it's the car I took my driver's license test in, and I failed when I took my driver's license test the first time because I just wasn't used to it; my, my family didn't have a car.  She had a car, but she used it to go back and forth to work, and her husband, Uncle Charles [ph.], had a, a Chevy [Chevrolet] pick-up.
Speaker 2: What did Uncle Charles do for a living?
Speaker 1: Unclear.  I, I have no clear recollection of what he did for a living.
Speaker 2: But combined, you saw them as being middle-class.
Speaker 1: Yes--oh, no question about that; their house was up on the main street, not at the end, their house had running water.  I'd occasionally take a shower or a bath up at Aunt Mildred's house.
Story_ID: 333123
Speaker 1: Bailey Street [Woodstown, New Jersey] was what--for the black community I'm assuming what Washington Avenue or Main Street was for the white community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in many--in many respects that's right.  There was a large com- Bailey Street then--they're not, they're not really blocks in my town 'cause we're talking about the country.  Bailey Street, we'll say, is two miles long, and that's where a large number of the black families lived in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]--the black families who lived in Woodstown [New Jersey]; there were some who lived out further in the boonies, and some north, but by-and-large, there was Bailey Street and there was South Main Street where a large number of black folks lived.
Speaker 1: What else do you remember from your childhood--I mean your earliest memories of Bailey Street.  Was, was the bank--I mean was there a black bank (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Was there a black--were there barber shops, pool halls?  What was on Bailey Street?
Speaker 2: There, there, there, the--Bailey Street was totally residential with one exception; there was a, a candy store.  The family--the Price family that had a little penny candy store in the back of their house--it was a pink house; that was the only kind of retail establishment on Bailey Street--black-owned--the only retail establishment that was black-owned.  There was a barbershop, black-owned wasn't really a shop, as such.  Mr. Luther Braxton was--he was the local barber and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 2: Luther Braxton.  He was the local barber; we would all go up to his house--
Speaker 1: To his house.
Speaker 2: To his house where he would give us a haircut.  And in fact, one of my best friends, Clarence Braxton, who's a high school classmate, was one of Mr. Luther's children.  There was no--with the exception of the teachers, there were no black professionals that I met. Now, there were other teachers--Mr. Cooper [ph.], who taught algebra, there was a Mr. Gibson [ph.] who taught over at the black school [School for Colored Children, Woodstown, New Jersey], but I didn't know him.  But there were no black professionals here.  The, the, the population of Woodstown by-and-large through, through my life there, was 2500; it's now 3500, so it hasn't grown a lot in the, in the years that I've been away.
Speaker 1: So, was it mainly a rural community?
Speaker 2: Yes, rural.  Railroad--two hundred yard lane, Railroad Avenue, railroad tracks, to the immediate right of the railroad tracks would be a cow pasture, behind the cow pasture would be a cornfield, behind the corn field there were some woods and it's another cornfield, then there was an apple orchard--rural area--agricultural area.  A lot of my classmates joined the Future Farmers of America, the FFA [National FFA Organization].
Speaker 1: The FFA.  So speaking about rural and, and 2500 people, how many of those people were black in this town--in the town?
Speaker 2: Best guess, between 10 and 15 percent I--extrap- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Small.
Speaker 2: I extrapolate that from--a little bit off on the numbers, but there are about 110 people in my high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey] graduating class, 16 of us were black; my best guess is that that reflected the population base then, and it still probably reflects the population base now.  I don't know, but was told when I was home a couple of weeks ago, that the population ratio really hasn't shifted too much.
Story_ID: 333124
Speaker 1: So, being that the community of black people was so small, were there, were there a number--what was the church life like?  How many churches were in the town [Woodstown, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: There, there, there were two; there was what I call Gram's [Frances Jackson] church, the Methodist church [Spencer Union American Methodist Episcopal Church, Woodstown, New Jersey], and then there was uptown, a Baptist church [Morning Star Baptist Church, Woodstown, New Jersey], both with black congregations.  And to some extent, and this is perhaps more in my mind than reality, I kind of got the sense that the folks in the Baptist church were a little bit higher on the economic scale, and I think I'm right about that. I think I'm probably right about that.  I still have the view.
Speaker 1: Were they like--well, we're gonna change tapes here, but before I change--do I have enough to--were they lighter skinned people also?  Was it divided along the color line?
Speaker 2: In part, in part.  And that's a, an, an interesting matter--yes.
Story_ID: 332699
Speaker 1: We were talking about the churches and, and the division that--but even reflect on it now as an adult, because you didn't have that sort of awareness as a kid, but looking back on it as an adult, you felt that there were two churches and that they were divided--
Speaker 2: They were certainly divided along economic lines.  I think that the, the reality is that my family and I were on the lower--we were lower income.  That's just the reality, and my sense was that, to the extent that there was a growing upper-lower income or middle income, middle-class group of black folks in, in the town [Woodstown, New Jersey] and its drawing area, that most of those folks went to the Baptist church [Morning Star Baptist Church, Woodstown, New Jersey].  For example, Aunt Mildred [ph.] went to the Baptist church--
Speaker 1: Not even your grandmother--her--that would have been your--her grandmother and--well, they wouldn't have been related.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, that--they wouldn't have been related by, by blood or anything like that but, you know, we were, we were a Bailey Town Methodist church [Spencer Union American Methodist Episcopal Church, Woodstown, New Jersey] family.  Even today I sense that there's still somewhat, somewhat of an economic and worldview difference between the congregations of the two churches.  Of course, I can go to either one of them and be recognized, and it's interesting.  I think at the Baptist church I'm recognized more for my kind of status, and at the Bailey Town church it's more, "Here's an old guy, great-grandmother [Frances Jackson] used to be in the church. He's done some stuff." But I looked at--in, in the, in the Baptist church they will call me Solomon [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV]; in the Bailey Town church they will call me Bub--that was my nickname growing up in the church.
Speaker 1: What was your nickname?
Speaker 2: Bub, B-U-B.
Speaker 1: Bub (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nice.
Story_ID: 332700
Speaker 1: Also, you saw some distinction in color, which you will--which you saw later on in life, more at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], meaning that lighter-skin people possibly were more middle-class than dark-skin people.
Speaker 2: Yes, that was certainly--I think even as a--growing up in Woodstown [New Jersey], I kind of had that sense and, and I think it may have come from the fact that speaking historically, through the, the late '50s [1950s] and maybe early '60s [1960s], a number of the movers and shakers on the social and political scene, scene, were, were light-skin African Americans as opposed to darker skin African Americans.  Certainly, when I got to Howard, I was told about, and saw, what I think were instances of--how can I say--segregation or self-selection, or whatever, whatever the proper term is, in terms of, of lighter-skin folks hanging together, and from time to time, alleging that they were, quote, better, close quote, than those of us who were not lighter skin.  In fact, not to mischaracterize it, but one of the fellows here [The New York Times] on the editorial board, [HistoryMaker] Brent Staples, is doing some writing for a book on this, on this very topic.
Speaker 1: Can you cite an incident for me, from Howard and, and then we'll go back just because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I only have a--one personal incident and, without mentioning the name of the individual, who I thought was a very attractive young lady, as well as being intelligent and articulate.  She and I were engaged in some social activity; it didn't work out well, and people, perhaps more sensitive than I, said it was because she was more of a light-complexion and I was of a darker complexion but I, I don't know if it's true or not, and so I don't wanna--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --put her, put her on the spot.
Speaker 1: Fair enough.
Story_ID: 332701
Speaker 1: So, what are some of your earliest memories of life in Bailey Town [Woodstown, New Jersey] as a child?
Speaker 2: Geez, I--
Speaker 1: Earliest memories.
Speaker 2: Earliest memories--just playing with other children.
Speaker 1: Playing what games, though? What--?
Speaker 2: We played certainly with--
Speaker 1: Sticks?  Stick ball?
Speaker 2: We played stick ball, when it rained we'd make little boats out of sticks or cups, they would go down the street; when we lived up on the street we'd do the same thing down the lane. I remembered five or six, getting my first bicycle with training wheels; just being able to roam free throughout the town without any, any worries, and just being comfortable.  It was a good, it was a good, a good growing up; I wouldn't, I wouldn't trade very much of that growing up for anything else.
Story_ID: 332702
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds, or smells remind you of, of that--of growing up in Bailey's Town [Bailey Town, Woodstown, New Jersey]--
Speaker 2: Fresh air; I cer- even here in the city [New York, New York], I like the smell of the air, the tension in the air after a rainstorm or a thunderstorm.  When we were kids, particularly before we got electricity, but even then, when there was a thunderstorm, my great-grandmother, Gram [Frances Jackson] would say, "Turn out those lights!  Thunderstorm!  God is talking."  So, even now, when there's a thunderstorm I say to myself, "Should I turn off that television?  Should I get off this computer?"  I say, "God will understand, yeah."  It was, it was a terrific, in many respects bucolic growing up.  There was no crime to speak of, there were no drugs in town.  Occasionally, somebody would be called a pothead, but I had no idea what folks were talking about, so it was a good bucolic neighborhood.  All the parents who could work were hard-working folks.
Story_ID: 332703
Speaker 1: What about life in school?  When you started--what year did you start first grade?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].  And if I recall correctly, the first day, they didn't have enough desks, so some of us had to sit on paper on the floor, and I'm still in contact with some folks who were in my first grade class from 1950 elementary school.
Speaker 1: At this time, it was still legally segregated in New Jersey, correct? In 1950 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, New Jersey had gone to voluntary desegregation.
Speaker 1: So, first grade, were there white students in the classroom?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, it was an integrated class, and since we--since my class hadn't gone to a segregated kindergarten, we didn't know the difference; we thought that was just how schools should be, and so we just grew up--we, we grew up in an integrated environment, and probably without very many white people recognizing that there was some segregation, or thinking about the impact of segregation on black folks.  And to some extent, black folks themselves didn't think a lot in the '50s [1950s] about the impact on segregation.  They had to make a living, they had to go out and work, so there wasn't any, any social activism that I can, that I can remember.  But I--what I am remembering is that I got an email about a week ago from another high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey] classmate who was on this thread, who is recalling a party that he invited to--invited me to in 1967 which was, I guess, after I was out of college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and maybe in the [U.S] Army.  But he is remarking in this email of how some parents, people of his generation, thought that I had crashed the party that he had invited me to, 'cause I was the only black there, and that's in 1967 in this town [Woodstown, New Jersey] that I grew up with, so the mindset between the white parents of my mother's [Denise Jones Watson] generation and the kids of my generation, was just completely different.  I mean the idea that somebody would think that I would crash a party--the guest of honor, whose house the party was being held at invited me, so I find--I found that strange, and that's why I'm participating on the fringes of this email thread because I'm coming to realize that classmates of mine, and friends, had very little recognition of what it was like for me and other people of color growing up in my hometown.
Speaker 1: So, when you think--thinking back in the early days was at, at this Bailey Town--it was Bailey School [School for Colored Children, Woodstown, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 332704
Speaker 1: And did Aunt Mildred [ph.] teach you?  Was she one of your teachers?
Speaker 2: No, she was not one of my teachers.
Speaker 1: Who were your teachers?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the integrated school, so my first teacher was Miss Richman [ph.], a white lady.  I did not have a black teacher at that school until about eighth grade when Mr. Cooper [ph.] was teaching.  He was a math teacher, Mr. Cooper.  But school was okay for me; it was, it was fun, I liked learning.
Speaker 1: And at that time, as a kid, what did you wanna grow up to be?
Speaker 2: As a kid, I just wanted to grow up; I had no idea about what I wanted to be until I was in tenth grade.  In tenth grade, my English teacher [Ms. Hanson (ph.)] said, "Solomon [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], you write well.  I think you should write for the school paper."  So, I said, "Well, I'll write for the school paper," and I started doing that.  I wrote a sports column, As Sol Sees It, sports commentator, and I worked on the yearbook, so my theory was that I'd be a writer.  So, when I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], my theory was I would be a writer.  So, I ended up majoring in English and taking a minor in journalism.
Speaker 1: So, let's go back before we get to Howard, and talk about Mr. Cooper because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mr. Cooper.
Speaker 1: --he's your first black professional and teacher and male.
Speaker 2: Yes, at first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And had you encountered any other black male professionals before Mr. Cooper?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Had I gone to the segregated school [School for Colored Children, Woodstown, New Jersey], I would have--I would have run into Mr. Gibson [ph.] and some other teachers, but no, Mr. Cooper was it throughout elementary and junior high, just Mr. Cooper.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you involved in any sports, or was it just the newspaper that you wrote for?
Speaker 2: No, I, I was a--I was a, a decent high school athlete; I was on the football team [at Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Now, was the--were the football coaches white also?
Speaker 2: Yes.  All the coaches throughout my high school career were white, as best as I can call--as I--best I remember.  Football coach was Mr. Cap [ph.], then Mr. Driscoll [ph.], basketball coach Mr. Murphy [ph.].  I think Mr. Cap was the, was the track coach, yeah.
Story_ID: 332705
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna go back a little also, to see if you remember anything at all as a kid; in like in 1955 you were what?
Speaker 2: Eleven.
Speaker 1: Anything at all do you remember about Emmett Till?  Do you remember this kid being killed?  Did it have an impact on you? Did people talk about it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I remember the--I remember the Emmett Till matter because of the photo; could've been a photo in Jet, could've been a photo in Ebony about his body.  I remember that very well.  Shocked by it?  I think the community was shocked by it, but it didn't galvanize anyone in our, in our area to become an activist in any way (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But did you know why he'd been killed?
Speaker 2: He'd been killed, allegedly, 'cause he'd whistled at a white woman and--
Speaker 1: Well, what impact did that have on you as a kid when you were going to school with white children?
Speaker 2: Interesting question and a good question.  I grew up knowing--known--knew before then that white women were not something that black guys should pay any attention to; you, you grew up knowing that.  Now, no one--I think no one ever said that--no one ever said, "Don't you mess around with those white women," but you got that sense; you, you, you could almost feel distance between white women and black men.  You, you got that sense, so it wasn't shocking; it was, it was at once shocking that, that it happened to Till, but not--because he'd been killed--but it wasn't--it was shocking and not.  He was in the South.  You should know better in the South, and one should know better.  And of course, in later years, there's, there's the thought that he might have had a speech defect, and what sounded like a whistle was just some manifestation of his speech defect--could have been--happy to hear that people who, who were involved in that have been brought to justice.
Story_ID: 332706
Speaker 1: But to take it back to Woodstown [New Jersey], there may have been some fellows in my high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey] class who may have dated some white girls.
Speaker 2: Black guys?
Speaker 1: Black guys.  But if they did it, they didn't do it publicly; certainly they would have been criticized by teachers at school, the girls would have been criticized by, by their parents.  There was just--it was not--it was--the mixing of the races in a social setting was unusual.
Speaker 2: Was it discouraged?
Speaker 1: It was certainly not encouraged.  I, you know, I wouldn't be surprised if a classmate told me that it, that it had been discouraged.
Speaker 2: But Cathy's writing you now; did you--she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Susan [ph.].
Speaker 2: Susan I mean--sorry--was in this high school.
Speaker 1: Susan was in the high school.  Susan would not have gone out with a black guy.
Speaker 2: Would she--did you know her in high school?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, she was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There were--like there were 107 of us and I knew her; she was one of the--she was a cheerleader, good student, probably wrote for the paper and was probably on the yearbook staff, so I knew her; I knew just about all 107 of them.
Speaker 2: So, were the black students allowed to function in leadership roles in high school or--like on the student body?  Student body president, black or white?
Speaker 1: I think--my guess is that--my recollection is that there were no black members of the student council in my class; there may be some folks--there may have been some folks who were more active in that area after I graduated, but they could have been in a couple classes behind me.  Bippy Poke [ph.], Clarence Braxton and, I were probably the, the leading black kids--black guys in our high school class; none of us were--did any student government or that kind of stuff.  We were in the Spanish class or the, the science class or whatever the heck--the English class--those kind of clubs, but we weren't leaders as such.
Story_ID: 332707
Speaker 1: What year did this teacher impress upon you that you should possibly consider writing?
Speaker 2: Ms. Hanson [ph.], that--she was my tenth grade English teacher [at Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey], so that was '59 [1959] or '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: Was that your first awareness of your skill as a writer?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  I always got good grades in English and good grades in writing, but she said, she gave me the op-, "You can do it, here's the opportunity, I'll help you."  So that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was she black or white?
Speaker 2: She was white.
Speaker 1: She was white, okay.
Speaker 2: And died maybe six or seven years ago.  I just found that out last year, that she had died.
Speaker 1: Now, she says to you, "Solomon [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], I think you're a great writer, you should write for the newspaper."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And you accepted her challenge or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, and so what happens after that?
Speaker 2: So I started writing, As Sol Sees It, and some of my friends give me little jibes as, as, as, as friends do, but people were happy to see--people generally, who knew me, were happy to see my name in the school newspaper; none of them were surprised.  I had that reputation for being a smart guy, so--as well as being an excellent athlete.
Story_ID: 332708
Speaker 1: Now, did you always know that you were going to go to college after high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: No.  The--in fact, while I was an aspirant to go to college, I wasn't aspiring to go to college; Aunt Mildred [ph.] had always talked about it--and I was in the academic track--tract or track at school.  You could be general, you could be secretarial, you could be agricultural, you could be academic.  Most of my friends were gonna go to college, both Bip [Bippy Poke (ph.)] and Clarence [Clarence Braxton], and all my white friends were going to college.  It wasn't 100 percent certain to me that we could afford it, so--
Speaker 1: How did you talk about it at home?  How did you bring it up to your mom [Denise Jones Watson]?
Speaker 2: Well, mom knew that I wanted to go to college so she took out a loan so I could go.  I think it was probably a--could've been a $1,000 loan, or a two $2,000 loan.  If I recall correctly, tuition at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was--I think 250 a semester, or 300 a semester, so it wasn't a lot if you had the bucks [dollars], but we didn't have the bucks, so she in fact had to take out a loan.
Speaker 1: So, talk to me about the process of even the application process, who mentored you.  I mean did you do it all on your own to get into Howard?
Speaker 2: I talked a little bit--since Aunt Mildred had gone to Howard, she was the person who'd suggested Howard over other schools.
Speaker 1: Now, did you qualify as like legacy, because Aunt Mildred had gone, or they don't even have that (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't---I, I don't think so.  That--if so, that wasn't in my mind at the time.  I had to fill out an application.  I didn't expect that I would be rejected because I was a pretty good student in high school but, you know, I hadn't spent a lotta time with other college-educated folks, so I didn't have a, a terrific idea what college would be like.
Speaker 1: So you decide on a historically black college [HBCU] for any particular reason?
Speaker 2: That would--yes, because that was--that's what history would lead us to.  I--there were--I'm sure at that time there were some blacks going to other New Jersey schools, Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and so forth and so on, but probably very few.  Remember, this, this is still just '62 [1962], so the, the march of, of, of black high school students to, to non-black colleges really hadn't started then--at that time.
Story_ID: 332709
Speaker 1: So, you graduate high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey] in 1962?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: And you start Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in '62 [1962]?
Speaker 2: September of 1962, yes.
Speaker 1: What is that experience like?  Nineteen sixty-two [1962], the campus of Howard University as a freshman.  Describe it for me.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a freshman who was a, a small town country guy and a lower-income guy, so I was in Charles Drew Hall--Charles R. Drew Hall, one of the dormitories there, and there was an immediate recognition on my part, that there was a larger income divide than I had been used to and I was kind of on the lower end, so that made me a little reluctant to sort of get out there, but by-and-large, most of the folks were welcoming, there was no discrimination that I felt because I was a--sort of come from a poor background.  The good thing about it was that I was pretty smart, so I was put in the honors program, which is where--the smarter smart kids are in this program, and all that.  And I, I spent my freshman year--got pretty good grades in my freshman year, pretty good grades in my sophomore year, stayed in the honors program, but then my, my junior year, I felt I was a big man on campus, albeit in the small area of the campus, and allowed my social life to overtake my academic life, so my grades went south.  But freshman year was kind of a way of finding my way socially.  I joined the football team and that became a social organization for me, and then I had my honors course classmates, so to the extent that I had social organizations that I belonged to, or groups, those were at the football players and the honors kids.  And I would go to football practice, go to the dorm or library and study, and that, that was it, that was my life.
Story_ID: 332710
Speaker 1: When Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated, you were in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: I was in Washington, was on the campus [of Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when I heard about it, and was shocked.  Couldn't believe that something like that could happen in our country to a person that I will describe as our--poor people, black people's president.  Couldn't believe it.  We got word from our ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] classmates, professors that if you wanted to view the body, you could put on your ROTC uniform and go down and go in the side door, so I--you know, a bunch of ROTC guys and I did that, but it was, it was--
Speaker 1: You viewed the body?
Speaker 2: It was a--yeah, but it was a closed casket.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, closed casket.  Yeah, we did that.
Story_ID: 332711
Speaker 1: So, you were in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What made you decide to join ROTC?
Speaker 2: A couple of things.  One was that growing up in southern New Jersey, I was basically a patriotic kind of kid.  You're too young to remember this, but when TV would go off at night at eleven or twelve o'clock, they would play the national anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] or 'The Stars and Stripes' ['The Stars and Stripes Forever'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember that.
Speaker 2: --and I would get up and salute that; I mean it was always kind of--I'm like a Boy Scout kind of guy, kind of patriotic kind of guy.  And the first two years of ROTC at Howard were required, so my freshman year, sophomore year, I had to be in ROTC.  I decided to stay in ROTC, advanced ROTC, on the theory that Vietnam War was going on, and that if I had to go, I'd rather go as an officer rather than an enlisted man.  But let me digress 'cause there was a--something else at Howard, and I think the only thing about my Howard career that I didn't--that I'm a little uncomfortable about is that there was some great student unrest.  Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was there, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], Cleveland Sellers--guys who were big names in the student Civil Rights Movement, and I was at best on the fringe of that.  I would go to campus rallies but I would never take a bus trip to go down south, and, and what I regret most about my college career is not having gotten involved in that more.  And I'm not 100 percent certain why I didn't, but those guys were the leaders, they had their kind of thing, and they had their kind of group and I was kind of in mind, but it was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk about--what did you think about them?  What was your head like thinking about them at the time, Stokely Carmichael and the others?
Speaker 2: Great question.  Initially, I was a little--I was kind of a conservative.  I didn't quite grasp the, the import of the Civil Rights Movement.  It probably--I was probably a year behind Sellers and this guy Bullock [ph.] guy--I've forgotten his first name--with Stokely Carmichael.  I was--they, they were more visionary than I in that particular area.  Yeah, I'm spending my time with my books and running around on the football team or the track team, or whatever it was, but I kind of got into it but I was never--I was never a leader; I was a follower, and I was kind of in the rear echelon of--I was not an activist, I was--there was no way in hades I could ever call myself in, in those days, a social activist and, and I kind of regret that but--that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: But what did you think about them doing it?  You thought that they were--
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought they were--heroic is, is too large a word because it wasn't kind of in my, my vocabulary for guys who were a couple years ahead of me in college, but I, I, I thought they were risk-takers, I thought they were great communicators.  I mean Stokely Carmichael could, could just--he could, he could spellbind people when he talked.  I thought they were very smart and, and to some extent there may have been a little envy but from, from, from way, way back in the pack.  They, they were good guys, they were great guys.  As they were, as I was, products of differing environments.
Story_ID: 332712
Speaker 1: At this point, you are at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  Are--have you decided what you think you might wanna do with your life as far as a career?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You have.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no question about it.  I'm taking English courses, learning the power of words.
Speaker 1: And what is that doing for you?
Speaker 2: To some extent, in large measure, opening my mind.  I mean, I'd grown up small town country boy, small town high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey]; did well, but I hadn't done a lot of reading.  I found myself drawn to, to poetry or--and short stories as, as modes of communication.  I had a couple of, couple of very well--good professors.  One guy was Sterling Brown who had been a member of the so-called--he wrote a story, wrote a series of books--stories about the Negro cavalcade--'The Negro Caravan' [Sterling A. Brown]--the cavalcade of folks coming from the South, and he wrote in the words, the dialect that black folks really spoke, as opposed to some formal stilted language.  I do both formal stilted language and Negro dialect.  And there was--and so there was him, there was Arthur Paul Davis [Arthur P. Davis].  I had a guy--my, my journalism professor was Dr. Fenderson, Lewis Fenderson [Lewis Henry Fenderson, Jr.], and those guys sort of opened my mind to, to sort of thinking about maybe teaching, certainly writing on a professional basis with Dr. Fenderson, who got me to work for a, a paper in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Called?
Speaker 2: The Washington City Tribune.  Now, The Washington City Tribune was a paper started by Dr. Fenderson--well, not by him--by one of Dr. Fenderson's associates, a woman whose name I've now forgotten.  Washington City Tribune had a green press card, and I was supposed to write and sell advertising for The Washington City Tribune; I was not terrific at either, and there was a very small staff, and I guess I worked for that paper maybe for six or eight weeks in my junior year, and then the paper went belly-up.
Speaker 1: Was it a black paper?
Speaker 2: It was a--it was designed to be a black paper in D.C., but looking back on it, it didn't have a good business plan, it was just someone's idea to do it, and looking back on it, if they were recruiting me to write and sell advertising, there's no way that thing was going to be a success.  But it was good.  It taught me a little bit about--a little bit about the newspaper business.
Speaker 1: So, you were learning the power of words.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And these words were opening up your mind. But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: So, you thought you might wanna teach.
Speaker 2: Thought I wanted to teach, thought I might wanna write, so I, I, I started--I tried to write some things, particularly, particularly poems because I like poetry, and I, I sent a number of them; I probably sent in one summer, poems to maybe two hundred publications, and I got one poem published in The Denver Post.  I've forgotten which poem it was, but poetry--I like poetry, I remember poetry.  Yesterday, one of our lawyers sent something around about gossip columnists and the--someone had written a, a blurb paraphrasing all the news that's fit to print into all the news that's fit to eat, and that made me recall in my mind a poem ['In the Desert,' Stephen Crane] that I had read twenty, thirty years ago.  The concept is that the poet comes along, he sees someone sitting in the desert, and the person is eating his heart, and the guy says, "What are you eating there?"  And the, the persona says, "I'm eating my heart.  It is bitter."  And the guy says, "Why are you eating it?"  He says, "Because it's my heart and bitter," so anytime I have an opportunity to increase the level of my staff--so I sent that poem out to, to the thirteen lawyers that work for me, and one wrote back saying, "Terrific poem, thank you for sharing it with me."  And that's a poem that I read back in the '60s [1960s] that stayed with me, and now someone else has read that poem and has been impacted by it, which is why the, the power of words--I just think it's terrific.
Story_ID: 332713
Speaker 1: We were talking about your, your writing skills.  And at what point do you decide upon a career at How- I mean while you're at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], whether or not it's going to be a career doesn't matter when you thought about teaching, you thought about writing--at what point do you decide this is what I'm going to pursue, and--
Speaker 2: Probably in my--in my junior year, I thought that what I would pursue would be some kind of writing career.  I wasn't 100 percent certain whether it would be creative writing or journalism, but if I'd had to guess at that time, it would have been journalism.  The reality then, of course, became that I was in advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  There were some organizations who were looking for, for writers, who came to interview folks at Howard, and I was interviewed by a couple of them.  The feedback I got was, "Watson [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV] is okay, has potential, generally speaking," but that folks knew that I had a two-year [U.S.] military obligation because I'd been in advance ROTC.  In advance ROTC, that means you go in, to the military, shortly after you graduate, so folks said, "Don't need to make this guy an offer.  Let's not get too excited about him, because he's got a two-year military obligation."
Speaker 1: During the time that you're, you're realizing you have this two-year military obligation, is the Vietnam War raging, or is it just starting?
Speaker 2: The war is--the war is pretty hopping--pretty popping by then; this is '64 [1964], '65 [1965].  Yeah, I think I decided in 1964 or '65 [1965] that I was gonna go in advanced ROTC, in part out of self-preservation, in part out of saying that if you gotta go in, you might as well be a leader of men as opposed to a follower of men.
Speaker 1: Now, at the time, did you think you were gonna have to go in? You knew that you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, no question; that was--yeah, I mean my--there were all kind of lottery numbers, and maybe student deferments--I don't remember, but my, my view of life is that you look at the worse days and do what you can to protect yourself from that, and don't rely on, on good fortune to keep you from getting in a bad place, so I, I knew that I had to go in the [U.S.] Army and I thought that it was likely that I'd end up in Vietnam.
Story_ID: 332714
Speaker 1: So, in '66 [1966], you graduate Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Graduate Howard in June.
Speaker 1: With a degree in--
Speaker 2: English.  Major in English, minor in journalism, and no job other than to go into the [U.S.] Army.  So, I was scheduled to go into the Army, I think, in December of '66 [1966].  After I graduated, I think I went to, to ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] summer camp, left summer camp, had nothing to do other than to wait until December came, so I asked the Army to move up my, my entry date to October of '66 [1966], so I went in the Army October of '66 [1966]. I was a military police [U.S. Army Military Police Corps] lieutenant.  I had chosen that as one of my three branches, and went to Fort Gordon, Georgia [Fort Gordon, Augusta, Georgia] where there was a military police school--teach us, one of them had military police missions and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: What was the [U.S.] military like for you?  Was it a racist place?  Was it a difficult place for, for especially an, an educated black man?
Speaker 2: Good question.  The military police school was in--outside of Augusta, Georgia, it's a place called Fort Gordon, and there were very few African American officers there.  I think there was none in my Military Police Officer Basic School.  There was a signal school there as well.  There may have been some, some black second lieutenants there.  We were generally told, or we were told, black guys were told that, by-and-large, if you go off-base to Augusta, Georgia into town, you're going to be discriminated against.  That wasn't an official word, but that--everybody knew that and people would tell you that, so--
Speaker 1: Even wearing your uniform.
Speaker 2: Even wearing your uniform.  That gave me a little--gave, gave me a little pause.  You figure you're a soldier, you're a soldier, but at that time because the Civil Rights Movement had been going on and so you knew that there were places in, in Georgia where black folk didn't go, so I had no desire to go into town to Augusta, so I think--I don't think I left the base to go into Augusta when I was there.
Speaker 1: When you were in Georgia, could you, could you go to the officers club that was on the base (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Oh, yes, not, not a problem there.
Speaker 1: Not a problem.
Speaker 2: Not a problem there.  And I think there is a large degree of truth to the, to the general perception stated now, more than it was then, that when you're in the military, what counts is your rank more than how you appear.  That's--there's always been that--always been that statement about the military, and in large measure, that's what I liked because by-and-large, I'm just as patriotic as the next guy and hard-working lieutenant, and wanted to be judged on that, and that's one of the good things about the military because at some level, the military is more--at least for officers--is more of a meritocracy than the meritocracies which are spoken about as existing in Corporate America even today--military, generally meritocracy.  You get that officer efficiency report, OER [officer evaluation reports] rating, you know where you stand, you're rated against your peers, and I enjoyed that kind of objective.
Story_ID: 332715
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-seven [1967], when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came out and spoke out against the Vietnam War, what impact did that have on you being in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Okay, let me, let me just deal with it, see where was I in that--'67 [1967].  Okay, I was--I left Georgia, went to a, to a base up in Upstate New York in December of '66 [1966], so if I remember King's speaking--I don't know if that was second quarter or middle of the year.  Heard it, discounted it.  What is this guy talking about?  All right, he's a preacher. Let him talk about preaching, let him deal with the civil rights stuff.  That was my initial reaction, then thought a little bit about it 'cause my mind had sort of been expanded, and said, "Ah, maybe he's got a point."  I understood his point, but I was in the [U.S.] Army, I was a lieutenant, I was a dirty bar second lieutenant and, and, and someone who might, might have thought at one time about staying in the Army.  So I, I thought he was a little bit out of his jurisdiction, but recognized the value and the importance and, and the accuracy, you know, at the religious level, at the anagogical level, at the social level of, of what he was saying.
Speaker 1: Right, but what--all right, what did you think about the fact that you black young men were dying in Vietnam, and then coming back to the South, not even, not even being able to be served at a lunch counter?
Speaker 2: Painful.  Understood it, understood it, still understand it, still happens no doubt.  Wasn't quite sure how to navigate that, didn't know whether any stand that I could take would, would change that in any way, so the theory, and I'm not sure I had this theory, is you, you go in, you serve well, you come out, and if you don't get that respect, you demand it.  That was kind of my theory but, you know, I was still a young guy, I had only been in the Army then for about eighteen months.
Story_ID: 332716
Speaker 1: I was up in Upstate New York. I had an administrative job.  First, I was in the MP [military police] company, run by a guy named Jim McCormick [ph.].  He was the first lawyer I had met.  Then I got out of the MP company.  I had an administrative job.  I was an adjutant, personnel officer.  The way the [U.S.] Army worked in the personnel area, Pentagon would say to the [U.S.] Department of the Army, "We need so many Army troops over in Vietnam and this place or that place;" they would be--those, those orders would be sent down the chain of command so they would come to an army depot, and the personnel officer would be--the adjutant--would be the first person to open the orders.  And I'd, I'd be sitting there, I'd get orders and say, "Ah, I see that they're sending Lieutenant Cubero to Vietnam." "Tut, tut, tut tut, tut."  Open the orders, next, next month's orders come in.  "Oh, I see they're sending Shawn to Vietnam.  That's really too bad, he and his wife just got married, they're just a wonderful couple."  And I remember the day--opened the orders, "Lieutenant Watson [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], 9th Division Military Police Company, Vietnam."  The perspiration came down as if it were a thunderstorm 'cause I did not wanna go to the big one overseas, and I think I probably sat and trembled for about four or five minutes, and of course being a military police lieutenant, I got myself together, went and told my wife [Bernadette Aldrich Watson].  She was sad, but you gotta go, you gotta go.  So, I shipped out, I think, in August or September--September (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Had your brother [Marvin Watson] been killed at--by this time?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: No, okay.  So this is nineteen what?
Speaker 1: So, shipped out, little scared.  This is middle of '67 [1967]; this is when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, you had not been long in--
Speaker 1: This was during the King time.  So--and so I went.  Well, you're in the Army they tell you--
Speaker 2: So, tell me about that.  Even, even the trip.  What's it like to pack your bags to go to Vietnam?
Speaker 1: It was not a, it was not a, it was not a happy time or a fun time.  The body counts weren't very high but my job, military police, you're bas- you're basically not a front-line guy, your job isn't like the infantry guys or the armor guys, or the artillery guys, to kill folks, my job was to--military police--you control traffic, you control drugs, you control the black market, you con--
Speaker 2: Drugs?  What drugs?
Speaker 1: In Vietnam?  (Laughter) Whatever you wanted in terms of drugs in Vietnam.  You controlled prisoners of war, so you were basically a rear echelon kind of guy, but you've heard all of these stories about how people get ambushed and killed, and all that stuff. So the trip--I think I went from here [New York, New York] to Oakland [California], got on a plane in Oakland, flew to Guam, we set down in Guam for a while, then flew to Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam].  And it's a story you hear a lot of guys talk--or you fly into Guam--fly into Saigon, Tan Son Nhut Air Base, and it's dark, and you can see lights around Saigon, and occasionally you'll see a tracer round go off, or an explosion, so you get really scared.  But plane lands, and then they, they ship you to a, to a place in Long Binh [Vietnam] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The plane lands and you're in the, you're in the jungle?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Tan Son Nhut Air Base is like, almost like overstatement, but a very well--very secure area outside of Saigon, and spend the night there and then you--the next day you get your duty station.  A lot of guys went to places where there was, where there was jungle; I went to a--initially to a base camp north of Saigon, and then to a, a smaller base camp down in the Mekong Delta [Vietnam] but I was, I was always in an area which was--at the time I was in it--a secure area.
Story_ID: 332717
Speaker 1: On that trip over [to Vietnam], there were black soldiers and white soldiers I'm imagining.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, at what point do you lose all sense of color and you are literally just soldiers?
Speaker 2: The answer really is never, at least for me.  I'm a black guy, and still a second lieutenant--black guy before I gotta (unclear) those dirty bars.  So, you could see--it is, it is, it is now, as it was then, that when I interact with folks, whatever my status, they see me as a black guy, and different people react to that.  Black folks say, "Go on, brother, go on, lieutenant" or "little lieutenant," as I was sometimes called.  And that sometimes makes a tension for an officer because officers aren't supposed to fraternize.  I didn't fraternize with the black soldiers any more than I fraternized with the non-black soldiers; kind of an easy-going kind of guy, as long as people don't step over the line.  But I, but I know going over there and during the period of time when I ran into black soldiers, whether they were infantrymen or guys in my own unit, the other black guys felt better because I was there, and that's, that's okay.  That was all right. That was good (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they have reason to feel--were they treated better by you than perhaps they would have been by a white military policeman?
Speaker 2: The, the answer to the question is that I always enforced the rules evenly, but with humanity and understanding, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did police brutality exist in the [U.S.] Army the way it did like outside of the Army, the way we were seeing it in the country at the time?
Speaker 2: As a former military policeman, I must say that we military policemen were never abusive of anyone in our custody.  Now, we were pretty good.  I mean the units I--that I, that I served with in Vietnam were pretty good; we didn't bust anyone's chops.  I mean those guys, by-and-large, the guys out in the boonies, had a much tougher life than we had.  Occasionally, you would hear about this kind of ironic issue about the guys back in the base camp saying to the military policemen, "Make sure when these guys come in from the field that they--dressed appropriately and they get haircuts and shine their boots."  Well, that's what we'd call--we'd call that bovine feces but, you know, you sort of have to do that--a little bit of that stuff, but we tried to, we tried to be reasonable guys.  I don't think, to my knowledge, none of my men ever abused anyone when they were in Vietnam, and I certainly didn't, didn't abuse anyone.
Story_ID: 332718
Speaker 1: What was the most difficult thing about you being there in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I, I had a couple of interesting incidents.  Once my, my driver--guy name Owens [ph.].  I think Owens was from Newark [New Jersey] or East Orange [New Jersey].  Owens was a good MP [military police].  He was big, he was black, he looked just like a black Mr. Clean, good guy.  Used to love riding around with Owens, but Owens had a weakness for marijuana, and he was found to have--or a marijuana pipe was found in his, in his--near his bunk, so he was convicted of having marijuana that violated Article--it wasn't Article 15 but violated a rule, and he was sentenced to Long Binh Jail [Long Binh, Vietnam].  Long Binh [Long Binh Post] was a base camp, I think, west of, of barrack at--maybe ten or fifteen miles, or maybe ten miles away, and that's where people were sent to jail who'd violated rules.  And I'm not sure about this, but I was asked to drive Owens to jail.  Now, I'm not sure if it was because I was duty officer that day the duty officer takes care of that stuff or whether people wanted to test whether I was strong enough to drive my own driver to jail.  That was kind of interesting.  I thought that was kind of a test of, of some type.  Whether it was intended as a test or not, it was a test.  Now, the reality is I'm the kind of guy, if someone says, "Rosie has violated the rules," then Rosie goes to jail, and I'd be happy to drive her there.  I'm the best person to drive her there.  So, while somebody may have been testing me on that, not a problem, gotta top--you got what's a tough job for anyone else, give it to me and I'll make it easy.
Story_ID: 332719
Speaker 1: You said that the smartest guys were the lawyers.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who were they, and how did you come in contact with them, and how did they end up in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: They were--there were two guys in particular--
Speaker 1: Now, were they black or white?
Speaker 2: White guys.  Steve Schwartz [Steven Schwartz], Jerry Richman [ph.], both Jewish guys.  And Steve played a larger role in my life than Richman did.  Steve was a captain.  He had been to law school already, so he was a lawyer, he worked on the, on the staff, general staff briefing the generals and that kind of stuff, and we lived kind of in the same general area.  And he was just smart, worldly-wise, said, you know, "Lieutenant Watson [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], you need to do this, do that," you know.  He was kind of a mentor in a way, and we were talking in--must've been early '68 [1968] about what I was gonna do when I got out, and he said, "Well, it's clear to me you should go to law school."  I had not given that very much thought, and to the extent that I had, I thought about criminal law--Perry Mason kind of, type stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But what extent had, had you considered law school before he--?
Speaker 2: Maybe just a smidgen; it wasn't so much considering law school, but coming to recognize that law played a large role in the lives of people, so it was really--it was really Steve who said, "Well, then, go to law school, and you can deal with some of these issues."
Speaker 1: But how did you have--what were the opportunities for you to see that law played a role in people's lives?
Speaker 2: Well, you, you could read in the paper.  Yeah, you know I was a military policeman, and you could read it--I had--Truman Capote had just written a book, or I had just read a book, 'In Cold Blood' Truman Capote, and it was--the lawyers in there played an interesting role in that, and that was a little bit going through my mind.  But certainly, while I wasn't a participant even at a remote--from a remote distance in the Civil Rights Movement, you began to see how important law was, you know?  These were what protected a number of the civil rights folks, Rosa Parks was recent--the most recent at the time--were that there were laws which, in some cases, protected their civil rights.  There were laws which protected people accused of crimes, and there were laws that helped people who had claims against each other.  So, all that kind of thing was going in my mind, and I met Schwartz, who was able to navigate.  Here's a guy had gone to law college, gone to law school, was able to navigate the military system well, used his intelligence to his benefit, was recognized for his intelligence, and I don't wanna over-state it, but I kind of said, "You know, this is the kind of guy I'd like to be."  And he was just a good guy; he's the guy that persuaded me to apply to law schools.
Story_ID: 332720
Speaker 1: And I applied to two, Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  This is probably in the second quarter of '68 [1968].  Could've been the end of first quarter, but it was after--it was clearly after Tet [Tet Offensive], I think.  Got accepted at Howard right away.  I'd gone to Howard undergrad school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I had a pretty decent record, and was waitlisted for Harvard.  Now, keep in mind, I'm a small town country guy from Woodstown [New Jersey], and when Steve [Steven Schwartz] said, "You should apply to Harvard," I said, "Me, go to Harvard?"  I mean that's something that I'd never contemplated; I thought the smartest people in the world had gone to Harvard.
Speaker 2: Why do you think he contemplated--why do you think he (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, Steve, Steve was from--Steve was from Boston [Massachusetts], had grown up in the Boston area, had gone to either--I think Boston Uni- had gone to Boston University law school [Boston University School of Law, Boston, Massachusetts], so there were a number of law schools in, in the Boston area--BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], BC [Boston College, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], and Harvard, and Steve's view was, "Always strive for the best, always reach as far as you can," you know?  "Don't settle for what you can get, try to get more."  So, that's probably the, the, the context in which he mentioned what I now refer to as a law school, to me.  So I applied to Harvard, and I must say that there was a personal statement that one had to write, and I was able to write my personal statement from Vietnam, so there was--there may have been a little rhetorical hyperbole (laughter) in my personal statement, but in the--in any event, it persuaded those folks back at the law school to take me off the waiting list and put me in.
Speaker 2: But I wanna ask this question because I wanna ask it a specific way.  You were accepted to Howard and Harvard.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Why did you not go to Howard?
Speaker 1: That's a very interesting question and a question perhaps that I think I may wish that you didn't ask, but I'll tell you.  The--two reasons.  One, Harvard would be a challenge, intellectually, it would be a challenge for me.  And two, Howard was a much smaller law school, and I wasn't sure what my opportunities would be when I left Howard.  Let me put it in today's context.  At that time, in the '60s [1960s], Howard's primary reputation, or the primary reputation of, of the Howard law school which, to some extent, continued past that period of time, was that it, it came out with not some of, but the greatest legal minds for the civil rights kind of activity, social activism, and I had thought, erroneously, that a lot of that had passed by, and that I wasn't gonna get involved in that.  And I had been, been at Howard, been, you know, been, been--I lived three blocks away from the law school, knew some the folks who had gone to law school after I left, and just decided that Howard would be, would be a different--Harvard would be a different kind of, of environment, and more challenging.  Not necessarily better, but different, yeah.
Speaker 2: And different how?  Did you think it present you with more corporate opportunities, not necessarily so narrow as far as civil rights?
Speaker 1: Just different at--the reality is keeping in mind that at this time, I had met three people known to me to be lawyers, I didn't know what corporate law was about, and the only kinds of laws that I had any sense about at all were civil rights law and criminal law.  I didn't know anything about law firms, didn't know anything about the Internal Revenue Code, but there was a, there was a challenge there.
Story_ID: 332721
Speaker 1: What year did you leave the--discharge from the [U.S.] Army and go to law school?
Speaker 2: I left, I left Vietnam on about the 18th or 19th of August, 1968, and started law school a couple of days after Labor Day in 1968.
Speaker 1: So, there's no transition.
Speaker 2: Very little transition.
Speaker 1: How did you--how, how did you transition from being in Vietnam to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it took a while, it took a while on two, maybe three areas.  First, not putting down the Army, but I had done nothing academic; I didn't study anything when I was in the Army, didn't read any great books, didn't write any great writes--writings, so my mind was a little of--not, not, not in the same gear as those kids who had graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or some other school in June, took the summer off and then slid back into law school.  So, there was a, an academic--I needed to shift gears academically, and it probably took me a while to do that, in part, because there had been no kind of socialization, psychological transition as you indicated.  You know, some of my classmates still make fun of the fact that when I'd hear an engine backfire or a car backfire, I would jump around or look, or reach for my .45, and I did that for a while; not that I was very much threatened during most of my tour in Vietnam, but large sounds, people coming up behind you quickly, anything outta the ordinary would occasion my thinking back, so some of that went on for the first maybe six or seven months, and then there was this whole academic socialization thing.  There were between five and six hundred people in my class at the law school, and we were in sections, four sections, and the reality is that there were some very smart people there.  I mean there were these--the professors would call on folks, they would say, "Well, Mr. Smith, how do you think this case should be decided?"  And Mr. Smith would say, "Blah, blah, blah, blah."  And the professor would say, "Well, what, what if, what if I change this fact?"  And Mr. Smith would say, "Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah," and the professor would say, "Well, what if I change these five facts?"  And Mr. Smith would say, "I just--Professor, it's just too tough."  The professor would call on Miss Denby.  "Miss Denby, can you pick up where Mr. Smith left?"  And Miss Denby would, would play the professor as if he were a violin and she were Stradivarius.  I mean they were just so smart, so intellectually powerful, and I would say to myself, "Gee, how can I compete with these folks?  Like, I'm just a small town country guy--just got outta the Army."  So it took me a while to sort of say, "I can compete with these folks, I can just hit the books."  Now, there are some folks who are much smarter than I, no question about--there are these, these folks who learn by reading the books; oh, I look at the book, read it, and I understand it.  There are some folks who read the book, take notes.  There are some folks who read the books, take the notes, and take notes on their notes.  Then there are some guys who just put their hand on the book and they got it; there, there a number of guys that I know at the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] who graduated, they just never went to class.  They went to class the first day to get the book, they worked full-time jobs, they go back and take the exam; sometimes they read some of their, some of their friends'--some of their friends' notes or something like that--but just very smart people.
Story_ID: 332722
Speaker 1: How many people--how many black students were in, in your class in law school, at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: My best guess is somewhere between twenty-five and thirty.
Speaker 1: What was the breakdown, men and women?  Mostly men?
Speaker 2: Mostly men.  I can't remember them all but, but certainly most, mostly men.
Speaker 1: How many of those students graduated?
Speaker 2: The only person that I know--all of them graduated.  One guy started with us in our first-year class, he took a year off because of family matters, but all of the folks--all of the black folks that I know that started with, with me graduated from law school.  Now, let me just, just to be clear.  One of the good things about the Harvard Law School, sometimes referred to by me as a law school, is that the folks who are admitted are folks who are expected to do well there.  Harvard isn't one of those kinds of schools if they exist, which say, "We'll admit five hundred, and after the first year we'll flunk out, so forth."  Every one admitted there has a sufficient academic record as to predict that he or she can do the work at the law school, and to, to the best of my knowledge, that's true.
Story_ID: 332723
Speaker 1: Continuing, we're gonna take a couple of steps back.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And which order is best?  I mean is it--yeah, I guess '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: In--just sort of picking up.  After I was advised to go to law school, I was told that I had to take something called the LSAT, Law School Aptitude Test [Law School Admission Test], or something like that, and I took that test in Saigon [Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam], and my recollection is that it was in the U.S.A information [U.S. Information Agency] office library in Saigon, and I took it, depending on the days, on the fifth of April or the sixth of April.  But in any event I, I spent the night in a hotel, went over to take the exam, and as I recall it, there were about five other guys in this Information Agency library, and one officer, a senior officer--a major--came up and said, "Lieutenant Watson [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV] I'm, I'm very sorry about what happened."  I said, "Well, what are you talking about?"  He said, "Martin Luther King was killed."  And I was shocked, and I said, "I hadn't heard that; thank you for telling me that, sir," and I sit down, take the exam, and then in the, in the newspapers that we get in the [U.S.] military, the story of King's assassination comes out, and there was a--there was in fact, as I recall, though I did not witness it, a lot of unrest among black troops; not in all--not throughout the country, but in a number of areas then, because the theory was what, what are we fighting for if our leader over there gets assassinated?  What's happening?  Why are we here?  Because prior to that time, there certainly was a lot of feedback, some generated by King, but others about the number of African Americans in infantry and armor units, and how they were getting killed disproportionately.  Now, the stats may not hold that out, but that was clearly the, the--clearly the perception.  The reason why I say I can't remember precisely was it--whether it was the fifth or the sixth because we were on the other side of the International Date Line, so I don't know exactly what day it was there.  But that, that was, that was troubling and problematic, and then began to get me thinking more about the points that Dr. King had made being against the war [Vietnam War], so I began to, to get somewhat more of a social consciousness (unclear).
Speaker 1: But at that time, do you--because you're taking a test to get into law school, do you think, "Well, perhaps I will pursue civil rights law?"
Speaker 2: No, it didn't move me any more in that direction for doing civil rights law but it sensitized me more to the reality of the issues that he had been talking about, yeah.
Story_ID: 332724
Speaker 1: You leave Vietnam, you're at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and in '69 [1969]--
Speaker 2: I leave Vietnam, and I go to Harvard, Cambridge Massachusetts, and my good friend Steven Schwartz is working in Boston [Massachusetts], and so I see him once or twice while I'm at, while I'm at law school.  So, I complete my first year, and it's difficult for first-year students to get jobs because the firms wanna hire second-year students; first-year students are thought not to know very much.  And Schwartz gets me a job working in the same agency he works for, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston [Boston, Massachusetts].  So, I get that job and I guess the job begins late May, early June of '69 [1969], and I get a call that my brother's [Marvin Watson] been killed; my brother was a marine--take five.  My brother had been killed, and the, the soldier's reaction is, "They got him," meaning the Vietcong.  So, I go home and try to help make arrangements for the funeral and all that stuff.  Takes longer for the body to arrive than we thought, I go back to, to Boston, my mom's [Denise Jones Watson] in, you know, very tough shape.  Go back to Boston, do some more work, and then I get to talk to the, the, the marine who--they send the marine when officers home to tell the family, when somebody gets zapped, and it turned out that my brother had been killed by friendly fire.  He had been in a night defensive position (makes sounds), attacked by Vietcong (makes sounds), artillery shells go over, one lands near him, kills him.  So, I think I tell my mother and sister--not until years later--but when this major is telling me this, I said--he said, "Well, you know, I, I don't think your mother heard what I said to her about this, maybe your brothers did, and they were very upset, but I'm a marine and I can take care of myself," this guy said.  So I said, "Yes, sir, you are a marine and I'm a former lieutenant, but if I'd been there, I believe I would've killed you" because I probably would have.  I mean it's, it's one thing when soldier is killed by the enemy; it's another thing when soldier is killed by friendly fire, and that isn't made clear to the family.  But anyway I got over that--as you can see--gotten over that.
Story_ID: 332725
Speaker 1: In any event--so, I successfully complete my first year at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], go to work at a job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Federal Reserve [Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: --set up, set up by my good friend Steve Schwartz [Steven Schwartz].  In the second year, pretty good student, not top of the class, not bottom--pretty good student, and I'm intellectually engaged, transitioned out of my, out of my, out of my [U.S.] Army-type mode, even though I still kept my beard.  Do okay, and it's time for second-year job, so I go to work for one of the major law firms in Boston [Massachusetts].  Do okay there, and then the summer after the second year, the beginning of the third year is when one has interviews for jobs.  Now, there are a lot of folks at the law school who are wealthy, some who are not wealthy, but all who--a large group who believe in so-called pro bono, working civil rights, working community legal offices.  And in fact, when I started school, I thought about becoming a criminal lawyer.  I liked the criminal law type issues, they're typically constitutional issues.  I had had a criminal law course in my second year in which I had been reasonably impressive, so one of the guys who taught it, who was a practicing lawyer, said, "You ever wanna be a criminal lawyer, come join my firm, I'll give you a job."  I thought--and I actually thought about it, but during the interview process--well, I, I'd heard the major firms pay more money than the minor firms do.  They pay more than the government agencies do.  Still, my, my first--my second-year summer job was my first involvement in a law firm.  I felt I could probably navigate law firms relatively well, but to make a long story short, I interviewed, I got an offer from a firm, Bingham, Dana and Gould [Boston, Massachusetts], and they made that offer primarily because their major client at the time was the First National Bank of Boston [Boston, Massachusetts].  The First National Bank of Boston was a bank holding company buying other banks.  The department of the Federal Reserve Bank that I worked in with Steve Schwartz was bank examination, so I had one, a knowledge of the applicable law, and I knew the regulators.  That's primarily why I was hired by that firm and got offers from other firms.  So, went to the firm, worked there for three years, got along with some of the older guys at the firm who had been in the [U.S.] military.  My military experience always set me aside from, and usually ahead of my peers, in either school or work, because I appeared to be a leader of men, more mature, and all of that.
Story_ID: 332726
Speaker 1: After three years there at the firm [Bingham, Dana and Gould, Boston, Massachusetts], I heard about the job here at The New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York], an institution known for its writing, and so I decided to apply for the job and, after a series of interviews, got the job.
Speaker 2: And you decided to apply for the job because you wanted possibly to be surrounded by journalists or to pursue--
Speaker 1: Good question.  By, by that time in my career, I knew that there was no possibility that I would switch out of law to writing, but as someone who had had a, a then lifelong interest in journalism, even though I'd be here as a lawyer, I'd be a lawyer for the greatest newspaper in the world, and that was the major attraction for my coming, coming to this job.
Speaker 2: So, for example, when Thurgood Marshall went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, did that have any effect on you?  Did you?  Did you think--?
Speaker 1: The reality is, it--I think, remains the case now and certainly was then, that seeing Thurgood Marshall, deceased some--several years ago, Judge Constance Baker Motley, who died just two weeks ago, those were the tigers, the lions and tigers not only of the Civil Rights Movement, but they were great lawyers; they were great advocates.  They were, they were, they were role models but they were like at the top of the pyramid, and other lawyers could only aspire to be at the bottom.  I mean they were it, they were, they were just so terrific and so inspiring, but the kind of law they wanted to practice was different from what I wanted to practice and it, it was their advocacy which made it possible for a small town country guy from Woodstown, New Jersey to end up at the Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: So, when you ended up here at The New York Times, were you the first black?
Speaker 1: I, I don't think so; I don't know.  I, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you could look around and see.  Were there any others on staff at the time?
Speaker 1: Well, at, at the time that I arrived, I was the only black lawyer in the department; there may had been--there may have been--when I came in '74 [1974], there may have been a guy who worked here for a couple of years in the early '70s [1970s]. I don't know whether he was an intern (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, how much earlier in the '70s [1970s]?  You had said before--
Speaker 1: Well, it could have been '71 [1971] or '72 [1972], I just don't recall.  But certainly I've been the, the, the longest-serving African American member of our legal department.
Speaker 2: But at that time, I mean I know it's a very diverse community, or culture here now, but what did it look like in 1974 when you arrived?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-four [1974] when I arrived, the senior, the senior black guy here, either on the, on the admin side of the business, was a guy name Guy Garrett [Guy Garrett, Jr.].  He was the vice president of personnel then in the newspaper, then later on he became the corporate VP of personnel, but Guy was a former Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] Bison so we had that connection; he was a good mentor, he, he helped me a lot in my career.  He was one of several mentors that I had here, no question about the fact that I kind of stood out in this building and, and in the corporate staff when I got here.
Story_ID: 332727
Speaker 1: So, did you have any feelings, one way or the other, about affirmative action at that time?
Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: In the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you came to The New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And what were your feelings about it?
Speaker 2: I was a proponent of affirmative action, not an activist, but a proponent of affirmative action.  It is possible sometimes to move behind the scenes to help achieve objectives, as opposed to getting in someone's face, but I was a strong proponent.  At the time I got here, there was in fact a, a class action litigation brought against some black folks--
Speaker 1: Brought against some black people?
Speaker 2: Brought, brought--I'm sorry, brought against The New York Times by some black employees, and that case was settled by a consent decree with The Times agreeing to--not to, to discriminate, had never admitted discrimination--
Speaker 1: Can you cite the case?  What was the case?
Speaker 2: The case was Rosario v. The New York Times [Rosario v. New York Times Co., 1979].  It settled someplace, I think, in the late '70s [1970s], and the lady who was the main plaintiff in that case, I think, is still an employee here, Benilda Rosario.  I think she works in the advertising department, but I'm not sure.  Now, to be clear, later in my career here, there was a class-action case brought by a group of women against The Times, so it's not only African Americans or black folks who sued The Times in the '70s [1970s], but I think the women's suit was in the, was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about both.  So the black suit in the '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was because the black--because Rosario felt that she was being discriminated against on--based on race?
Speaker 2: Based--yeah, based on her color, yes.  I didn't--
Speaker 1: But how so, though?  I mean you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't, I, I didn't--I think it was in terms and conditions of employment--it may have been compensation.  The litigators handled that case, I was a corporate guy so I didn't get directly involved in the, in the case.
Speaker 1: The women's case [Elizabeth Boylan et al v. The New York Times, 1974].
Speaker 2: Women's case.
Speaker 1: They were being discriminated against because they were--
Speaker 2: Primarily, as I recall, pay--pay and promotions; that was, I think, the thrust of their case.
Speaker 1: Now what was the--what was that case?
Speaker 2: Don't, don't remember--again, don't remember the details; the litigators and the employment lawyers handled it, but once again, it didn't go to trial.  It settled with a consent decree with whatever discrimination that had taken place, if any, agreed to be remedied on a going-forward basis.
Story_ID: 332728
Speaker 1: So, what caused you to be promoted in '76 [1976]. From '74 [1974] to '76 [1976]?  You'd only been here [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] for two years.  What were you doing that stood out for them to recognize you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There are, there are, there, there are a number of factors which come into play in, in the success or failure of anyone's career, and by-and-large, most of these factors have been ones of success for me.  Early on in my career, I had an occasion to make a presentation before the board of directors on a law which had recently come into effect, and the presentation went relatively well.  I--
Speaker 1: But tell me the story because I know you were a junior lawyer, it wasn't common that juniors present, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--I was a very junior lawyer, the newest guy on the block, it was a new complex law, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act  of 1974, signed into law by President Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] on September 2nd, 1974.  All the lawyers in the department were smart; I was the new guy, I'm the guy that had to read the law, explain it to my bosses, one of whom used to sit in this office, and we had to come up with an administrative process for handling pension plan issues and welfare plan issues, medical, dental plan issues, and my bosses and I came up what we thought was--with what we thought was a reasonable structure, or scheme, as the English would say, and someone had to present it to the board because it involved the establishment of a new board committee.  I, of course, thought that one of the senior guys would do it.  They, of course, thought that it would be, be good for me to do it, and I remember one of my bosses--mentor--I just love this guy, said, "Sol [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], okay, we're gonna practice, we're gonna do this; don't worry, it'll be okay, don't worry."  I said, "Mike [Michael E. Ryan], just relax, there's no one shooting at me in there, you know?  I'm a Vietnam [Vietnam War] vet, I can do this."  But Mike, who was a great mentor and supporter was--he was more nervous about it than I was.  So that was--it was helpful to me because later on when there was the need, because of a structural change in the organization, to promote someone up the ladder, the directors were familiar with me; I became corporate secretary, which led to my sitting in on board meetings, so they became very comfortable with me, and as there were corporate organizations and reorganizations, I was--I had the reputation of being a very hard worker, a very reliable worker, and when vacancies came up in the legal and administrative chain of command, I was able to, either by virtue of luck, or some--how can I say--admixture or mixture of luck and, and managing the process, influencing the process, I was able to, to be promoted--
Speaker 1: To assistant secretary--
Speaker 2: I went up from assistant secretary to secretary, I then became assistant general counsel--
Story_ID: 332729
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before we jump way ahead-so, in--at this time, I'm assuming you were practicing what I'm going to call corporate law (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, corporate lawyer.
Speaker 1: There was, there was nothing out of the ordinary, it was all corporate.
Speaker 2: Corporate is good; that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '78 [1978], there was a criminal case with Farber [M.A. Farber], the reporter, and The New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you do on that particular case?
Speaker 2: I watched from a distance.  At that time--
Speaker 1: What was the guy's name?
Speaker 2: Myron Farber.  Myron Farber was writing a, a series of articles about a fellow name Dr. Jascalevich [Mario E. Jascalevich], and he received a subpoena to turn over his notes, and at that time, the then-head of the legal department, Katharine Darrow [Katharine P. Darrow], and our outside lawyer Floyd Abrams, very well-known First Amendment lawyer, took the position, supported by the publisher, that reporters do not turn over their notes; we're just not gonna do it.  We're not going to give up our confidential sources.  It's antecedent of the case that we have today in many respects.  Farber was in jail for forty days, and--
Speaker 1: But before you go on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'm just interested--what's happening on this team of lawyers, I mean twelve or thirteen of you, when you have a reporter sitting in jail?  What is your responsibility (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, the way--our, our responsibility is, in many respects, to protect our interpretation, which was then the industry interpretation, of what a journalist's obligations are.  Journalists' obligations, then as now, are to pro- was to protect the confidential source; we never burn our source, you never say, "Yeah, Wilson told me that in confidence.  I told him that I wouldn't tell you guys that he was my source, but to keep myself from going to jail, I'm gonna to tell you."  We'd never do that, it would never enter anyone's mind.  Myron went to jail--there was a team; we had kind of a First Amendment team.  We had Kathy Darrow, Jim Goodale [James C. Goodale], Floyd Abrams, the publisher, then Arthur Ochs Sulzberger.  We were all committed to protecting the principle, and Myron went to jail for forty days before he was let out.  The Times had to pay some fines. I think it ran up into the two or three hundred thousand dollars, and those were later refunded because the final opinion of the court was that Myron shouldn't have been in jail.  But those were tense days because this was one of the first cases testing this principle, certainly in, in New Jersey.
Story_ID: 332730
Speaker 1: So, you said you watched that case from afar, but I'm sure you were taking notes, because you're dealing with that case today.
Speaker 2: Well, we all are able to learn from experiences that we have, sometimes directly and indirectly.  The, the Judy Miller [Judith Miller] case, in large measure, indeed in its totality as a legal matter, stands for the same principle.
Speaker 1: Almost like a photocopy.
Speaker 2: If a reporter says, "Mr. Wilson [Shawn Wilson], tell me what's going on in The HistoryMakers," and you say, "I can only tell you if you promise never to tell anyone I was the source."  When a reporter says, "Yes, I agree with that," in terms of the legal process, that means that the reporter is not going to say that you were the source.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even if that reporter is subpoenaed before a grand jury of--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Reporters, reporters subpoenaed before the grand jury, that's Judy Miller.  She had a source, she made a promise--promise ran from her to the source that she wasn't going to give up this source's name.  Now, her case becomes more complex from a legal and journalism analytical point of view because the source had signed a document releasing all reporters from their pledge of confidentiality.  Judy believed, and some of the journalists believe, that that release, that waiver was forced, and her position was, and we [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] backed that position, that a forced waiver of confidentiality--the boss saying, "Wilson, if you don't tell who that was, we're going to fire you.  If you don't tell the reporter--say that you were the source, we're gonna fire you," that's coercion.  What Judy wanted, and finally got, was a personal waiver, a telephone call from, from her source, releasing her from her pledge of confidentiality.  Then, and only then was she able to go and speak before the grand jury, as a matter of principle.
Speaker 1: So, in a case like that, you are upholding the principle--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: --not necessarily Judy. Judith, I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Principles are espoused and manifested by individuals; the principle of civil disobedience cannot be stripped from Gandhi [Mahatma Gandhi], the principle of civil disobedience cannot be stripped from Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and the principle of confidential sources cannot be stripped from Judy, they are one in the same before the law.  The principle and the person who holds it are one in the same.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're still waiting for the outcome of that case I should note.
Speaker 2: My best guess is that--well, I do know that the grand jury expires tomorrow, October 28th; there are those who are speculating and prognosticating that the special prosecutor will issue some indictments.  I'm withholding judgment on that particular case (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Now, I have to ask--you don't have to answer, but it's for The HistoryMakers.  Will Judith retain her job here, or will she be asked to leave?
Speaker 2: I have--I can't comment to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't make the comment on that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 332731
Speaker 1: Stepping back, but still sort of the present day--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I wanted to talk about another big New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] issue, and then we're gonna fall back to some other dates in the past, but because we're in the present, I'd like to stay here for a moment.
Speaker 2: Sure, sounds good.
Speaker 1: Jayson Blair.
Speaker 2: Jayson Blair. (Pause) Jayson Blair was a young African American reporter at The New York Times who, it was found out, fabricated some stories, plagiarized material for his stories, and who, as a result of that, is no longer a member of the staff.
Speaker 1: There's another reporter, the New Republic; remember that?
Speaker 2: I believe the reporter's name was Stephen Glass.
Speaker 1: And what was that?  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: I, I don't have any--obviously had no specific involvement in the Stephen Glass matter, but he, I think, admitted to fabricating a number of stories at the--when he was at that, at that publication, including setting up offices to try to substantiate false reports that he, that he had made.
Speaker 1: Well, the, the only reason I bring up those two is because when most people refer to Jayson Blair, myself included, one of the very first things that come up is he was an African American reporter.  What does that have to do with what he did?
Speaker 2: As a journalistic matter, it has nothing to do [with] what he did, but as--
Speaker 1: As a non-journalistic matter, what does (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It just harkens back to the fact that I alluded to earlier that while I was a young lieutenant--second lieutenant, first lieutenant in the [U.S.] Army, in what people salute is the uniform and the rank, people saluting that uniform and the rank realize that the body in it is a black body, an African American body, and there are people who make that distinction.  Jayson Blair was, was a plagiarist, Stephen Glass was a plagiarist.  The majority community makes no distinction about Stephen Glass' ethnicity because he's a member of that community.  The majority community makes a distinction about Jayson Blair's ethnicity because he's not a member of that community.
Speaker 1: So--I mean it's just a legal matter; he, he did something--he broke the law, he loses his job, end of story.  But some people feel that the reason perhaps that he wasn't necessarily looked at so closely is because he was black, and working through some sort of affirmative action, we don't wanna--we're gonna treat this guy special.
Speaker 2: I do understand that there are those who allege, and perhaps even those who believe, that Jayson got special treatment specifically by Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd], the managing editor, because Jayson was black and Gerald was black; I believed Gerald when he said that was not the case.  The fact that Gerald said that was not the case would not change the minds of many, but I believe him.
Speaker 1: So what was the final outcome of that situation?  Two people lost or stepped down.  I don't know if they lost their jobs, but didn't two editors, or--
Speaker 2: Howell Raines and--who was the executive editor, and Gerald Boyd, are no longer with the paper, and that--their leaving the paper began as a result of issues raised in the Jayson Blair case.
Speaker 1: Okay, well those are all the tough questions; we can go back to lighter stuff, or easier stuff.
Story_ID: 333125
Speaker 1: We should just make the corrections up front that we need to make.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], there were how many lawyers on staff here [The New York Times Company]?
Speaker 2: There were eight or nine lawyers.  That was a transition year for us in terms of growth in the department.
Speaker 1: And then, the case--the women's case--the title of that case (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the, the, the primary plaintiff in that case [Elizabeth Boylan et al v. The New York Times, 1974] was a woman named Elizabeth Boylan.
Speaker 1: No, it's okay.
Speaker 2: Her professional name and her byline was Betsy Wade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, those are the two corrections.
Story_ID: 333126
Speaker 1: The Tasini case [New York Times Co. v. Tasini, 2001] you would--just give me--you were gonna briefly touch on it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, The Times [The New York Times Company] has been involved in one [U.S.] Supreme Court case during my tenure here, and that was a case brought by Jonathan Tasini.  The issue in the case was whether The Times and other publishers, including some electronic publishers, had the right to put on their electronic databases works contributed by freelancers in the absence of a writing from the freelancers allowing The Times and other publishers to do so.  We felt, before the case was brought and, and indeed after the Supreme Court came down, that the practice that The Times and many other newspapers and periodicals had, of dealing with freelancers, was correct.
Speaker 1: Which was?
Speaker 2: That is to say, when a freelancer contributes an article to The New York Times, the freelancer doesn't care whether that article is put on an electronic database or not, and in fact, as an economic matter, a freelancer should encourage The Times and other periodicals to do that because that's how the freelancer gets his or her name out before other publications.  Notwithstanding that, our economic analysis of how the case should have come out, the Supreme Court held that in the absence of a specific writer--writing from a freelancer, the publishers couldn't put their work on an electronic database, and since that time, The Times and another--a number of other publishers have worked out, or close to working out a settlement with a number of the plaintiffs in that case.  It was an interesting case, it's a case which--whose holding was not consistent with technology, and indeed some of us who sat in on the Supreme Court's argument in that case, believe that the court, by its questioning, indicated that it didn't have a good grasp at least of the technology, if not the application of the copyright law to the technology.
Speaker 1: So what was it like sitting in?
Speaker 2: It was actually very interesting.  That was the first Supreme Court argument involving this company that I sat in.  The publisher of the newspaper was there, the president of the company, a former lawyer and colleague of mine, was there, and we both--all three of us recognized that there appeared to be a predisposition from the court that the authors, the freelancers would win and the publishers would lose.
Speaker 1: How could you tell that?
Speaker 2: Now, I say that--I'm glad--that's a good question.  We all are inclined to say--almost all lawyers are inclined to say, "You really can't judge how an appeals court is gonna rule on the basis of the questioning."  We all say that, but at the same time, we believe that we can, if other lawyers can't.  It was just a sense that the court favored the freelance position, the justices would say, "As a matter of law."  Indeed, as I recall, there was more than one instance in which Justice A would ask counsel for the freelancers a question, and that counsel wouldn't answer the question as effectively as was demanded, and the justice might say, "Well, Mr. So-and-So, didn't you mean to say."  It, it was actually very interesting; it was an interesting social, political, legal experience--but for the loss.
Story_ID: 333127
Speaker 1: So, I sorta wanna go back in time, to 1980--in the '80s [1980s].  I'm not exactly sure of the date at the moment, but doesn't have as much to do with the law as it does with just journalism in general.  When Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] ran for president for the first time?
Speaker 2: I remember that only vaguely.
Speaker 1: Only vaguely, okay.
Speaker 2: Only vaguely.
Speaker 1: And, and the story I kind of wanted to see if you knew anything about was the reporter who reported on the comment that Jesse had made in calling New York City [New York, New York] Hymietown.  Do you remember that incident at all?
Speaker 2: I had no involvement in that incident.
Speaker 1: Okay, but do you remember the incident?
Speaker 2: I do remember the incident (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did that report come out of The New York Times?
Speaker 2: I have no knowledge of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you--seriously, you don't.
Speaker 2: I have--no, no, no knowledge (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right, but you'd tell me if you did.
Speaker 2: I--yes, sure. I'd tell you.
Speaker 1: So, I'll tell you what I've been told is that he--this--first of all, that was the first opportunity in which a lot of black reporters had been given the opportunity to cover a pres- a presidential campaign because it was a black candidate--
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Sure.
Speaker 1: --and so there was some talk amongst the journalists that perhaps he should not have reported that particular incident, him being a black journalist and being one--you know, among--being the only one there, whatever.  So, he had the--sort of the power of the pen to say this thing that Jesse said, or not say it, and some people felt that him saying that sort of sank Jesse's ship with his possibilities of becoming president.
Speaker 2: Let me give you a little bit about my take on the journalist ethos.  A journalist is a journalist is a journalist, and if there's a story, the journalist is gonna write it.  That is his professional, and many lawyers will argue, constitutional and legal obligation to report, capture, write accurately the truth.  When journalists begin to not report accurately and fully the truth, then journalism is in, in for tough shape.
Speaker 1: Well said.
Story_ID: 333128
Speaker 1: Moving back a little also, a question came up, and a very good one, is how did you afford the tuition at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's an interesting question.  There were a couple of factors; one, I received a partial scholarship from the law school, and two, I got some benefit from the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  I don't recall whether I took out any loans to help pay for education when I was in law school; I may have, particularly in my, in my, in my, in my last years because I, I then had a little family to support. I had a couple of children born in 1969.
Story_ID: 333129
Speaker 1: Let's continue with your rise here at The New York Times [The New York Times Company].  So you--in 1988, you graduated the Amos Tuck graduate program--executive graduate program [at Tuck School of Business, Hanover, New Hampshire].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is that program?
Speaker 2: Well, the Tuck program then was a two-month long program that companies typically sent their up-and-coming executives to to ensure that they had a good grounding in business matters, strategy matters.  Computers were becoming, becoming important during that period of time, and I went, I think, from--in June, July and part of August, to that course.  It was a good course for me.  I had been a lawyer and a corporate lawyer working in this environment more-or-less successfully, but it gave me an opportunity to interact with folks from a marketing background, from a data processing background.  Now, I will tell you an anecdote about that course.  My basic style is to be quiet, kind of in the background, lead if leadership is needed from the, from the rear, say very little.  And what I try to do at the very beginning of a process--academic process or a leadership process, or a managerial process--is to make a statement demonstrating that I know what's going on, and then shut up.  And I remember there was a case that, I think it was in a marketing course, that some marketing professor was, was testing people on, and he read the case and said to people, "Well, what should be the strategy?"  And there was silence.  Now, I knew what the strategy should be; I normally don't always speak first, but I was one of the few African Americans in the group, so I said, "Blah blah blah, blah blah blah, blah, blah."  Silence.  "Mr. Watson [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], you're just a lawyer, how did you know that?"  "I'm a lawyer from The New York Times Company," and that was it.  I mean that's the only thing I really had to say during the rest of the month--during the rest of the two-months there, 'cause people said, "Watson knows his stuff," you know?  Always that--I always try to, as much as possible, make a good first impression by whatever I say, even if it's the last thing that people was a--generally say.  Sometimes I'm successful, more--sometimes I'm not, but more often than not that I am.
Story_ID: 333130
Speaker 1: In 1989, you became general counsel to The New York Times [The New York Times Company].
Speaker 2: Yes, I must say that that was a position--becoming GC here had not been on my career plan when I got here.  When I got here, I had left a firm in Boston [Massachusetts], I had a lot of lawyer friends and social friends in Boston, so my career plan here, when I got here, was to come here, work five or six years, and then perhaps go back to Boston and become general counsel of The Boston Globe.  A good friend of mine, a guy named Bart Friedman [ph.], who was a corporate law at Bingham, Dana and Gould [Boston, Massachusetts] where I worked, had just taken The Globe public--made it a public company.  The Globe was gonna need a general counsel, I thought that my, my contact with the firm could allow me to aspire to that role. But what happened when I got here is I had such good fortune in my career here that I was reasonably well-positioned so that when the general counsel position became available, it was offered to me and I was--it was an honor, it was really an honor, and I was--I, I accepted the, the position.
Speaker 1: Was Katharine the person you replaced?
Speaker 2: Katharine Darrow?  Katharine Darrow [Katharine P. Darrow] was here.  She had moved on from being a lawyer to being on the business side.  She was the head of the company's small broadcast group, and she also was then responsible for acquisitions--corporate acquisitions, so I was--I, I then became the, the general counsel.
Story_ID: 333131
Speaker 1: And that happened for you in 1999.  Since then, what have been some of the big cases you've--or big legal matters you've worked on [as general counsel for The New York Times Company, New York, New York]?  The Boston Globe acquisition was one.  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I became GC [general counsel] in 1989.  The Globe acquisition--I think we began negotiating that in 1992, and we closed it in 1993.  The purchase price for The Globe, as I recall, was a billion one--a billion one hundred million dollars, the largest price paid for a single newspaper up until that time.  That was a big deal, that was a very interesting deal, and it's the kind of deal that a corporate lawyer, which is what I was at bottom, really enjoyed.  We had to bring in outside counsel, corporate counsel; we had antitrust counsel; we had to work with the investment bankers; we had to make sure that the legal obligations of the board, which was asked to prove the, the acquisition, that its legal obligations were satisfied.  We had to get fairness opinions from the, from the investment bankers.  The negotiations for the acquisition of The Globe itself broke down during one period of time, and I think the story is fairly public that a, a major breakdown, the major reason for that breakdown was that The Times wanted an acquisition--in the minds of some folks, a takeover.  The Globe management wanted a, a merger of equals, and the way that we were able to overcome that, at least from a corporate point of view, was that there was a section in the purchase agreement, Section 4.22, autonomous operation, which, for a period of time, had allowed the then management of The Globe to continue to have authority over certain areas of The Globe's business, and that provision went on for about five years.  It was an, an interesting compromise.
Speaker 1: But that has dissipated now; it is simply a takeover--or, not a takeover, but--
Speaker 2: I like to, to speak to my Globe colleagues as, as if they are people who, as I do, are employees of The New York Times Company, and the reality is that at the time, The Times Company and The Globe came together in that corporate combination, the leadership of The Globe had come from a family called the Taylor family, and it was sometime after the end of that five-year period expired that the last member of the Taylor family left The Globe, so there are no Taylors now in the management structure of The Boston Globe.
Speaker 1: Does that put you in charge of the legal team at The Globe?
Speaker 2: That's actually a very good and interesting question.  It has some irony on it.  Yes, The Times Company legal department is centralized.  We do all of the legal work, all the in-house legal work, for all of the company's properties from, from Boston [Massachusetts] to Florida, from New York to California.  At the time The Globe and The Times came together, there was a woman at The Globe who was The Globe's general counsel.  Her name was Catherine Henn.  The irony is that when I was at Bingham, Dana and Gould [Boston, Massachusetts], Catherine and I were in the same office suite, and in fact shared the same secretary.  She's since retired, so my troops and I are responsible for all of the work at The Globe.
Story_ID: 333132
Speaker 1: You said that, that, that The Globe's [The Boston Globe] acquisition is something that you loved to sink your teeth into here at The Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York].  What is something you absolutely hate, that's a pain in the butt--a legal matter here that's something--that's no fun at all.  Is it something like Judith Miller, or is that so high-profile that the intrigue allows it--and the suspense makes it good to come to work, to see what the--see how it will unfold?
Speaker 2: We are, we are a general practice legal shop, and we deal with all kinds of legal issues that come up in representing a diversified communications company.  The copyright issue that came up in Tasini [New York Times Co. v. Tasini, 2001], the First Amendment issues that come up in cases such as the Miller cases.  We have litigation involving employees who are suing the company for unjust dismissal or denial of a medical or pension benefit.
Speaker 1: So it can become--go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My sense and my passion about the law is that I know about all of those issues.  There're individuals in our department, my department, who, who are expert in those areas, so from time-to-time, I delegate authority for folks to work in those areas, but I'm sufficiently intellectually involved in everything that happens, and if it's something new--I love to learn things new.  I--my intellectual curiosity is--has its limits but haven't been reached yet.  And indeed, there are issues--issues of law, sometimes issues of fact--which are tough to decide, but that's why I'm here.  Anyone can make the easy decisions; my job is to help make the, the tough decisions.
Story_ID: 333133
Speaker 1: Being a lawyer, or just being legal, what did you think about Clarence Thomas' nomination and the, the course which that process took?
Speaker 2: Justice Clarence Thomas of the Supreme Court of the United States is an interesting fellow.  I didn't pay a great deal of attention to all of the details of the nomination process.  I guess what I can say, with due respect to Justice Thomas, is that he wouldn't have been my nominee, and if I had to, to vote whether he was to be seated or not, I would have not voted in his favor.  I don't think he was particularly well-qualified for a seat on the Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: And he was not qualified because?
Speaker 2: From my--from my point of view and then from again, from a narrow legal point of view designed by nature (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I'm talking about the law, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and a political individual, there wasn't a substantial amount of--what can I say--constitutional scholarly-type work that he had done.  He had worked for a number of agencies, and he was--this is not to say that he wasn't a good lawyer, but at least he, to my knowledge, at those times, there were some political aspects of his appointment which, which would have probably turned me off a little bit.  Now, I must say I, I have very few, and would be hard-pressed to name more than one or two, modern-day heroes, but one of them was Judge A. Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], of the, of the Third Circuit, [U.S.] Court of Appeals who, after leaving senior status, joined the board of The New York Times Company [New York, New York] for a while.  Judge Higginbotham, or Leon, as he liked to be called, was a person who was adamantly opposed to Justice Thomas' being seated, and his continuing presence on the Supreme Court, and I found myself agreeing with Justice Higginbotham--Judge Higginbotham on a lot of those issues.  He's no longer with us, but he was a, a clearly antagonist of Justice Thomas.
Story_ID: 333134
Speaker 1: Before you talk more about your personal life, since 1989 to 2005, what else stands out about your career here at The Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: The--one of the very good things about The Times is that it's an organization, The Times [The New York Times] and The Times Company, which is always in change; no day is like the day before.  There used to be a mural down in the lobby that had the phrase, "Every Day is a New Beginning, Every Morn' is the World Made New." There's always something going on.  There's no stasis here, and this is a dynamic organization.  And over the period of time in the last several years, I've had the, the happy move from being pure lawyer to being senior executive, honored to be a member of the executive committee, so I get to talk about strategy, the budget process--
Speaker 1: Strategy, strategy meaning--?
Speaker 2: Company strategy.
Speaker 1: And what's the company strategy?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll give you a long-winded answer that at bottom, a large percentage of the revenues and profits of this company come from the newspaper industry.  The Globe [The Boston Globe], The Times are (unclear) smaller city newspapers.  There's been structural change in the advertising and readership markets over the last half decade where people are reading things online, where advertisers are going online, and we have a strategic challenge here to figure out how to go from being ink on paper to being more digital--more digital readership, more digital advertising.  That's a strategic kind of discussion that we are bringing in.  The industry has undergone structural and cyclical change.  Very few newspapers--companies, if any, are doing well today.  We've gotta come up with a strategy to deal with that, so there a, there are a lot of issues beyond the pure legal that I'm able to have input into.  That being said, my primary obligation is to see to the affairs, the legal affairs of the, of the company.
Story_ID: 333135
Speaker 1: So, who here is responsible for The Times [The New York Times] being so diverse now?  Who is responsible for keeping that at the forefront of, of its mission?
Speaker 2: At, at, at the very top of this company [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] there are three positions held by two, two people.  Arthur Sulzberger [Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, Jr.] is the publisher of the newspaper and the chairman of the company.  Janet Robinson is the chief executive officer of the company.  Each of Arthur and Janet is, is a strong proponent for diversity--gender diversity, ethnic diversity, age diversity, and some level, even intellectual diversity.  But there's no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, let's talk about that (laughter).
Speaker 2: There's no (laughter) questioning that--there's no rational questioning of their commitment to diversity and indeed, having been here longer than most of the other employees, I can go back and say that the commitment that Arthur and Janet have is one which has been decades old, decades old--both in the newsroom and on, on the corporate side.
Story_ID: 333136
Speaker 1: What are they grooming you for?
Speaker 2: I have no reason to believe that I'm not at the, the end of my career.  Being senior (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But why would you think you're at the end?  And you're young.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Being, being senior vice president and general counsel of The New York Times Company [New York, New York] is the best possible job, conceivable by me--there's nothing else I would want to do either in this company or somewhere else.  I can't think of a better job for me.  It has the intellectual environment, it has the legal challenge, it has the strategic overlay, so for me this position is perfect.  Now, I perhaps don't perform it as perfectly as I would like, but I'm working on that.
Story_ID: 333137
Speaker 1: So, what's intellectual diversity?
Speaker 2: Well, intellectual diversity from, from my narrow legal point of view is having individuals who approach problems from, from different perspectives.  I'm in the process of reading a book now by a guy named Thomas Schelling.  He's a Nobel laureate in economics [Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel], and the hypothesis in the book is that actions by individuals who come at issues from different points of view can have an effect on the aggregate reaction to a different circumstance, so there are folks here who come at issues from a different point of view.  I come from a lot of issues from the point of view of what?  An African American Vietnam [Vietnam War] vet [veteran] who is a small town country boy, and I can come at issues of criticism--Broadway criticism, I can come at--from that point of view on a number of matters--even from the business area.  Indeed, happy to have been weighed--to weigh in on what the company's [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] policy should be for members of the National Guard and the Reserves who serve in Iraq.  Look, I come at that from a point of view of a vet.  You give them all the employee benefits that you can, and you keep them on the payroll as long as you can (unclear).  Some of the non-vets who are more quantitative in analysis might have a different point of view, but I'm a vet and they're not.  My opinion counts for more.
Story_ID: 333138
Speaker 1: So I did read something about you doing work with Vietnam [Vietnam War] vets [veterans] and Agent Orange, and we didn't talk about that.
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah--yes, there was an organization called the, the Agent Orange Class Assistance Project.
Speaker 1: Now, will you just tell me what Agent Orange was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Agent, Agent, Agent Orange--
Speaker 1: --and did it exist, really?
Speaker 2: Agent Orange was a chemical manufactured by a number of nationally-known chemical companies which was sprayed in various areas of Vietnam, primarily in the north country as opposed to down in the Delta [Mekong Delta, Vietnam], and its purpose was to knock leaves off trees with a defoliant, and the view was that Agent Orange would come down--sometimes it would get on individuals because they would be drinking some of the water, moving through the water, moving through the jungle, and that Agent Orange led to some harm to the vets, and the Class Assistance Project focused on the fact that Agent Orange appeared to have contributed to birth defects, severe birth defects, particularly in the spinal column area, of children of vets who had been exposed to Agent Orange.  There was a lot of multi, multi, multi-million dollar litigation involving the chemical companies.  There was a settlement, and part of that settlement was put into a pool called the Agent Orange Class Assistance Project, and those of us who were directors there were charged with the responsibility of funding projects which had as their primary mission, the remediation of the health, sometimes the mental health, of vets who had been subject to Agent Orange, and also children of such vets, who had birth defects.  And it was, it was good work; it was actually--it was good work (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was that pro bono work?  Or were you working for a legal team?
Speaker 2: It, it, it was--I was on it because I was a vet, and the folks here [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] who were my bosses at that period of time supported my getting involved in, in that kind of stuff.  And in fact, to bring it up-to-date, one of the individuals who was on that board is a guy named Ken Feinberg [Kenneth Feinberg], and Ken Feinberg was the guy who was put in charge of settling the claims of the survivors of the 9/11 [September 11, 2001] catastrophe, so Feinberg and I go back a long way.  That was good work, I enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 332746
Speaker 1: We are now going to talk some about your personal life and your philosophy, but first question I'd like to ask is, who has helped you along the way?  Who stands out as mentors that have made a difference for you and how so?
Speaker 2: Well, certainly here at The New York Times Company [New York, New York], in addition to Guy Garrett [Guy Garrett, Jr.] who was the vice president of personnel, I guess my strongest mentor was a guy named Mike Ryan [Michael E. Ryan].  Mike was, was a lawyer, he was the corporate counsel and corporate secretary when I got here, and he helped guide me through a number of career moves, some of which were good, some of which were not, but Mike is an example of the old kind of New York Times Company executive.  He started here as an office boy when he was eighteen, married the publisher's receptionist, went to college at night, went to law school at night, and rose through the ranks.  He retired several years ago--maybe ten years ago now, at age fifty-six, after thirty-eight years of service, and Mike knew the ways of, of this newspaper and the way of this company.  He was very helpful to me.  The fellow who was the general counsel at the time I was hired was also very supportive; his name is James Goodale [James C. Goodale], he's a very well-known First Amendment lawyer.  One of the good things about Jim is that he had been a military policeman when he had been in the [U.S.] Army, so he and I had that bond which formed when, when I interviewed.
Story_ID: 332747
Speaker 1: Were you the first African American general counsel here at The Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here?  Oh, yes, yes.  At the time I became GC [general counsel] here--
Speaker 1: In '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: --in 1989, I was one of the few African American general counsel of Fortune 500 companies; there had been maybe two or three more, including one fellow at, at General Motors.
Speaker 1: And you said that over-all, that there are thirty of you now?
Speaker 2: Yeah in, in the Fortune 500 to, to 1,000 [Fortune 1000] companies--public companies, there is approximately thirty minority general counsel because I think we, we, we've expanded that group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Including women?
Speaker 2: Including, including women, including females.  Again, Paula Boggs at Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation] is an African American, Gloria Santona at McDonald's is Hispanic, Deirdre Stanley at Thomson Corporation [Thomson Reuters Corporation] is a black woman, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduate; Ken Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier] at Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.], Harvard Law School graduate, and just a, an increasing number of folks.  I like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Merck pharmaceutical?
Speaker 2: Merck--yes, the one that's involved in the Vioxx litigation, yes.  I was about to say I like everyone among that group; I like telling the story about Paula Boggs who was in the [U.S.] military for a while, and she's a diminutive person, good lawyer, good strategic thinker.  One of the things that she did to differentiate herself from other folks is she became jump-qualified.  She became a parachutist.  She took a number of jumps so that she could get her wings, but that makes her stand out among all the general counsel and forms a bond between those of us who've had military service.
Speaker 1: Any other mentors that--people that have made a difference for you?
Speaker 2: Well, there certainly were--when, when I was a kid, a young kid growing up in town [Woodstown, New Jersey], there were a--just a bunch of old folks who would look out for me, but none of them, other than my Aunt Mildred [ph.], stick out in my mind specifically.
Story_ID: 332748
Speaker 1: So, how do you feel or do you feel affirmative action has been helpful for you?  Has it helped you in--?
Speaker 2: I have never asked anyone whether I got this job where I've worked now [at The New York Times Company, New York, New York] for thirty-five years--thirty-one years--whether that was the--whether I'm the beneficiary of affirmative action.  But the reality is the answer is yes, I must be.  I'm living at a time--happily--not in the '50s [1950s] or the '60s [1960s], when there was out-and-out racial discrimination against people, but working at a time when in fact African Americans are being welcomed, perhaps not with arms as open as wide as we'd like, but into the workforce, and I was hired in the, in the '70s [1970s], so sure.
Speaker 1: Are you perpetuating that tradition by looking for minority lawyers to bring on staff here?
Speaker 2: The--what we do is that we have a pool--when we're looking for lawyers, we have a pool of qualified individuals, and all pools that we have are diverse by ethnicity, by gender, sometimes by disability.  We look for lawyers who, on the basis of their resumes and their experiences, are qualified to fill whatever position we have, and we choose from the best.
Speaker 1: And choosing from the best, how do you--I'm just gonna ask this--how do you make sure it stays diverse?  How do you make sure you get enough blacks, enough women, enough disabled people?
Speaker 2: Int- you actually raised an, an interesting question which I'll answer on the legal dimension.  We take a number of factors into consideration in terms of diversity, but we don't make race, gender, age--any of those things--a deciding factor.  We look at the whole--we look at the whole person.  The person can go to Rutgers Law School, but if he or she has the kind of experience that we'd like 'em to have, and will become the kind of lawyer that we think they should become, we hire them.  I pick on Rutgers because one of my former lawyers is a woman who went to Rutgers Law School.  Now, in some places, where there are a lot of ivy leaguers on staff, people would say, "Rutgers?  No."  We look beyond that, we look at the whole person and the person's experience.  We had--we hired that lawyer back in 1987, she left in '92 [1992], came back in '96 [1996] as the head of our corporate HR [human resources] department, and our broadcast group.  We hire from a diverse pool, we take people with diverse talents.  Several years ago, we had a, an African American labor and employment lawyer who was a minister of a church.  People would say, "Well, why would you hire someone who's a minister of a church?  He wouldn't feel it."  He was a good counselor in the labor and employment and personnel area.  You need someone who can engage in active listening, and someone who can be empathetic.  Happened to be that he was an African American, but if he had not been--if he'd had that same ministerial background, that's something that gave him a leg-up on the position.
Story_ID: 332749
Speaker 1: You have two children.  One's a teacher, one's a lawyer, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: The lawyer--let's talk about the lawyer first.
Speaker 2: Kira [Kira Watson], the lawyer.  Kira is a, a litigator--
Speaker 1: Where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: Kira went to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania], and then to Fordham law school [Fordham University School of Law, New York, New York], and she is a litigator at a firm called Bryan Cave [Bryan Cave LLP] here in New York [New York].  Kira, as she would tell the tale, would say that she always wanted to be a lawyer.  I don't think she ever said that when she was a kid.  It is not surprising to me that she's a lawyer, she's fairly intellectual and very argumentative, so she's a perfect advocate for her clients, and is--
Speaker 1: What type of law does she practice?
Speaker 2: She practices--when she was a commercial litigation, she was involved on a criminal case last year involving a fellow named Dennis Kozlowski.  He was the CEO of Tyco [Tyco International].  Kozlowski and his chief financial officer were tried in a case in which Kira played a role, and there was a mistrial, and then there was a subsequent trial in which Kira played a lesser role, in which they were convicted.  But she's a litigator, she's a good kid--good, good, good young lawyer.
Speaker 1: And the teacher?
Speaker 2: Katitti [Katitti Watson] is an elementary school teacher down in Maryland; she lives in, in Laurel, Maryland.  Katitti went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] undergrad, and got a master's [degree] in education from the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  Katitti is a, is an excellent teacher, she's a committed teacher.  Her specialty is teaching young children to read, and reading is a, is a very fundamental skill.  So I'm, I'm reasonably proud of both of my daughters.
Speaker 1: Your wife?
Speaker 2: My current wife Brenda [Brenda J. Watson] is an interesting person.
Speaker 1: What makes her interesting?
Speaker 2: Well, she worked here in the human resources department at The New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] for thirty-three years, and she retired, I think, three years ago, so she's gone from being a manager in the personnel department to kind of being my personal manager.  She keeps me on the straight-and-narrow, reasonably well-organized, she helps me deal with some of my management-type issues, and she's, she's in fact the major acquisition that I worked on here.  The Globe [The Boston Globe] was one kind of acquisition, acquiring Brenda after ten years of courtship, was another acquisition.  She's a, she's a terrific person--the best possible wife for me.
Story_ID: 332750
Speaker 1: So, what are your hopes here for The New York Times [The New York Times Company, New York, New York]?  Actually, generally that question is what are your hopes for the African American community, but what are your hopes for minorities here at The New York Times?
Speaker 2: My hopes for minorities here at The New York Times are, are similar to my hopes for all employees here.  I hope that everyone has, as I've had, an opportunity to demonstrate how well he or she can perform in their current job, and to some extent, in jobs that may be coming down the pike.  We do have, in the company, a fairly structured talent review program where we review up-and-coming managers.  Minorities are in that pool.  We have a succession planning session each year with the board of directors, and in that discussion we talk to the board about all up-and-coming employees, and I'm happy to report that there are minorities in that pool.  What we all hope for is an opportunity to strut our stuff, to do as well as we can.  And I will digress a little bit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I'm not much of an ego type guy, but I will say that I spend a fair amount of my time mentoring young lawyers, some inside the department, a lot outside the department, and I spend a lot of my time mentoring, talking to younger employees here, many of whom, at least on the corporate side but also in the newspaper [The New York Times], sort of see me as kind of an older guy that has, has made it.  But my theory is you never make it; you make it a day at a time--you're never totally secure.  But I've been here for a while and there's--in addition to giving legal advice which I hope my clients follow, giving advice to young folks is something I enjoy, and spend a lot of time at here.
Story_ID: 332751
Speaker 1: So, why do you feel history is important or do you feel history is important?
Speaker 2: That's actually a good question.  When I was a kid in high school [Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey], history was the course that I paid no attention to because I didn't see it as being relevant to my existence.  The individuals being talked about didn't look like me, they had no connection to me.  I'll leap forward.  In 1972, I went to London, England, and I saw in London and other cemeteries around, the cemetery--the, the, the burial grounds of a lot of folks I'd heard about in the English literature and all that stuff, and it was good; I'd heard about them, but I knew more about those guys, some of those writers, some of those politicians, than I knew about African American history, though I did get a pretty good dose of that at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I talk from time-to-time to young students about the law, and I say, "When, when you hear the [U.S.] Constitution mentioned, and the Declaration of Independence, you hear about the founding fathers.  Well, none of those fathers look like me.  I didn't have a direct father-son relationship, and you never hear about founding--the founding mothers."  So, the Constitution--American history itself sort of has that built-in kind of barrier for people--sisters or brothers--who want to have an access point.  Now, having said that I paid no attention to, to history when I was in high school or college is correct.  I felt a little bit disadvantaged in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because Mr. Wilson, when he was answering a question for the professor, could have said, "Well, as President Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson] said, in his speech before the League of Nations blah, blah, blah, blah, blah."  Some guys could put their an- their answers in a historical context; I couldn't when I was in law school.  I've come to appreciate the importance of knowing history generally better than I did when I was a kid, including in college, and I've certainly come to appreciate the knowledge of learning African American history, not only for African Americans, but for people at large.
Story_ID: 332752
Speaker 1: So, when you don't--when you're not on this planet anymore, what would you like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Yikes.  (Laughter) That's an interesting question.  I guess at bottom I'd like to be remembered as someone who made a difference, someone who was always trying to, to catch the bigger fish, whatever that means.
Speaker 1: And what would you like for your legacy to be, although it will probably--well, what would you like for your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: It'll be whatever it'll be; I try not to think of--very much about that.  It'll be whatever it, it will be.  I--to digress a little bit, I went, a couple of weeks ago, to the funeral of a high school classmate of mine, a lady who was, in fact, a childhood sweetheart of mine, and her legacy in part will be, in large measure, will be that she was a, a person who was very religious and very good, and very kind.  And as the preacher said, "Her life is her eulogy."  I kind of wish I were able to (laughter) pay some preacher to say that at my--at my funeral.  But I don't know--I, I don't think very much in terms of legacy; it'll be what it'll be, and I hope it'll be good.  In the end, I just hope it'll be something that the kids [Kira Watson and Katitti Watson] are proud of--the kids and the grandkids are proud of.
Story_ID: 332753
Speaker 1: Before we stop, did I miss anything?  Anything we need to cover?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't know if you want to mention Bernadette's name or--?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I'll be happy to do that.  The--at, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I was a small town country guy and met, early on in my freshman year, a woman named Bernadette Aldrich [Bernadette Aldrich Watson] from New York [New York], and while she was a city kind of gal who liked dancing and partying and things like that, she did see something of benefit to me, so she and I became kind of boyfriend and girlfriend, and I remember coming to visit her in New York the summer after my freshman year.  And I'm a small town country guy from the sticks of New Jersey, and I was afraid of New York, and the, the big--there was a TV show called the 'Naked City.'  "There are 8 million stories in the Naked City and this is one of them," and it was always about crime.  I was so much afraid of New York that when I came here, I bought a pistol--a Derringer, a two-shot Derringer, and I carried it--I had it right here in the top of my socks.  I got off the, the bus at the then Port Authority [Port Authority Bus Terminal, New York, New York], and I began walking from there to 99th Street, and I thought everybody was looking at me saying, "There's that small town country boy from New York," [sic.].  To make a long story short, when I, I got back home at night, I tried to pull up my pant leg to take the Derringer out but I was wearing pegged pants, so the reality is that if I had had to go for the Derringer, the only way I would have gotten it would have been dropping my pants, so--it's a weird story, but Bernadette and I were college classmates, we were boyfriend and girlfriend off and on throughout college, and we got married actually in March of 1967, and she was with me up at Seneca Army Depot in Romulus, New York when I got my orders to go to Vietnam, and she--we had a good time.  She and I were, were good friends, we--my first R and R in Vietnam--I had two--I went to Hawaii and I spent that with, with Bernadette, and we came home and--we came home, started living together, we had a couple of kids [Kira Watson and Katitti Watson], but to some extent, the Vietnam experience changed me; I wasn't as easy-going or, or, or patient, or to some extent even as understanding as I once had been, and our styles had just changed, you know.  Sometimes people just change.  They're in different places and different spaces, so sometime after we had the kids--the kids were born on August 3rd, 1969.  Several years later we just, we just parted company, amiably.  Bernadette and I are still good friends.  Brenda [Brenda J. Watson], my current wife, and Bernadette get along very well together.  I said to Brenda, "When you marry me, you marry the Watson family and all that, and all that baggage."  But Bernadette and I were just chatting yesterday as a matter of fact.  She's a good kid (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, what hap- what does she do professionally?
Speaker 1: Bernadette is now retired.  She had, for a number of years, been a social worker and she still stayed in the, in the social work area.  Later in life, she went to school and got a master's [degree] in business, so she went from being kind of at the case worker status to being a manager of agencies, and it was social work in the last twenty years in the real estate area, but now she's, she's retired, which is a good thing because she's now available to sort of act as grandmother to at least one of my grandchildren.
Story_ID: 332754
Speaker 1: When you look back, do you think people expected this to come from you?  Like did your mom [Denise Jones Watson]--like was your--when did your mom pass away?  Did your mom live to see what you'd achieved?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but--
Speaker 1: Did she expect it?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the answer is she probably hoped that I'd be a success at whatever I chose to do, but keep in mind that, you know, I'd not met any lawyers and there, there was one lawyer in my hometown [Woodstown, New Jersey] when I grew up, his name was Burt Zinger [ph.].  I'd heard of Zinger the lawyer; his son was in my high school class [at Woodstown High School, Woodstown, New Jersey] and has now become the Watson family lawyer, but I hadn't met a lawyer, I don't, I don't think Mom had met any black lawyers.  I mean the reality is that even when I entered law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I had no idea what the corporate practice was like, or what it meant to be a senior vice president.  But, I've been fortunate, I've been actually been, been more than fortunate--I've been blessed.
Speaker 1: So, are you living proof of an American dream--to start with nothing and to end with a great deal?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  In, in the minds of some, oh, absolutely, sure--no question about it.  From a house with no running water (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No electricity.
Speaker 2: --at the end of--at the end of Railroad Avenue to living in an apartment at an Upper West Side [New York, New York], and being a senior VP, and all that stuff.  But the reality is--and this is what I like best about my reality, is that when I go back home, I am still the kid that grew up down the railroad.  Now, of course, they've now--my grandmother's house--[maternal] great-grandmother's [Frances Jackson] house burned down many years ago, and the area where her house was has been converted to a public park, but when I go back, I still drive down that--drive down Railroad Avenue as far as I can because those are the roots; that's where I came from.
Story_ID: 332755
Speaker 1: You are a member, I think, of 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.] or you have been?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm a, I'm a member of 100 Black Men.  I don't do a lot of 100 Black Men type activities with the exception that last year, I became a mentor at a school that has a connection with the 100 Black Men.  There's a school up in the Bronx [New York], the Eagle Academy for Young Men, which was just started last year with a ninth grade class.  Last year, I was a mentor of a kid up there, Aaron Davis [ph.]. He and I have not hooked up together this year, but we're gonna do that.
Speaker 1: What about Boule?  Are you a member of Boule?
Speaker 2: The Boule, yes.  The Boule is an organization founded (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Are you a member? Of the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --founded at the beginning of the last century by some individuals who might today be called the Talented Tenth, and it's an organization that I may have heard about once or twice between ages one and fifty, and a good friend of mine who used to be on the board of directors here [The New York Times Company, New York, New York] suggested that I become a member of the Boule.  I agreed to do that.  It's an interesting organization of very accomplished individuals; at some level--I'm not sure that I belong there.  There are some trailblazers there, there are some guys there who are some of the Tuskegee Airmen, there are guys who were successes in Corporate America in the '50s [1950s].  We're talking about black guys--successes in Corporate America in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s].  They all have terrific stories to tell, and it's a good organization, it's a good organization, enjoy that.
Story_ID: 332756
Speaker 1: Any other awards you've received that you are--I, I mean we, we have five minutes left on this tape, so I figured we'd just go for another five minutes.  Any awards you've received that can--I can read the list if you want (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I did--I'm not an awards and decs kind of--award and decorations kind of guy.  I get them--
Speaker 1: Which ones mean something?  Which ones have meant something to you?
Speaker 2: Well, there, there was one I got a couple of years ago from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I think it was a Servant of Justice Award [sic. National Equal Justice Award], and that was pretty meaningful.  I'm not, again, you know, a guy who's kind of out front on the civil rights stuff, but the folks--then it was [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones, head of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], know that when there's work to be done, they can give me a call and I will, I will do one of two things.  What I will, what I will do is ensure that the work needs to be done, gets done.  It'll either be done by me or--when I can, when I can do it 'cause I always like to push it off to someone else.  When I get a call today--someone'll call--a bar association will call and say, "Gee, Sol [HistoryMaker Solomon Brown Watson, IV], we'd like you to speak at this annual event, or be an honoree at this annual event.  What do you think?"  I'll say, "Let me check my calendar and I'll get back to you."  And I check my calendar and, depending on the nature of the award, if there's not a conflict, I'll put a conflict there (laughter), and then I'll call back and say, "Gee, I can't make it, but I just met this terrific general counsel who's the general counsel of, of Thomson [Thomson Reuters Corporation] or Starbucks [Starbucks Corporation] or Jim Lipscomb [James L. Lipscomb] at MetLife [Metropolitan Life Insurance Company].  Give them a call."  Now, I've been around long enough, and have gotten sufficient exposure, and almost any exposure to me is over-exposure, so that I don't need very much anymore.  My, my job is as--my role as much as possible is to sort of bring along this new generation of younger general counsel and lawyers and, and in this building [The New York Times Building, New York, New York] the administrators.
Story_ID: 332757
Speaker 1: So, let's end this interview on fly fishing.
Speaker 2: Fly fishing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I know nothing about it.
Speaker 2: The most important work written on fly fishing was written by a guy named Sir Izaak Walton, I think, in 1653 ['The Compleat Angler'], and he was talking about fly fishing for trout, and it's called fly fishing because the lure, if you will, at the end of the line, is designed to look like an insect or a fly, throw that in the water, the trout comes up, bites it, you catch the trout--terrific.  I began trout fishing many years ago, and fly fishing equipment can be calibrated so that you can catch a fish that size (gesture) and have a good fight, or you can catch a fish that size (gesture) and have a good fight.  I've become infected with big fish-itis, so I've gone away from trout fishing, or fresh-water fly fishing, to salt-water fly fishing, and in there, you can catch a larger fish, a tarpon, which is five or six feet long and weighs a hundred pounds.  You can catch a very wary fish, or permit, which is this long (gesture) and may weigh fifteen or twenty pounds.  Or recently, you can catch a, a small or baby blue-fin tuna, which is this size (gesture), which weighs twenty-five or thirty pounds.  So, big fish-itis is what has attracted me to salt-water fly fishing, and sometimes I catch them, sometimes I don't.  I tie my own flies to catch salt-water fish, and it's a, it's greatly enjoyable, and to end where, in part, I always begin, is that one of the things that I enjoy most about my salt-water fly fishing, a lot of which I do up on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts], is that I've shared my passion for that with a number of other people, many of whom are black.  So, whatever the number of African Americans who come to the Vineyard to, to fish, 90 percent of them know who I am or who I was, or that I was one of the first guys up there to do that stuff.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much for your time, and it was a great oral history.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much for this opportunity to talk more than I've ever talked in the past about myself and my life.  I hope never to duplicate it.
Speaker 1: Well, you don't have to because we'll give you a copy of the tape (laughter).
Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you (laughter).
Story_ID: 332095
Speaker 1: This picture was taken on the steps of the Riverside Church [New York, New York] on April 28th, 1984, the day Brenda [Brenda J. Watson] and I got married.  Brenda is standing on one side, and the other side is my proud and happy mother [Denise Jones Watson], and next to her is my sister Masolete [Masolete Watson]--
Speaker 2: Will you spell that name, please?
Speaker 1: M-A-S-O-L-E-T-E, Masolete.  The bridesmaids in the pink and blue are Kira [Kira Watson], K-I-R-A on the left, and Katitti [Katitti Watson], K-A-T-I-T-T-I on the other side.  The other folks are friends and family.  The, the best man is the tall fellow with the mustache, Bob Deutsch, D-E-U-T-S-C-H.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken on the day that my daughter Katitti got married, so that's Katitti in the white dress and Kira in the pink.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken again on April 28th, 1984 across from the Riverside Church.  It's the day that Brenda and I got married.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 2004 at the Kellogg School of Management [Evanston, Illinois].  This is a group of individuals who were attending a course on minority executives becoming candidates to become directors of public companies.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken at one of the many company-sponsored off-sites, and reflects my being pensive and penetrating.
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken at the studio of The New York Times on the ninth floor, and is my official corporate picture.
Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite family pictures showing several generations of the family.  There's my great-mother [sic. great-grandmother] Fannie Jackson [Frances Jackson], my mother, two of my sisters, and various nieces and nephews and cousins.
Speaker 1: Do you know the two sisters' names?
Speaker 2: Masolete and Stephanie [Stephanie Watson], S-T-E-P-H-A-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: And Masolete?
Speaker 2: M-A-S-O-L-E-T-E.  Yeah, I just had to check; my eyes are so bad, I don't--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is an, an Awards and Decorations Ceremony, probably in July of 1968, in which I'm being awarded a medal for the quality of my service in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my grandson, Trey Jackson Watson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next one?
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me holding a javelin.  I was a javelin thrower on the Howard University [Washington, D.C.] track team from '63 [1963] to '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: These are two pictures in which my mother is included.  She is the sole person in the picture, wearing the yellow coat, and in the other picture she's standing between my daughters Katitti and Kira.  This was taken in the front yard of our Bailey Street [Woodstown, New Jersey] house.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Brenda, Kira and Katitti and myself at a festive event in 1994.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife Brenda, along with our grandson Trey, T-R-E-Y.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Rosie Cubero, my long-serving friend and associate, at a social event at which I must have had too much to drink.
Speaker 2: Can you spell the last name?
Speaker 1: Cubero?  C-U-B-E-R-O.
Speaker 2: This is me receiving the Distinguished Service Award from the American Corporate Counsel Association [Association of Corporate Counsel], New York Chapter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, this, this picture is of a speech being made at the Call to Action [Call to Action to the American Legal Community], a call issued by President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] to members of the bar [American Bar Association] to ensure that the civil rights acts of the '60s [1960s] were continued.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next please.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken at the White House [Washington, D.C.] after President Clinton's call to arms for numerous lawyers to support the civil rights acts of 1960s--of the 1960s, and their continuation.  I'm in the red tie, dark glasses, standing on the left.
Speaker 1: What year is that, 1992?
Speaker 2: Rosie? What was Clinton's last year in office?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How about that?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, here it is--'99 [1999]--July 20th, '99 [1999].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is picture of me giving a toast at the retirement party of Daniel J. McGlynn, my right-hand man and long-serving colleague at The New York Times.
Speaker 2: Call to Action to the American Legal Community.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me; I'm standing on the left, and President Clinton, at a ceremony called a Call to Action, in which the present--president called together a number of lawyers to ask them to continue the civil rights acts of the 1960s.
Speaker 2: This is a picture with Caroline Kennedy, [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones, my wife Brenda, and me at a fundraiser for the Legal Defense and Education Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] held on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite pictures; it shows my daughters Katitti on the left, and Kira on the right, standing in the ashes of what had been my great-grandmother's house, the house in which I grew up as a child.
