Story_ID: 634235
Speaker 1: Okay.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Grace Y. Ingleton, G-R-A-C-E, Y for Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E, Ingleton, I-N-G-L-E-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 14, 1936, Panama Canal Zone [Panama], Gorgas Hospital, G-O-R-G-A-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a professional registered nurse, I'm a consultant, healthcare consultant, and also art consultant, in a way.
Speaker 1: And a collector too I would guess?
Speaker 2: And a collector, collector is what I was really searching for.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 1, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't ha- you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: We are presently located in my home--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Queens [New York].
Story_ID: 634236
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  Favorite food.  I have a strange favorite food at the moment, and it's not even a food, it's, it's cottage cheese.  I've gotten in a habit of eating that every day.  So, that's my breakfast food and I look forward to having that with a fruit.  So those are two things that are favorite for me right now.  I don't get tired of it.  It's kind of unusual but that's what it is.  Years ago I would have given you rice and peas, which was really, and fried plantains, that's an ethnic sort of, a thing from Panama and I really loved those things but I had to, as the years go by and you get older, I had to sort of reduce my intake of those items.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have it on, purple.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Time of year?  I love the fall, love the fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Love the colors that come back in the fall and I'm really pleasant--I'm not a lover of summer, I don't like the heat, so I like fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation, a favorite?  That's interesting.  I've gone to, I've literally covered just about all of the continents and I would go back, given, I, well, parts of Africa, but Australia, matter of fact, New Zealand.  New Zealand's been one of the places I've gone to that I love very much because of the colors, the weather, the calmness of the country and I was very surprised that I would have liked it as much as I did but by comparison of other parts of the world, it's really one of the quietest places I've been and really very peaceful, it's New Zealand.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question in this group is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's one that I use, well, it's, it's a saying that I, and I sort of lead my life by it, I have, if you call on the telephone, you're, and I'm not here, the message that you will get, it says, "I'm sorry I'm not here to receive your call.  However, since you called, remember to do something nice to someone else; it will make you feel better."
Story_ID: 634237
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Patna Brown] side but separately, and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So first, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Edith, E-D-I-T-H, Alexandria, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-R-I-A, Pond, P-O-N-D, that's her maiden name, and married name is Brown, B-R-O-W-N [Edith Pond Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 28, and you're going to have to hold off on that.  She died two years, three years ago at ninety-two so that was, I think, 19--can I give you, get back and give you that answer?  But she's, she was ninety-three years when she passed away three years ago, and that would have been in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 2009, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in, in Ancon, Panama, Panama Canal Zone, Panama Canal Zone.
Speaker 1: How do you spell--
Speaker 2: Ancon, A-N-C-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, A-N-C-O-N, okay, in Panama.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: My mother's parents are from Mont- a small island in the western--it's called Montserrat, M-O-N-T-S-E-R-R-A-T.
Speaker 1: Now that's the volcanic island, right?
Speaker 2: Yes it is.  It erupted a few years ago, yeah, and my grandfather's also from there but that's on my mother's side.  Do you need his name right now?  Arthur Pond, A-R-T-H-U-R, P-O-N-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother, Mary Grace [Mary Allers Pond], had ten children.  Looking back at their names, let me see if I can get them, the ones in order.  My, she had three children in Montserrat before she came to Panama and that's John [ph.], James [ph.] and Dora, and I think one other child, that was, that was deceased, and then in Panama she had my mother, being the eldest, Edith, known as Minnie, then she had Anesta, A-N-E-S-T-A, do you need last names?
Speaker 1: Well, that's, this is for posterity, so your relatives might see, they may want to know.
Speaker 2: Anesta Samuel [Anesta Pond Samuel], S-A-M-U-E-L, Rosa Binnom [Rosa Pond Binnom], R-O-S-A, B-I-N-N-O-M, Rosa Binnom, my uncles are Wilfred Pond, W-I-L-F-R-E-D, Pond, George, George Pond, and Edwin, known as Eddie Pond, P-O-N-D.  Now, going down that line, I would have, my uncles in Montserrat had, to the best of my knowledge, they did not have children.  Their sister, Dora, Dora Allers [ph.], had a son and his name is Noel, N-O-E-L, and he resided on, most of the year, early years in Montserrat and he came to the United States when he was forming his thirties.  My aunt, my mother, well, I'm going back, coming to Panama, my mother now had two children, Grace [HistoryMaker Grace Y. Ingleton] and Velma.  My sister's name is V-E-L-M-A, Velma Carlotta Brown Armstrong [Velma Brown Armstrong].  My, and it's just the two of us, I have one sibling, and that's the children of Edith.  My Aunt Anesta, has, her name is really Sarah, S-A-R-A-H, she never used it, Anesta Samuel, so she's known either as Nes, N-E-S, or professionally some people call her S for Sarah, Anesta Samuel, and she has a son by the name of Henry, Henry Samuel, who deceased about three years ago and a daughter who was born, seventeen or eighteen years later, by the name of Merry, M-E-R-R-Y [Merry Samuel], because she was born in December, for Merry Christmas, and she was not expected, her brother is eighteen years older and she was thought of as my mother [sic.] having a, a fibroid for about five months before she found out that she was really pregnant and her, that's Merry.  So she has two children, Henry and Merry.  My Auntie Rosa, Rosa Binnom, did not have any children either.  She had, she raises a son, well technically a son, her husband's son, name was Cyril, C-Y-R-I-L [Cyril Binnom], and my Uncle Eddie had two sons, Ernesto, E-R-N-E-S-T-O, Pond [Ernesto Pond], and a son, what is, Victor, V-I-C-T-O-R, Victor Pond.  My Uncle George has three sons, Guillermo [Guillermo Pond], G-U-I-L-L-E-R-M-O, Gregory [Gregory Pond], G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, and Garry [Garry Pond], G-A-R-R-Y, all three of them were, she had three, George, and three sons.  I know their, I don't know their middle name but they're all, my uncle's name was, his middle name was L, and so it was G.L.P., George L. Pond, or Gregory L. Pond, Gary L. Pond and Guillermo L. Pond.  So that's on my mother's side, the ones that I can trace back.  Now, do you want children of those children?
Story_ID: 634238
Speaker 1: What did your family do in, in Montserrat and, and how did they, what, is there a story behind the transition from Montserrat to Panama (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My [maternal] grandfather [Arthur Pond] left Montserrat to go to Panama to work on the canal [Panama Canal] and my grandmother [Mary Allers Pond] followed and she left three children behind with her mother and she raised that set of children and then she had the other children in Panama.
Speaker 1: Now, now, refresh my memory here.  I was trying to think of when the canal was finished.  When was the canal finished, do you know?
Speaker 2: The year that it was completed?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I'm about to say, I think it's 1903.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were, that's prior to 1903 so they came over--
Speaker 2: My grandfather came, it wasn't finished in 1903 because my grandparents, as a matter of fact, if, I just received some research information that I requested just because of that question and it has a census in 1930 indicate, it doesn't indicate, but this was taken from the census in 1930, it listed all of the children that they had, it listed the name of my grandfather and grandmother, on my mother's [Edith Pond Brown] side, I got it on both sides of the family, and the children that they had.  The children that were listed are the ones that I gave you.  My grandfather came to Panama, that's 1930.  That meant that it was later than that that he came and he had to have come into Panama after the 19--after 1903, so I'll have to go back and check on that for you, if you don't mind?
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I do have the data here, though, in terms of--
Speaker 1: I'm thinking, I should have looked this up before I came, but anyway, so they came to work on the canal?
Speaker 2: They came to work on the canal.
Speaker 1: And, fr- now there have been documentaries made about this and, from what I've heard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, I have some.
Speaker 1: --of other people.  I mean, it was pretty rough work--
Story_ID: 634239
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was very, very, very difficult work.  The Caribbeans that came over to Panama, first of all, they, the work that was started to, in doing, in building the canal [Panama Canal], was started first by, you had Chinese workers that could not withstand the heat.  They had people that came from, from Spain and other countries around the world to build the canal and they just could not withstand the heat and the mosquitos and they died in droves, and yellow fever.  So they then found out that the Caribbean workers were very, not immune, but very able to withstand the mosquito bites and so on and they brought them over from all of the islands.  So you'll have men coming over, you had women that, that, that impersonated men to work on the canal and they did, but the work that they, they, what they went through was living hell and families that were brought over, when the wives came or, you know, the families get them together, lived in what we will call tenements today and Panama, because it was being, the canal was being built by, under supervision of Americans, made it very difficult, in fact it developed a Jim Crow system in Panama.  West Indians had a very, very difficult time but what they did in spite of all of the difficulty, they survived because they brought their teachers with them, children were educated by, by teachers that people that, that were very interested in education and, and creating a better lifestyle for their children and so many of the people that were there were well educated.  What occurred, however, is that they were only allowed to go to a certain level of education and then they were not provided with any more.  A lot of those people learned their skills on their own.  My uncle, one of my uncles I know, son of his father, and they came from Antigua, I believe, what he did is that he always was very involved in taking courses that came from the United States or anywhere else.  So, he could have been a dentist, could have been a mathematician, could have been an excellent art writer because those were all the things he did.  When he came, when he migrated to the United States, and this is my Uncle Sam, that I grew up with, Henry Samuel, he married my Aunt Anesta [Anesta Pond Samuel], when he came to the United States without a high school education, he went back to school, to high school, at nights.  He worked in a hospital, in an operating room, as an aide, and he was determined that he was going to make a success of his life, that he came to the United States to improve the quality of life and that's what he did.  He, however, really worked, really very, at home, before he, at home being Panama, before coming to the United States, he was considered to be a very successful person in his own right.  He was a musician, he had knowledge of dentistry, he was also someone that, that knew the arts very well and he was very, very well schooled in terms of reading skills, the ability to communicate, a very, very distinguished gentleman.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so he came to the U.S. before anyone--
Speaker 1: He's the one that came, my aunt, his wife, was my, on my maternal side, Anesta, she had been here after they got married.  She was here, she came up because she was interested in beauty culture and she came to the United States before he did to learn how to improve the quality of hairdressing and so on and she came, had her education, that was the day of Madam Walker [Madam C.J. Walker] and she went back to Panama and she was one of their first woman entrepreneur in that she opened up several, she had a chain of beauty shops, and that's what she did for a living, she worked for herself.  My mother [Edith Pond Brown] worked with her, who was her sister, and they worked together for many years.  She then followed my uncle when he came to this country, back in about 19--that might be about 1950, when they both came, and were met by an aunt on my father's [Patna Brown] side, Aunt Shug [ph.], we called her, and she lived in Brooklyn [New York], and they had a room there and later on they saved their pennies and got together and purchased a house in Brooklyn at 276 Lafayette Avenue, which became a home, it was a brownstone and it became a home that was renowned in the Panamanian community because what they did, my uncle had a goal was that he would send for nieces and nephews.  If I recall, we had two rooms on the top floor and three on the second floor and then the parlor floor had one, two, three rooms, and downstairs in the kitchen we had the, a large first floor and we had a basement and my uncle wanted to have all of the children that were able to travel to come and live in those rooms and study and that was his goal, to educate us, to have a, get a better education.  So I came in 1953 to the United States, at age sixteen, I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 634240
Speaker 1: I didn't want to get you here yet but we will (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, I wanted to find about, out about your, more about your mother [Edith Pond Brown] first and--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my, my mother, my mother worked with my aunt, Anesta [Anesta Pond Samuel], and she, when she married my father [Patna Brown], they married in 1935, probably, more or less (unclear).
Speaker 1: Now in terms of, your mother, now she was in Panama until she, how far did she get in school before she left Panama?
Speaker 2: All of them, my mother never left Panama, permanently, now until about ten years ago (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh she stayed--okay, so she stayed, stayed.
Speaker 2: She stayed in Panama. That was her base.  She traveled back and forth, extensively, all these years but she did not come to live in New York [New York], permanently, until 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did your mother talk about growing up in Panama or--
Speaker 2: All the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my, I felt like I could go back and live their lives because my parents are very close.  My mother and her sisters, Anesta and Rosa [Rosa Pond Binnom], were extremely close and my mother, being the eldest, every sibling of hers had a lot of respect for her.  They were taught to be that way from her parents [Mary Allers Pond and Arthur Pond] and she in turn was a really, very organized woman.  She also had systems, system that she worked with, you know, in terms of raising children, learned from my grandmother to, how to run a household, how to budget and so on, and also learned that she needed to be independent.  So, she and my, she never had a job other than working with my, with her sister, Anesta, in the beauty shop, but in the meantime, she became very well known for being a good dressmaker and also very involved with Christian activities in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what church does she go to?
Speaker 2: Episcopal.  We went to, when we moved to a town called La Boca [Panama], L-A B-O-C-A, and that's what I can remember, she grew up in an area called Red Tank [Panama], R-E-D, T-A-N-K, and these communities were named based on the things in their environment.  There was a tank that was red so it was called Red Tank, and these were, were communities that developed along the, the highways, or if you call them highways now, close to where the canal [Panama Canal] was being built because the workers that went to the canal could just get up and leave their little community and walk over maybe fifteen minutes, twenty minutes, to work.  So their families lived in the areas where they worked, the men, in particular.  So my mother grew up in Red Tank and then later on she moved to the City of Panama [Panama City, Panama], when she got married, and following that she moved to La Boca, L-A-B-O-C-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can recall being raised by her, and my aunt, because they lived, they were so close that they, they, when my aunt got married, and my mother's marriage by, at '35 [1935], 1935, they lived in the same, what would be considered here an apartment, and they had their own, division of rooms and so on but my mother and her sister were close so they stayed together and my mother's, my father and my aunt's husband, became very good friends, they're like brothers.  So when I say, Uncle Sam [Henry Samuel], who's the husband of my Aunt Anesta, it's to me, you know, it's very difficult to separate who's maternal and who's paternal.  The same thing with my mother's side of the family, they're very close, so, my mother and her sister, Anesta, remain very close.  My Aunt Rosa was raised by her godmother but she met with them just about daily.  They're in the same community but her godmother did not have any children so since my grandmother had three daughters living at home and three sons, she asked her, the godmother asked whether or not, we call her Nannan [ph.], whether or not my Aunt Rosa could live with her but that did not take away the influence of, of not being sisters or not being close for my mother and Aunt Anesta, they're very close, a close family knit.  The boys were, again, very respectful.  My grandmother raised them with attitude, "Don't you ever let a policeman come to my door and bring to tell me you all did anything that was not the right thing."  So, they never got into trouble, they were members of the community, they played music, they were elocutionists, very well, well spoken, very well liked, so, that's basically, you know, the background.  What kind of work did they do?  My mother, again, as I said, was a beautician and my aunt was also.  My grandmother stayed at home and took care of us.  When my mother didn't have, the babysitters were grandparents, and my grandmother was my babysitter and my sister's also.  So, we grew up in that environment.
Story_ID: 634241
Speaker 1: I think you were telling me before we started that the Panama, the school system in Panama put a ceiling on where, how far you could go?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: On the canal zone's area, and the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] was administered by the America- U.S. government, okay, and they had schools for West Indians, in particular, that went no further than the eighth grade.  It wasn't until many years later that they started a high school and that had to be probably in the, the late '40s [1940s], that they started high school.
Speaker 1: So, let me get this straight.  If you were a, some other nationality, you weren't a West Indian, you could get a higher education at the expense of the state?
Speaker 2: No you could not.
Speaker 1: You could not?
Speaker 2: No, because basically the workers were Hispanic or Caribbean, and Caribbean primarily, and you had Hispanics but they rarely worked for the canal zone and that's why there's always that, that, that discussion that the canal [Panama Canal] was built by West Indians.  They don't get credit for it but there are a number of research, research has been done and shown that this is where the building of the canal came from, truly, West Indians, and those are the ones that came primarily from the West Indies that lived there and raised their families and their only job was to build a canal.  So the education, as I said, they brought people with them, women in particular, that educated, trained, initially.  I, I know that I learned my ABCs and my multiplication tables.  I could, if you woke me up in the middle of the night, I said twelve times twelve is how much and I'd say 144 but I knew that when I was about three or four years old because I used to sit on the stairs, looking into an apartment, a little room, to a room that Mrs. Carrington [ph.] held classes for the children of the people in the community and she would have the front row is for those children that are from maybe kindergarten to third grade and then from fourth grade to eighth grade, you had another, another group that she trained or they went off then to the elementary school and later, much later, just before I came to this country in 1953, they, I guess at '53 [1953], yeah, '53 [1953], they, I went to the junior high school [La Boca Junior High School, La Boca, Panama] to complete my eighth grade and at that time they had then put, initiated, the high school that went from nine to twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay, but when your mother [Edith Pond Brown] was growing up--
Speaker 2: My mother--
Speaker 1: --she could only, she was allowed going to eighth grade--
Speaker 2: --she only could go to eighth grade, eighth grade--
Speaker 1: --but what you're saying is--
Speaker 2: --and my aunts.
Speaker 1: --is that her education was supplemented by the teachers that they brought over from--
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: --home, from Montserrat?
Speaker 2: From Montserrat and from Trinidad and from Jamaica and Jamaica in particular, and Barbados.  Barbados had people I recognized that were really quite bright, educated themselves but, or learned from the English, but they were really very well informed.  If you had a Barbadian teacher, you were very proud.
Story_ID: 634242
Speaker 1: You also said the Americans instituted a Jim Crow system.  This, I suppose this really affected your mother [Edith Pond Brown] since she was there so long, she grew up there and finished school there?
Speaker 2: Oh, it definitely affected my mother--
Speaker 1: What did it consist of is what I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Okay, what it consisted of is first of all, they, they were only allowed to work as, as, what would one say, housekeepers.  They were not allowed to do anything professionally if you had, and to iron.  A lot of, during the wartime [World War II, WWII], they ironed the, the clothes of the soldiers that came into the community.  Those are the kinds of jobs they had.  They were not able to go and work in stores and so on.  Later on, they had what was called, commissaries, and that would be like going to one of the local stores that sold everything, and some of these women were employed later but prior to that, they could not, I'll give you an example.  If a housekeeper who worked in a different part of town, that they, where the Americans had their residence, and that's, they were serviced by the West Indians from the community, women in particular. If they were to go into someone's home and leave with, with maybe an orange or an apple, that they know maybe they should not have taken or took it by mistake, along the way, out of hunger, they could very well be arrested.  So you know very well that they would call, and there's the police, to arrest them.  If you pass, walking from, let's say, my mother, from La Boca [Panama] to Balboa [Panama], which was the America side, and that's within maybe a mile or two, if they stopped and picked up a mango that fell off of a tree, or any fruit, and it was in an area of that, of a white person, they could be arrested for that.  They were disciplined for things of that sort.  They were not allowed to mingle.  The churches that they went to were segregated.  You had white only and blacks only, or colored.  Post office, to pick up the mail.  If you went in and you had to drink from water from a fountain, the fountain was listed as white only, colored only.  So there was a lot of pressure which they learned to live with and there are people that came along in my father's [Patna Brown] generation that had difficulty accepting the role of a second class citizen and many of them then started the idea of unions and, and discussion about how does one move forward and that's out of that creation came the, the opportunity to get a high school and then from a high school, they went into what was called a normal school, normal school being, would be like a college, and many of the people that came along during that period of time, took advantage of it.  So you find that a lot of the children of my generation, or the generation just before me, were very well educated and when we traveled to the United States, a lot of the information that I learned in my high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York], I'd already been taught that on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone], when I went there for two years of education.
Story_ID: 634243
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Patna, P-A-T-N-A, Leopold Brown [Patna Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind his name?
Speaker 2: His name, he tells me that his name was, is an English name and that's about as much as I know because it's a very unusual name, P-A-T-N-A, Patna, but I call him Pat, throughout the years that I've known him.  Very few people called him Patna.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 31st, now I'm going, want to go back to, let me recollect because he was about 1916--I'm blocking on the names, the dates of birth, so let me just, I'll get back to you with that as I speak to you.
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Edith Pond Brown], I calculated at 1917--
Speaker 2: Seventeen [1917]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so my father was two years older than her, so 1915, that's right, for him [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was born right after the canal [Panama Canal] was built?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, well, where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in a little place called, I'm trying to think of, this was off of Red Tank [Panama], a little community outside of Red Tank.  I'll have to think about that, it will come back to me.
Speaker 1: So he was born in Panama?
Speaker 2: He was born in Panama--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] side.
Speaker 1: Near Red Tank, okay, canal zone.  Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Does--
Speaker 2: Very little.  My father, his father [William Brown] was born in Jamaica, which I just found out from investigating that.  I kept, I don't go any further than that generation.  Both my father and grand- my grandfather and grandmother [Jane Brown] were born in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you--
Speaker 2: Came to Panama and they, when they married, they had, to the best of my knowledge, five children.
Story_ID: 634244
Speaker 1: Now do you know your [paternal] grandmother and grandfather's names?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name was Auntie Willow Ganga Brown [Jane Brown], you know, my grandfather [William Brown] and grandmother, again, I just found that out in the research because I've never, I never knew them by their first names, so that I have to, you have to give me some thought.  I'll just get back to you with that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's in the research, though?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have it right here, the research is here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, but they came over to work on the canal [Panama Canal] too?
Speaker 2: They did.  My grandfather came over to work on the canal, my grandmother was, remained as a housewife that ironed and, you know, clothing from the soldiers and did domestic work.
Speaker 1: So your grandmother was already in the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] when your grandfather came over (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she came over--
Speaker 1: Oh, she came over with him.
Speaker 2: --came over either with him or a little after him from Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I wondered how they did that if, if the U.S. government was bringing women, as well as the men--
Speaker 2: Yeah, men and women, disguised as men, in order to get over, they, they pretended that they were men in order to get jobs on the canal and that's how they came over.
Speaker 1: Now did your grandmother have to do that?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, not on my father's [Patna Brown] side, on my, not on my mother's [Edith Pond Brown] side, on my father's side, my grandmother did disguise herself to get to Panama.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, okay, so, so your grandparents came over to work on the canal and your father was born shortly after the canal was, I mean, what kind of work did people do after the canal was built, were they?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were, yeah, they were, they had, they were laborers.  They were constantly digging, still for areas that were not being, you know, would be utilized so they spent a lot of time digging.  They were watchmen, they were firemen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so even after the canal was built, there's a sort of--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, they have--
Speaker 1: --a need for labor?
Speaker 2: Laborers, that's what they were (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: They were considered laborers--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they had a lot of building to do, construction.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: They were carpenters, they were electricians, they, they just repaired things, they were very, very good with their hands, in particular, and, and great builders, builders.
Story_ID: 634245
Speaker 1: What kind of things did your father [Patna Brown] say about growing up?  Did he have any different experience than your mother [Edith Pond Brown] growing up?
Speaker 2: Any different experience after--
Speaker 1: Yeah, than your mother with, I guess, with the Americans in the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] or the educational system or?
Speaker 2: Educational system was the same for all of them.  They went no further than the eighth grade and the time that he was born on the canal zone is called, Empire [Panama], E-M-P-I-R-E, was on the canal zone but it was a small little community.
Speaker 1: Empire, okay, all right.  So did your father go on through the eighth grade like--
Speaker 2: My father went to the eighth grade, so did my mother, both of them went to the eighth grade, and my father, again, was a person that I remember being a very self-educated man.  He read the newspapers every single day, I can recall.  He listened to the radio.  He got the armed forces news that came on and in Panama I remember that on the canal zone, they spoke primarily English, all English, on the, but you're getting music from the City of Panama, also which was just separated by a street.  You could go into Panama City [Panama] and when we get to me I'll talk about that because even though I grew up on the canal zone, I was educated in Spanish, unlike many of my friends that stayed on the canal zone and went to school up to eighth grade and then later on, high school, but I did not do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: What did he do?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, my father worked in, in, what was known as the Balboa Commissary [Balboa, Panama].  The commissary system is like if you're at a Costco where everything was sold in there, you know.  They, you sold clothes, you sold food, sold electrical supplies, it was a, a store that just met the needs of everything that you needed in their community but he worked primarily in the commissaries that catered, again, to the white population and he had a very difficult time and I still think to this day that that's one of the things that causes early death, is that he had a very frustrating job in that he would train, he was the manager at a time of the commissary where he worked, but he often had to train people, younger white men that came to the country to then take a job as a manager.  He would never, you know, he was known as a manager but was not really the manager because the bottom line and the final word was not his, it was always somebody else and he did an excellent job, everybody knows him as being an outstanding manager.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is a common problem, even today--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --having to train somebody white to do the job--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Constantly--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which he vented that frustration when he came home but he was a very bright man, is my recollection, because Shakespeare's [William Shakespeare], all of the classics, they knew them.  People in the canal zone just learned those things.  When we came to the United States and you start talking about 'Hamlet' [William Shakespeare] and 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] and so on, those are things that we had learned already from the women and men that came from the Caribbean that were self-educated, or were, had their education there, and passed it on.  There are people to this day that my father will talk about, well, "Mr. Beecher or Mr. So and So Port," taught them this and they, so they knew that early.  He knew that he would not be, in order to function, well he had to be a well informed person.  So he was always in books and, and the radio and the newspaper is my recollection, or he also, they had what they called, lodges.  Like he was a member of Sojourner Lodge [Sojourner's Lodge] I remember.
Speaker 1: Now were any members of your family members of the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]?
Speaker 2: Members--
Speaker 1: Of the, Garvey's UNIA?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, my grandfather, in particular.  I mean, we were all going, my father, we were going back to Africa.
Speaker 1: I know they had strong ties in--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --the canal zone?
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Definitely, Marcus Garvey.
Story_ID: 634246
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' talents, their dispositions, their tempers, their, their habits, their, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father [Patna Brown] was a handsome man, very, very handsome man.  And my mother [Edith Pond Brown] was an attractive woman.  And, I fall somewhere between the two of them with certain features.  My mother and father always said to me that, you know, neither one of them were people that were very, very verbal and they don't know where I came from.  The ability and love to talk so much.  My sister [Velma Brown Armstrong] is a fairly quiet person also but they are both generally people that were loved in the community because my father was not one that, that attached himself to too many people but he was a people person as it required for a type of job that he did, was bright, so he, at the lodges he will always be the person in charge of, of whatever was going on.  He was a take charge type of person but in a very low keyed fashion and what, in those, in those instances, he was the type of person that you don't mess with his children, my sister and I, and I came from a community where people looked out for other people's children.  So, if I were to do something, if he told me that I, and he was very strict.  My mother, my mother and my aunt [Anesta Pond Samuel] owned the beauty shop, as I mentioned before, the first generation to, to have a chain of beauty shops, they had three at the time.  My mother ran one of them and that was part of this little complex where we had a, what we called a club house.  You had a shoe mender there, you had the barbershop, you had the beauty shop which belonged to my family, my mother and my aunt, and you had, I went there for a typing school after classes because every child had to do, you had to learn how to embroider, you had to crochet and you had to have something that you're doing with your hands after school, so I'd learned to type.  My mother, an excellent person for crochet, she always had people that she taught to crochet.  She taught them how to do dressmaking.  So they were very involved community minded people, very involved with the church and any activity going on in church, she was center of it.  My father was not the churchgoing person but he insisted that we must get up and go to church every Sunday or when, or activities, was surrounded by the church based on my father because I remember when, and that's going forward, when I, when you asked what type of person he is, I wanted to become a Catholic and I wanted to be, be a, take First Communion because all my friends had their white dresses and their little veil and so on that they used for, when they were getting, they're taking their First Communion and my father said, "You will not, you are an Episcopalian and you will not be--or come to me another time and ask me if you can be--take First Communion and join a Catholic church," not that he had anything against the Catholic church but he said, "You're an Episcopalian, and when you make those decisions, you need to be an adult to make them. You can't make them at this age."  So I could not become that but my friends were all members of the Catholic church and one of the things that he required that on Sundays, we got up on Sundays and at seven o'clock we went to the Episcopal service, we left there, came home and had breakfast, you left from there and you went to, perhaps, the Salvation Army church, but the whole day was taken up by church: I went to Salvation, Methodist, Lutheran, whatever.
Story_ID: 634247
Speaker 1: I mean during the week, I remember used to be annoyed because my mother [Edith Pond Brown] would stop and they had--in Panama, the lottery, was always very, very prevalent.  Every Sunday we played the lottery and it was a national activity and people had their runners during the week that sold chance, we called it, and during the, my mother coming from work, late in the evening, sometime on a Friday evening, we will stop under a house, and what does that mean, under a house?  A house is, multiple houses that were built of stilts so under the house that they had activities that a woman will have and they had, there's a piece inside right there by, by Ernie Crichlow [Ernest Crichlow], with women in white, and their heads wrapped and these were women that would have their services and they will call out numbers when they start jumping around and prancing and having what we called a spirit, they will start calling out numbers that if somebody died, you want to find, what was their grave number, number that they, the coffin was where they got buried and if they called that number out, you can be sure that every man that sold chances were to be selling those numbers or you went into the city and you looked for the number because you might win it.  It was such a culture that my father [Patna Brown] said, "I do not want you all involved with that," and if he found out that we had stopped, because my mother wanted to go by it to hear what the numbers were going to be, if we stopped, I mean, he would punish us.  You could not leave to go out and meet your mother, at a given time.  In other words, he was a strict man.  He was a very loving father.  I would remember him coming home and cooking food but everybody that, in that community knew that, you don't mess with Mr. Brown's daughter because if you're a boy and you call on that telephone, he wants to know who you are and why you're calling my daughters, and please don't call back anymore, end of story, but not difficult to understand that the Brown girls that couldn't deal with anyone.  I remember walking home from school with, a friend who just called me today, as a matter of fact, his name is Dr. Herrington Bryce, he has been at William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia] forever, and so on, and his brother just passed away, they're all very good friends of mine, Dr. Roy Bryce-Laporte, well known sociologist and was the chair at Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] for a long time, and we always laugh because I said to him and his brother at an award dinner that I had been giving, is, "I wish my father were alive today to see what happened to the Bryce brothers, the Br- boys" because one of the brothers, Herrington, walked me home from typing school one evening and when I got home, the neighbor, who was keeping an eye on us because my father went to the lodge, told my father that, "Grace [HistoryMaker Grace Y. Ingleton] had been walking home with Herrington Bryce.  Before she comes home, she does not walk home alone." And my father came upstairs and woke me up and said, "How did you get home?"  I walked home, and my mother's beauty shop was right in the complex where, where the school was.  He said, "You do not stop at your mother's on the way home, you head straight home," which was a couple blocks away, and he woke me up and he said, "I'm telling you for the last time, when you leave school, you walk home by yourself.  Don't let me hear that you walked home again with those, with those Bryce brothers."  So I always laugh and tell Herrington and Roy, I honored them one year for the accomplishments they made in this country, and I said, I wish my father were alive to see whatever became of the Bryce brothers, and that's to tell you the character he had.  He was a very firm man, but a very loving father but he had plans for us.  He said, "You are going to be an educated woman and you're going to learn to serve your community. You're going to do like your mother and always give back for the things that you have earned."  So we, I, I did not grow up with, as a lot of my friends would, a lot of children, sisters and brothers, or having to worry about not having anything because I was a first of, first generation, first grandchild of my mother's maternal side of the family, which means my grandmother [Mary Allers Pond] did not have any other grandchildren, you know, from the children that she had locally, I was the first one.  So I was totally spoiled and that I never knew what it was not to have.  I never wore secondhand clothes, which most of my friends did.  I did not have to worry about what we were going to eat because my father and mother always worked.  I was, I understood that my role is to go to church, to study, and to have friends but that, you know, that you had to follow a certain lifestyle when we're, said this is what has to be done.  I learned to be respectful but I also learned from my mother from very early that you have to give back what you get, if you're, if you're gifted with much then you have to give it back and I understood that.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --tried to lead my life that way.
Story_ID: 634248
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and smells and sounds?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Sights, I lived on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone], close to the canal [Panama Canal].  Most of the communities were around the canal, so we were not far from water, even though I never learned to swim in Panama, but, which was strange.  My husband [Edward Ingleton] and the boys all swam but my father [Patna Brown] did not want me going down there to swim, and he was an excellent swimmer.  We were, I would say, the equivalent on this country, maybe two, two blocks would be where the canal ran and water flowed and the Miraflores locks and so and so.  We always had the scent of salt water, you know, the difference between salt water and fresh water.  People lived on fish a lot.  So we had a lot of fishermen that will come by with their fish.  So you had the scent of fish in the air but you also had the scent of, depending on the season, of fruits.  Mangos falling off of trees, breadfruit, soursop, guinea- guineps, so we always had the scent of fruits and aroma because things were also from the ground.  You learned to understand how to, you know, you're dealing with, what we call to this day, ground food, yams and yucas and aloes and so on, and things like that that came out of the ground, so that you always had fresh fruit around you at all time, water.  I'm trying to think of other scents.  In the evening, it was absolutely beautiful because the skies were usually very clear and you could see the stars very well.  You could deal with, everybody knew the moon in terms of if it's a full moon, a quarter moon, if it's, so I mean that's a lot with astronomical, astrological things looking up and understanding what goes on around us.  Foods were, again, a lot of people that had malnutrition, you know, like most of our friends came from families of five to twelve children and so they were not as blessed but they always, always had food because you could always grow your food and that was very important, you didn't have to worry about specialties, you know, and, and the women, that's another thing that women did a lot, they baked a lot, they sewed and they baked constantly, they cooked.  They were excellent cooks, most of them, and the daughters came along doing the same thing and boys will be, you know, newspaper carriers or they worked in, probably working with, a lot of people were musicians.  We loved, coming of a culture that likes music and calypsos and so on.  Orch- the extreme, the other part of it is that most of us grew up with classical music, just, and go into band exchange and, and also by going to different churches, you, you either, you know, the question you, belonged to the CYO if you're a Catholic and you didn't have to be Catholic to go to Catholic Youth Organization.  Salvation Army, if you're the tambourines.  Wesleyan, but you knew those songs, you knew those hymns and you also went to, to classes on, on religion.  If you should be a Catholic, you know your catechism and other than that, I mean, we went to church programs where you learned the Bible by, you know, if you were to say to me, what is the 23rd Psalm, well I could repeat it when I was a little girl from the beginning to end.  If you wanted to say, oh, "I learned this, 91st Psalm," well, you're grown up, you don't know the 91st, that's long, well, we had to study the Bible.  You had to study things that you were able to repeat and, and use.  You had to learn poetry.  You can tell poems and so and so.  Those things were just common place for most children.  Whether you had or did not have a lot of material things, those were things that were taught to you, so, that's the environment I grew up in.  So that was a flavor, that's a sound of music, of poetry, of classical music and another activity, it was very, very popular, are games.  Ball games, baseball, basketball, very, very popular in Panama.  We had teams that we rooted for and they also placed.  I think I played a little soccer but mainly baseball, I can remember, and tennis.  Tennis, the families that were a little bit more in the like, a little we call the upper crust or uppity, they played tennis.  So we learned tennis along the way but baseball, I remember one of the first fellows that worked, played for the New York Yankees from Panama was Hector Lopez.  Well his mother and my aunt were very, very good friends.  So when he came to live here, his mother lived with us at 276 Lafayette [276 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, New York], so we got to know the ballplayers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And track, track and field was another big--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --big sport.
Speaker 1: Did you know Cirilo McSween?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, very, very well, Cirilo McSween is somebody that I honored again through The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.] for his success in Chicago [Illinois] with all the McDonald's and the fact that he was a part of the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, groups that traveled with him.  Also, he was known for the insurance company [New York Life insurance Company] that he worked with.
Speaker 1: He founded these McDonald's, he was, he owned the big McDonald's in the Loop, Chicago Loop, several of them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He did, exactly, I visited it, I know.
Speaker 1: I know he was a track man, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that's what, what got him where he did, it was track and field, track person.
Speaker 1: He was a big part of the Harold Washington coalition.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 634249
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: The name of my school, I went to Spanish school.  As I said to you, my beginnings were sitting on the stairs, a long stair, the house that we lived on in La Boca [Panama], was where my, with my grandparents, in particular.  If you came down halfway through the stairs, I could look in the window and I would see the, the teacher, Mrs. Carrington [ph.], teaching children of different age group, and a lot of stuff was taught by rote.  So I would learn my ABCs, that's where I learned my ABCs, I learned my multiplication, my division and poetry and so on, I could repeat those things when I was four, five years old but then in the city my mother [Edith Pond Brown] and father [Patna Brown], and my aunt [Anesta Pond Samuel] and uncle [Henry Samuel], moved into the City of Panama [Panama City, Panama] and from there I went to Spanish school and the reason for that--
Speaker 1: Now, what was the first, I'm sorry, what was the name of the first school?
Speaker 2: It was, it was, Mrs., Mrs. Carrington's school--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --Carrington.
Speaker 1: So she was just one of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was one of the teachers that held classes--
Speaker 1: --the ladies from the Caribbean that came over--
Speaker 2: Yes, came from, from, I think she was Jamaican.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But actual schooling was started when I was living in the City of Panama and I went to a school called Justo, J-U-S-T-O--
Speaker 1: J-U-S-T-O--
Speaker 2: --Arosemena, A-R-O-S-E-M-E-N-A, Justo Arosemena [Escuela Justo Arosemena, Panama City, Panama], and I have about four of my, my mother saved them which was wonderful, I, she saved me my, my report cards.  I actually have them.
Speaker 1: Now do you know the meaning of this--
Speaker 2: Justo Arosemena?  Well, that was the name of a very well known politician in Panama, somebody that had a background, I think, in traveling around in ships, a sailor--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Justo Arosemena, and I think, I don't want to, I wouldn't want to give my last dollar on that, but that's where I went to school.
Story_ID: 634250
Speaker 1: I remember that I was basically a quiet, but a good student and thinking about that, I remember the first and only fight I ever had in my life was in the third grade at Justo Arosemena [Escuela Justo Arosemena, Panama City, Panama] because despite the fact that, that in Panama's, now, I had a different problem there.  Now in the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] you're dealing with the segregation issues and, you know, so your environment is, we grew up and there's all black and then I get into the City of Panama [Panama City, Panama], because my mother [Edith Pond Brown] and father's [Patna Brown] thoughts were that if you were born in this city, you're a Panamanian, you're going to learn to speak Spanish because most of the Caribbean people did not speak Spanish and because of them having regular paychecks, despite how little it was, many of them did better than the Panamanians, and that lived in the City of Panama, that were probably not employed as well or made as much money as the people that worked on the canal zone.  So there was always the little competition of who was better and, of course, as bad as it was on the canal zone, the Panamanians, the West Indians tended to feel that they were better than the Panamanians that lived in the city.  So here I am caught between these two cultures.  So, in the daytime, where all of my friends have gone off to English school, I am now picking up earlier than they get up to go into the City of Panama, get on the bus and go into the city and, to go to Spanish school, 'cause my parents said, "If you were born here, you are going to learn to speak the language.  We don't speak the language, we're learning as we go along, but you and your sister [Velma Brown Armstrong] will learn," and I said, "Fine."  So I had my early training in Spanish and I remember the third grade--
Speaker 2: So it was, I'm sorry, was school taught in Spanish?
Speaker 1: Everything is in Spanish, yes, because it's a Spanish system.
Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted to make sure of that, okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, that was during, there are no English teachers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I remember when I was in the third grade and I know her name to this day, her name was Dora Colon [ph.], C-O-L-O-N, used to tease me every day because I was learning Spanish and she will call me, chomba, which is, in Panama, not an endearing term as like, the, the, unfortunately, the negative term for black people.  Now what was interesting was that she was black as I was but she was Spanish and she saw that as a difference.  You don't speak English, you don't speak Spanish and, and you're black and she's black also, and she did everything.  She pulled my hair, she had people tell, tease me because I didn't, my Spanish was not as good as theirs and so on and then one day she pulled my hair in class and I turned around and I beat the life out of her.  So I never had a problem in school anymore and I learned Spanish quite well.  So prior to, you know, so my, in the daytime, I went to school in the city and then when school ended, I went to the canal zone where my parents, my grandparents lived, who was babysitting with us because my parents didn't live in the city at that time and my friends now on the other side are speaking English so that's how I learned my English but my, my husband [Edward Ingleton] and his peers, and my peers all had a better handle on grammar, they had a better handle on, on penmanship because in Spanish school we never learned penmanship.  If you saw the penmanship of people coming from the canal zone, excellent.  They had training that I didn't have.  I had to then, what my parents did, is when I came home in the evening, now I'm in trouble because I have to learn English, in terms of understanding how to use my grammar so on and so forth, so I was a bit conflicted there because it was English and Spanish for me, which was in the long run the best thing that could have happened to me.
Story_ID: 634251
Speaker 1: Now did you have any special teachers or mentors in school?
Speaker 2: Yes I did.  When, in my elementary days in Spanish school [Escuela Justo Arosemena, Panama City, Panama], there was a lady by the name of Constance Fife [ph.], F-I-F-E.
Speaker 1: Constance Fife.
Speaker 2: Fife, F-I-F-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, F-I-F-E.
Speaker 2: Constance, and her husband was a dentist I remember and she was a woman of color that had married a Hispanic man and that was considered sort of like a interracial marriage.
Speaker 1: So she was a black woman from, from--
Speaker 2: A black woman but raised in the City of Panama [Panama City, Panama], though, so she spoke Spanish fluently and that was her, her lifestyle, was that of a more of a Hispanic than a Caribbean person.
Speaker 1: But her background was Caribbean, you think?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I really don't know but I think it is.  I think she was of Caribbean background that grew up in the City of Panama.
Speaker 1: Now did you, okay, well I shouldn't ask this now, I'll ask about the teachers and I'll ask this next question, but what about, yeah, so Constance Fife--
Speaker 2: Well, Constance Fife, Ms. Fife as I remember her, was always very special to me because she spent a lot of time encouraging me to, to do well.  She said, you know, "You, you're going to grow up to be someone," and I said, "Well, what does someone mean?"  She said, "It means that you will be someone that makes a contribution to, to the world," and I said, "Well, all of us make a contribution to the world," and she said, "No, and, in a special way," she said, "You have a gift of, of working with people," and I said, "Well, I don't know what that means."  She said, "No, I'm telling you that you get along well with people and that you, you're very sensitive and you're very caring and those are qualities that will take you far in the world."  And so, she, but she spent a lot of time looking out for me and looking out for me means that she always checked to see if you did your homework.  Did you have any problem getting your homework done?  Did you understand what was assigned?  Did you, how long did it take you to do your homework and who were your friends.  She said, "Always remember that you have to, you know, people know you by the friends that you keep," and that's her advice that she gave, and from a little girl, and I've stayed at the school until I was in the, I believe the sixth grade, and I met her when I was in the second grade and every year, even though she was not my teacher, I think, I had her for two other classes, years, that she always sought me out to find out how I was doing, how are things going, how was your English and Spanish, did you, you know, learn to transcend that without having difficulty and, you know, I would say yes, because many of my friends when I went home did not speak Spanish.  Some did, some did not.  So I was sort of navigating between two worlds.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, were there any black Americans in the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] in those days that you, that you met?
Speaker 2: No I didn't know any of them but there were some that were there based on, if they came down with the [U.S.] Army or, you know, one of the services and they were stationed in Panama.  Very few of them brought their families with them, very few.  They sort of, tour they had but they were there unlike the, the Caucasians that brought their wives with them, especially if they were officers and they had homes that, a house that was assigned to, to the person in the Army, [U.S.] Navy or whatever branch they were in, would be a house that if a Caribbean family living in three rooms, or two or three rooms, would be able to put in all of their children and, I mean, the disparity was so great that they, it was very painful and if you worked for the canal zone, and you were terminated, you were immediately terminated from having quarters.  Quarters were considered what your homes were.  You had to move off of the canal zone and move into the City of Panama immediately.
Speaker 1: So, if you lost your job you also lost your place to live and--
Speaker 2: You lost everything.  You didn't have access to the commissary anymore.  You did not have access to the services that were provided.  In spite of things being bad, they could have been worse and if you move into the City of Panama and did not have a background where you could get a job, just speak Spanish and so on, then you were not, you're worse off than, than, than having lived on the canal zone.
Story_ID: 634252
Speaker 1: You were a little girl during World War II [WWII]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and did your family like follow those events and talk about it, and?
Speaker 2: All the time, you had no choice because we had, I remember us having, what they called blackouts where, where, you know, everything went black.  I remember the air raid shelters.  I remember the foods that you got in, in cans, the special rationing.  Yeah, remarkably I remember a lot of that.  I remember the soldiers coming into the city [Panama City, Panama], into La Boca [Panama] and the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone].  I remember, as I said, the air raid shelters and, and the sound of the siren.  It was a terrible sound, it was frightening 'cause you felt that you're not, especially with the canal [Panama Canal] there, that they're going to attack and you'd hear parents talking about that all the time, yeah, so, I, I, I understood.  This was, I was born in '36 [1936] and that was in the '40s [1940s], early '40s [1940s], and I can remember them talking about Hitler [Adolf Hitler], Stalin [Joseph Stalin] and those are memories that still come back to me.
Speaker 1: Now, because it was the canal zone and ships were coming through all the time, did the, did you meet a lot of foreign nationals coming through?
Speaker 2: We didn't meet them, but they're in town, near, you always know when a ship was in because you are going to see a lot of sailors, soldiers and navy people coming in to town, Panama and the canal zone, you'll have both of them, yeah, except if I went to school in the city, I will always, you know, you knew when, when the ship was in because you saw the sailors and the crew from the different ships in town, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I just wondered how much intera- 'cause I know, when we interviewed people who were raised on the Gulf of Mexico, even though they were down south, they're in Mobile [Alabama] and New Orleans [Louisiana], they had a more kind of cosmopolitan--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --view of the world because there are a lot of different people around.
Speaker 2: Exactly. That's what happened in Panama because there are people that I just met, the gentleman that I just had some painting done and he said, "Well, you know, I was in Panama in the service and I got to know a lot of people.  I know a friend of mine that takes photographs," he says, "You know, I know a whole lot of Panamanians because I used to visit their home and they're always surprised that as an American I would understand their culture," and they just had a broader understanding of what went on in those cultures, yeah.
Story_ID: 634253
Speaker 1: Now you were all at Justo Arosemena [Escuela Justo Arosemena, Panama City, Panama]--
Speaker 2: Justo Arosemena, I was--
Speaker 1: --school, for how long?
Speaker 2: I was there until I was in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you went to another school?
Speaker 2: And that school, I went into another school called, Liceo, L-I-C-E-O, de, D-E, Senoritas, S-E-N-O-R-I-T-A-S. That was going into like junior high school.
Speaker 1: Now that means the school for girls or--
Speaker 2: Liceo de Senoritas [Panama City, Panama], school for young ladies.
Speaker 1: Young ladies, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is in the, this is in the--
Speaker 2: Another part of town, still in the City of Panama [Panama City, Panama], and we wore uniforms.  I wore a blue skirt and white top, black shoes, white, white socks.
Speaker 1: Okay, so by this time you can probably speak Spanish fairly--
Speaker 2: Very well, very well, yes.
Speaker 1: --fluently.
Speaker 2: And that was my, I always say I had two first languages but that was my first language 'cause I spent my daytime speaking Spanish, I did my homework in Spanish, I, lessons that were, you know, if we had to go on a bus trip or something, it was to a Spanish area, people that spoke Spanish, and then when I came home, then I, that picked up my English and my mother and father [Patna Brown] were funny.  I said to my mother, "When are you going to learn to speak Spanish?"  She said, "I speak Spanish," and in the meantime she's living in the city where, or neighbors were Spanish speaking and she would say, "I, I speak building Spanish."  I said, "What is building Spanish?"  She said, "I speak the Spanish of the building I live on.  They understand me when I say something that is in English and Spanish."  She said she spoke Spanglish so, you know, so she learned, they learned along the way.  My mother understood, and my father understood Spanish, very well, they just could not verbalize it like we did as children, that we learned to speak it but they, they could get around it very well.  I remember the neighbors used to be very upset with her.  "Mrs. Brown, Senora Brown [Edith Pond Brown], why don't you get the children to eat when we offer them food?"  My sister [Velma Brown Armstrong], just opposite of me, she will eat anything that was offered to her by, I said, "I don't want any of that Spanish food because I don't understand it."  My sister did just the opposite.  She would spend her money for transportation for us to get home to buy food, the Spanish, you know, I call it mishmash but she loved it.  She entered into the culture much better than I did.  I've always had that reservation with being two, between two cultures.  My sister didn't have a problem with that at all, you know, so to this day, they always say I'm a false Panamanian, my friends.  "You don't eat the food, you don't do this, you don't do that," but--
Speaker 1: You still don't eat the food?
Speaker 2: I still don't eat a lot of the, what would be considered the local food, no.  I have difficulty.  My sister doesn't.  If we, I mean, she'll sort of look for it here, she'll go to Panama, when we're there, she'll buy stuff from the street and not me, I can't do it.
Speaker 1: Was it, was it similar to Mexican food or other--
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: Was it similar to Mexican food?
Speaker 2: In many ways, yes, but, but I was always afraid because they add iguana.  Iguana, you know, and I, I, and they wanted to tell me it tastes like chicken.  So I'm not going to take a chance and eat an iguana thinking I'm eating chicken.  So before that I ate nothing from any of the, unless it was cooked by my mother, or my aunt or my grandmother.  My sister was just the opposite.  Anything they, they fixed her, all of the, you know, like you'll go out to buy, well, "Let's go to McDonald's and buy food that's current to the--." I won't do that, I just couldn't.  My sister did.  So they always, people are very, that spokesperson, "You're a false Panamanian, you, you just have not adapted to the culture," and I say, "You're probably right."
Speaker 1: Now the, the Panamanians are, the Spanish speaking Panamanians are primarily Indians, right, from Central--
Speaker 2: They're probably what?
Speaker 1: They're primarily Indians from Central America, right?  They're Indians, Native Americans--
Speaker 2: Some of them are, some are but mainly they are, a lot of them came from Spain.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, most came from Spain and, and some Indian but, but primarily from Spain is their culture of difference.  They, they have the Indians in the outer parts of Panama at that time, we will consider outer now, it's they're, they're very much close to the city and they're become like, part of the culture that is becoming accepted but it took a long time for the Indians to be accepted in Panama.  Oh, yes.  Now if the West Indians are second class, then they were third class.  You know, there are gradation of, of people.  It took a lot longer.  Indians are still not considered to be totally acceptable in some areas but there's a mixture because you have a lot of Spanish speaking, people from Spain have the different speech pattern to the people that learn Spanish in Panama.  So, so there's a difference, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Culturally.
Speaker 1: So Liceo de Senoritas is, is a middle school, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is a middle school.
Speaker 1: A junior high school.  Yeah, now were there any special teachers there or--
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  I didn't, after I left Liceo de Senoritas, I was only there for two years, six, seven, eight, then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nine, that's like 1942 to--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no, unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm wrong, I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: No, that had to be closer to '50 [1950].
Story_ID: 634254
Speaker 1: Where did you go after Liceo de Senoritas [Panama City, Panama] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I left, when my Aunt Anesta [Anesta Pond Samuel] and my Uncle Sam [Henry Samuel] decided that, and my parents [Edith Pond Brown and Patna Brown], they got together and decided that the best thing for us to do, you know my mother had two daughters separated by four years in age, that she will make the sacrifice and send her daughters to the United States and the first one to go was, my uncle and aunt were here, Aunt Anesta and Uncle Sam, they decided to send for me to come to the United States to finish my education here.
Speaker 1: Now had your aunt started The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.] at that point?
Speaker 2: No, it started in '53 [1953] when I came.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So they, they paid, or--
Speaker 2: They, they sent for me.  They made the decision.  So in knowing that I was planning to come to the United States, I was transferred from the Spanish school to the English school on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone].  So I attended La Boca Junior High [La Boca Junior High School, La Boca, Panama] for one year and then La Boca High School [La Boca, Panama] for one year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you came to the United States, you were a junior in high school, like, a sophomore?
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: Sophomore?
Speaker 2: You're right.  Yeah, no, I spent two years so I had to be, what is that, sophomore?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A sophomore, not a senior, and I came in 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1953.  So were you excited to go to America or did you, or did you feel, oh, I don't want to leave my parents, and--
Speaker 2: I was happy but I was glad because my aunt felt at that time that she was salvaging me from my, taking me from my father who was going to kill me if I didn't learn to follow directions 'cause he was very strict and I was very, very stubborn, you know, like, I just couldn't understand why I could not walk home with a friend.  I, you know, I sort of started challenging things, very quietly, and my father was not about to have that, you know.  "Children are seen and not heard," "There's only one woman in this house, that's your mother," those are the admonitions that you got.  So my aunt said, you know what.  I'm sending for you so you can get out of that environment where, he was just so strict and I can understand that.  It was a community that were if someone, when you live in a small community, you know everyone, you know their business, and if you had girls that became pregnant, all he, the thought of a parent saying that, you know, I may become pregnant, is all my father needed to think of and he was very, very strict.  He said, "If anything happens to you, I," but, I know, I don't understand what does that mean if anything happens to you, "You and your mother and your sister [Velma Brown Armstrong] hold hands and don't bother to come back in the house."  So, he was really very, very strict, very strict and as I said, he, and I, because he said that will restrict you from having a better life but he never really went into details.  My mother was more, you know, in terms of explaining what, what, if you look at a future, then this is, these are some of the things that you have to do.  You have to go to school, you have to be respectful, so and so forth.  And so there was no one prouder than him when I came here and graduated from high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, but, now did he have any objections to you coming to the United States?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't because he saw that as, as an avenue to, to a better life--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --education and a better life.
Story_ID: 634255
Speaker 1: Now what did you think you knew about the United States before you came over in terms of, did you go to movies in Panama or the radio, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, yeah, no, we understood the movies.  I mean, I, I can remember Esther Williams swimming and I wanted to swim like Esther Williams and I remember Judy Garland singing and, oh why, we knew all of the movies.  Movies were, we had a movie in the commissary, not commissary, in the clubhouse area where people went to movies every night.  I remember it was like ten cents and we saw all of the films that came down.  Roy Rogers with the, and Hopalong Cassidy and all those things.  I can go back to, oh yes.  Costello and who was the other one?
Speaker 1: Abbott, Abbott and Costello [Bud Abbott and Lou Costello].
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  I, you know, all of the comedians and so on and the dramas and so on.
Speaker 1: Now did, now the--
Speaker 2: And he allowed us to go to the movies and see things.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any Jim Crow restrictions in the movies?
Speaker 2: Well, you could never go to a white theater, it had to be always be, on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone].  I mean, Jim Crow was a hundred percent in Panama, on the canal zone, 100 percent.  The church was at one point segregated.  You could not, I mean the Catholic church, in particular, cathedral, blacks on one side, whites on the other.
Speaker 1: Now was there a black Episcopal church or, or was--
Speaker 2: Black Episcopal and black Catholic church.  I mean, the Catholic church in general will have one side for blacks and one for white.  The Episcopal the same thing and, but if it was all black, not a problem.  I went to church called St. Peter's [St. Peter's Church, La Boca, Panama], was my, my home church.  My godmother was the wife of the minister.
Speaker 1: Now was that, was that a black Episcopal church?
Speaker 2: Yes, definitely--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --black Episcopal.
Speaker 1: Okay, St. Peter's.
Story_ID: 634256
Speaker 1: Did you have any trepidation about being treated as a second class citizen in the United States when you got over here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did, I did.  I had, when I came to the states in '53 [1953], 1953 I came in June, June of '53 [1953], I started school in September and I was sent to Prospect Heights High School [Brooklyn, New York] and was primarily, I would say it was about 90 percent Caucasian.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is this the first time you went to school with--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a lot of white people?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: How did it, how did it work out?
Speaker 2: My adjustment was slow because I did not speak a lot, initially.  I remember that classes were totally different to me from what I had on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] for, the two years that I spent in the English school in the canal zone, were totally different.  You had mainly one teacher, primarily, in, in the junior high [La Boca Junior High School, La Boca, Panama].  High school [La Boca High School, La Boca, Panama] I had different teachers but coming here it meant trying to learn a new culture, trying to get accustomed to Caucasians and with them not, and I didn't speak very much, and they would say, "Well, where are you from?"  "I'm from Panama."  "Well if you're from Panama, then you speak Spanish."  "Yes, I do."  "Well if," one girl said to me, "well if you speak Spanish, then you have to be different from the other black people."  What does that--? So I'm confused now, "What does that mean?"  "Oh, no, you're better than them because you're from, you speak Spanish," and believe it or not, that's one of the ways I was accepted, because I spoke Spanish, I was from Panama, I was not born in the United States, I was not from down south, I was not at a place where it will become, I was identified as a black American and I found that just so difficult to deal with.  Then, I dated, we didn't have, I have a picture of one of my high school classmate, that just attended my seventy-fifth birthday because then I started seeking out people that I could identify with also and there are not that many of us but I, to this day, several of them are still my friends because I developed friends that were black and I, I tried to break down the barrier, I had two barriers to break down and now dealing with a culture where, if you're black, you're not going to be accepted at Prospect Heights, as such.  If you're African American or black born in the South or from the New York [New York] area. Speaking Spanish and coming from Panama made me different and then dealing with the American black who felt that being Caribbean was also not an acceptable thing, you're different, you came here to take away our houses, you came here to take away our education and so on and so forth.
Speaker 1: You're a threat to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, so I'm caught in the middle of all of this and so I, I started taking classes and I remember taking chemistry.  I knew that I wanted to be a nurse and I needed to have science courses.  So, I did not understand chemistry at all, that was being taught to me in that first year.  I also did not understand that if you didn't go to school, that they sent notes home to your parents.  So I started cutting classes on a Monday and in the morning when I had chemistry was from 8:30 to 9:30, I believe, or eight to nine, I'm sure wasn't, was the first class, and I had a, a gentleman that was my teacher that really didn't offer any encouragement for me learning and he thought that if I spoke Spanish that I didn't understand English so he wasn't going to spend any time with me and I remember his name to this day but he gave me a failing mark and because I was, I started to cut classes because he wouldn't call on me, he wouldn't help me, so on and so forth.  So my [maternal] aunt [Anesta Pond Samuel], when I got home one day, she was a very easygoing woman, never raised her voice, rarely ever raised her voice, she said to me, "Where do you go in the mornings when you leave here to go to school?" 'Cause I was attending the other classes but I wasn't going to chemistry class and that was my first class.  I said, well, I figured I better not lie, "I get on a train and I'd ride the train from one stop to the other, from the beginning to the end and then when it gets close to, to the next class, I go to school."  So, okay, not a problem.  "Why do you do that?"  "Because the teacher doesn't like me," and she said, "Well it shows here that you're not in class and you're getting a failing grade and you cannot go," and we had a general diploma and an academic diploma.  If you didn't have an academic diploma, you could not get into nursing school or, you know, schools that required a higher passing or, so I, she said, "Not a problem, I'll walk you to school.  Do you want to go to school?  Every morning I'll take you to school for the first week, second week you're on your own and you will attend."  She went to the school, she spoke to my teacher, she told him that, why didn't they get in touch with her earlier and what was it that I was doing incorrectly, why didn't I pass the course and so on and so forth.  And he said, "Well, it doesn't make any difference, she can get a general diploma, she'll graduate because she has grades, good grades in the others," and she said, "No, I don't want her to get a general diploma. I want her to get an academic diploma and that's what I intend that she will have," and my aunt came up there and watched that man teach that class for about a week and after that she said, "I'm leaving now, but if you have a problem with her, if she's not bringing in her homework, if she's not attending and she's not here on time, then you contact me," and she said, "To be on the safe side, I'm going to go and see the principal of this school to inform them that you failed to notify me and that you are not treating her with respect and that you're telling me that's okay for her to get a general diploma," and she did, and I had no problem going to school after that because I knew that she would be on my case and my uncle [Henry Samuel] and so I did well.  I graduated with my academic diploma.  I made friends along the way and it turned out not to be, the first year was not easier in terms of adjustment, second year was a lot better and in the third year, yeah, I finished, finished high school in '55 [1955], that's (unclear), 1955.
Story_ID: 634257
Speaker 1: How did you deal with the weather?
Speaker 2: How did I do?
Speaker 1: Now how did you deal with the weather (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, my Lord.  That was such a change because I came in the summer and it was a hot, hot summer so I did not like the summer that much, you'd think coming from the tropics I would like it, but a different kind of heat, and then came the fall, I enjoyed that and then came winter, and winter I had a rough, rough, rough time trying to get accustomed to the winter.  It was, I mean, the cold was just incredibly cold and after a while I made up my mind.  Well, given the choice of the winter, the summer and all of the other, I'm going to learn how to like this winter 'cause I kept wearing enough clothes, the summer I can't take off enough.  So, I, just mentally I, I conditioned myself to liking the winter and when, then snow came and I had to get into boots and sweaters and so on, I went through a lot of transition with that.  My aunt, and most people coming from the Caribbean will tell you, "Don't, don't get up, take your shower at night and, no in the morning, and go out into the, into the cold because it's going to make you sick, you're going to get a cold.  You don't iron your clothes, you don't press your clothes in the morning, you put it through the night before because you're going to get a cold when you--." So everything was giving me a cold.  "You have to wear enough sweaters, you have to wear enough scarves," and so on and so forth and I said, "I'm going to break this trend."  And I just cannot not shower in the morning, that's the only thing that wakes me up, rather than in the night, and then they say, "Then you get washed in the morning," that would never work for me.  So I showered in the morning, I ironed my clothes, it was necessary because you have to press your clothes before you left the house and I just adapted to the winter and became a winter person as opposed to a summer person and it was hard.  The first year was very hard but after that I got accustomed to it, you know, like everything else and I think I was young enough that I, at sixteen, seventeen, that I was able to, to deal with the transition.
Story_ID: 634258
Speaker 1: Now in your neighborhood, were there other bla- were there black people in the neighborhood or other people from--?
Speaker 2: My, my neighborhood in those days, Clinton Hill [Brooklyn, New York] was an integrated neighborhood, primarily white, though.  It changed later but it was primarily a white neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Who were your friends in high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York]?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Who were your friends?
Speaker 2: My friends were, as I started to say, I remember, I have a picture of one of them right now, Althea, Joyce, Joyce was from, her people were from Barbados.  I had, what's her name, Joyce Babb [ph.] was her name.  The other one, it was Althea Cooke [ph.], no that's not it, that's, that's nursing.  Oh, I had about four or five good girlfriends during that period of time.  Some of them were, their parents were, they were born in the United States but their parents were from the Caribbean, two or three of them.  I had one friend that was from down south and one friend that, her family came from South Carolina and one family that she grew up in Brooklyn [New York], so I had a mixture.  I did not have, end up with any white girlfriends that, you know, that I conversed with after I left school or that I, I visited or things like that.  For whatever reason, I think, maybe my reluctance because of two things, one is that I didn't come out of that environment and two, I felt that when I came, they were not open to me and that I was not going to be accepted unless I was something other than black, whatever, because they did not want to deal with me unless they felt that I was of a different culture, I was Hispanic, and coming from Panama and that I was, you know, bilingual, so I was different and I didn't find that as a reason for having a friend.
Speaker 1: Did you participate in the prom and that sort of thing, the social stuff in school?
Speaker 2: I, I did in, no, not in the prom planning and things of that sort.  No, I, I joined a couple of organizations, more something, I think it was a literature program committee and, but not really.  The two years I did not really become totally absorbed with, with the school--
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--
Speaker 2: --but I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you graduated, were you a ranking student?  In other words, did you have good grades?
Speaker 2: Did I do what?
Speaker 1: Were you a ranking student in terms of the top, one of the top students or--
Speaker 2: I was in the upper third of the class, yes, because I needed to be in order, I knew that I had to study and study hard.  I didn't like chemistry but I did well in the other courses, English and Spanish and, whatever the courses were I did fairly well in them because I knew that in order for me to get into a nursing school that I needed to have good grades and I needed to have a wide range of, of background.
Story_ID: 634259
Speaker 1: You went to school at the Lincoln School for nursing, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: How did you choose that school?  Did you have any counseling in high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York] about where to go?
Speaker 2: No, I did not because they were not very, my advisors were really not that helpful and I remember, finally, I had one teacher, one advisor that said, that perhaps coming out of Brooklyn [New York] and coming from Panama and not being accustomed to city and stuff like that, that maybe it'll be better if I went to school in Brooklyn and there was a nursing school by the name of Prospect Heights High School, no, I'm very sorry, Prospect Heights nursing school [Prospect Heights Hospital School of Nursing], was the hospital and a nursing school was there, it was in Brooklyn on Washington Avenue and St. John's Place, and I recall that I found out how to go about making the application, I did that and they invited me for the interview and I went and, again, if you go back and take a look at the, the yearbook, I suppose, graduating class, it will be again a situation where it was primarily a white school and I went in for the interview, had done well in everything, academic wise, and when this person was interviewing me, could not think of anything else to, and I could look back now and say to reject me, and she said to me, "Do you draw well," and I said, "No, I'm not good at drawing at all," I said.  "I have trouble drawing--putting two straight lines together," and she said to me, "Okay, well I want you to draw a picture of, of your mother, your father, a sister," and so on, and I said, "Draw a picture?"  I said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "I told you I don't draw."  She said, "Make something, put together something."  So I did stick figures 'cause I tried doing, you know, features and that didn't work so I went ultimately to stick figures and at the end when I was called in, I was told that I was rejected because it was seen that I would have psychological problem dealing with men because the, the figure that I drew did not resemble a man that will, I would relate well to male patients and so on and I don't know, they didn't know whether I would relate well to people that were not people of color because I did not indicate any coloring and most of my, my drawings seemed that it will be dealing with black, Negroes. Negroes is the term she used and she felt that psychologically I needed to get some counseling before they could admit me into their nursing school.
Speaker 1: Well she asked you to draw your family, right?
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: So, if you'd have put some white people in your family, it would not have been--
Speaker 2: Exactly, and that's what I said to her and literally, she blocked me from getting into Prospect nursing school and for the year, I mean, I was just so thrown by it.  My [maternal] uncle [Henry Samuel] and my aunt [Anesta Pond Samuel] could not understand that and it was not enough time, this was like in June or July and I should have been, it was June, it was just before graduation, or after graduation, she saw me, and I could not get into nursing school by September.  So, I decided, well my aunt and uncle assisted me, and said, "Look, you know what, maybe it's a good thing, it will give you some time to choose and make sure that's what you want to do," and so on and so forth.  So I went to work.  I worked for one year at Equitable life insurance company [Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States; AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company] in Manhattan [New York], right facing Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station], that's where the building was and I worked there for a while.  My aunt said, "Do that but in the meantime you'll be studying to take any exam that you're given," and I met, I don't even know how I met her.  I met a woman that said to me, "You know, maybe that's the best thing that happened to you."  Said, "There are several schools around, Bellevue School of Nursing [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York] is good," she said, but I think that one of, she said, "One of the outstanding school in this country for black women is Lincoln School for Nurses [New York, New York] or Fordham Hospital [Fordham Hospital School of Nursing, Bronx, New York]," and I said, "Fine, let me apply to Lincoln," and I applied to Lincoln and they, they, I mean, they were so thorough in terms of going over my, my background and my, you know, where I came from, how I adjusted to the United States and the classes I took in high school and what did I do when I worked for the year and so on and so forth.  And then they gave me an in house exam that took, to see if I qualified, and, but, I was able to pass with flying colors to get into the school and I did.  So I got into Lincoln School for Nurses and that was a blessing, one of the best things that happened to me.  It was an outstanding nursing school and I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 634260
Speaker 1: Lincoln [Lincoln School for Nurses] is located in--?
Speaker 2: Lincoln is closed.  It closed in, I graduated in '59 [1959] and it closed two years later, '61 [1961], I believe.  It was in the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, in the Bronx and now, was it founded as a place that's going to be friendly to African Americans?  I mean, the name Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] sometimes is like code for an African American friendly place--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --because of the--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was. It was really a very good school.  The, the director of nursing, fortunately for us, was the first African American director that was named to, to lead a nursing school in the city and to this day she's widely recognized.  She, of course, has passed up to, maybe about five, six years ago, 'cause I used to meet with her yearly.  I attend the alumni luncheon every year and she has a wing named after her at the state nursing building in, in Upstate New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is a, I guess a pioneering place for training African American nurses?
Speaker 2: Yes, anywhere that you went in the United States, or anywhere, then they said you were a Lincoln nurse they know that you were coming out of a very, very good school, outstanding.  We rarely, you know, you take your exam for your state boards after you leave and we had very, very few failures over the years, for anyone failing the state board, you know, state board, to get your license.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were there for--
Speaker 2: From 1956 to 1959.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the kind of degree you have, was it a degree as a--
Speaker 2: I did not get a degree, I had a diploma.
Speaker 1: Diploma, okay.
Speaker 2: In those days it was not a requirement to get a degree so I got a three year diplom- credit for having a diploma, nursing diploma, and then I went back to school and got my degrees.
Speaker 1: So, so you were able to function as a, what they call a practical nurse afterwards or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --were you a registered nurse?
Speaker 2: A registered nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Registered nurse, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, I think, I've interviewed some other nurses now. I'm, it's vaguely, it's coming back now, you know, had that, because there were some strange, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, practical nurses were just a one year, one year program and they were more, a step above the nurse's aides in those days.  Today, they're more qualified to, as LPN [licensed practical nurse] but they still have to do another program in order to become a registered nurse.  Not the, not the same.
Story_ID: 634261
Speaker 1: Where did you go after you got your diploma?  What did you--did you start working immediately?
Speaker 2: No, what I did, in 1958 I, remember I joined, I went to school [Lincoln School for Nurses, New York, New York] in 1956 and I graduated in '59 [1959], in 1958 I got married.  I'd, I'd been dating my husband [Edward Ingleton] and my, my, on the weekends he was in the [U.S. military] service at the time, my husband, and I think he had probably come out of the service by then and we started dating and my [maternal] uncle here, Uncle Sam [Henry Samuel], was just as strict as my father [Patna Brown] in Panama and I remember being the eldest in the household and I went home during that period of time.  If we went anywhere, my sister [Velma Brown Armstrong], who loved to party, and my cousins and the others, if we went somewhere, I'm the eldest so I have to see that they get home, we get home at a certain time.  So I would start gathering the clan because in the meantime my aunt had filled the house up with relatives that, that were in school and I, being the oldest one, when it's time to come home, I give the orders, we're going home and they will disappear and they said, "Listen, if we get home a half an hour later, it doesn't make any difference, you're late anyhow," so they will scatter in different directions and leave me there holding the bag, until we got home, bad, bad, but teenagers, that's all.  But anyways, when I say that, to say that my uncle was, when I got home, my aunt, Aunt Anesta [Anesta Pond Samuel], was always awake, reading a book.  In other words, my uncle could sleep if he wanted to but she had to be up to be sure all of us were in the house, so I learned that trick very early but my uncle also here was very strict so when my husband wanted to start dating, and going out on weekends and so on, when he came home, my uncle said, "Well, you know, if you're going to do that, you have to write to Grace's [HistoryMaker Grace Y. Ingleton] father in Panama," he's here under my father in Panama.  He said, "You have to write my, my, her father and ask permission if you want to date her on a regular basis," and he did, and my father said yes because he knew his family in Panama, okay, so that was okay, you have to know the family.  And then later on he wanted to become engaged because, I mean, we had to be home at ten o'clock during the week, I mean on weekends, and my father surprisingly said yes.  So, in 1958, I went off to school, I was in school and we planned a wedding for September, right after summer break, and got married September 13th, my birthday was September 14th and on September 14th, on my birthday, I was back in school at probably eight o'clock that night, on the Sunday, because you were not allowed to marry and live at home.  So I went back to school and I only came home on weekends.  We had an apartment in Brooklyn [New York] and then, so my husband did his cooking, he did his laundry and so on because I was not at home, I was only home on the weekend, and on weekends I'm studying.  So, my mother [Edith Pond Brown] said, "That was really the worst mistake your husband allowed," because he did the laundry, he did the cooking and for fifty years after that, I still wasn't cooking or doing laundry.  So, 'cause I said he had to do it on weekends and he said, "It's okay," and, but they were so strict that I had to be back in school that Sunday after the wedding, a big wedding.  People here from Panama, hundreds of people but I, I, Sunday evening I had, one of my classmates came and picked me up and brought me to, took me back up to the Bronx [New York] to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my father came, was the only time he came to the United States.  He was a happy man.  He came and gave away his daughter,        with the understanding that he had planned to come back more often because he wanted to travel and he never did.
Story_ID: 634262
Speaker 1: One thing we didn't mention, before we go further, is The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.].  Now--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --tell us what is The Dedicators and who started it and what was it about (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Nineteen fifty-three [1953], when I came to the United States, I came in June, in September my, there were a lot of Panamanians, young men in the service and they came, they were, many of them wanted to pursue an education after they got out of the [U.S.] Army, that's the reason why they were able to, I still don't understand the system but they were allowed to join the service in Panama and if you lived on the canal zone [Panama Canal Zone] and they were able to come to the United States and be part of the Army, [U.S.] Navy, whatever they choose to, most of them, Army, and so come the weekend my [maternal] uncle, Uncle Sam [Henry Samuel], who had gone to school and gotten his degree, he went to high school, he finished high school at night, I remember, and then he went on to Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York] in, over the years.  I mean, even the perpetual student until he died.  He went and got his degrees, he went to Brooklyn College but he worked at all sorts of odd jobs in the daytime and, to take care of the family.  My aunt [Anesta Pond Samuel] worked as a beautician and beauty culture and did that for years and then I remember she had her daughter, as I said, eighteen years between their son [Henry Samuel] and her, and daughter.  When she had her, she was so accustomed to not having little children around and I remember every Monday she had a routine.  She would go up to the bank about a mile away and she will put the money in from the beauty shop and so on and then get back home and cook.  We knew what was going to be cooked on Monday because we had a routine thereon, you know, kept things going but keeping an eye on her daughters and my little cousin, who's a little sister, though, she took us to the bank, she used to walk down to the bank and she took Merry [Merry Samuel] to the bank, the bank in her buggy and came back home and when we got in the house, my sister [Velma Brown Armstrong], I'm the first one, I'm looking for the baby, "Where's Merry?"  And she said, "Merry, my god," she forgot her in the bank.  A bank customer had a baby and went into the bank, left her in the bank.  She said got to get on the subway and she took off like a bat out of hell and ran down to the bank, which is like what, about a mile away, or not further, and the baby, the security guard, thank god in those days, he just took the baby and put her aside, "I figured she will come back for you sooner or later," and gave her the baby to come back home with.  Well, that was out of habit but they, my uncle and my aunt both worked hard at whatever they had to be, he stayed in school, when the, all these young men were coming, they would call me when they got into town.  "How you doing?"  "Let's come by and visit 276 Lafayette [276 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, New York]."  My uncle saw that, and my aunt, always had food for good and if his food was there and somebody, one of the fellows in the service came by to see me, he would tell him to give them his food, that's the way he was.  He was just very happy to welcome them.
Story_ID: 634263
Speaker 1: Well, that, many of them wanted to go on to get an education and they could not do it because they couldn't afford it.  And my aunt, in '53 [1953], decided that what would be worthwhile doing is to get, she called together eight women, eight friends that she had, and she said we're going to start a little business of fundraising some money to see if we can help some of these young men that come by that can't finish school to go onto school.  And they started baking and sewing stuff and having a little, whatever, to raise funds and then, I think it was in '56 [1956], one of the people that lived in the house with us, because I told you we took in students from all over, but from Panama, primarily, there was Roberto Reid [Roberto "Bobby" Reid], and brother was, Bobby.  It was Bobby and, I think the other one's Junior, Junior Reid [Exley Reid, Jr.], but Bobby was a well known jockey in Panama and his father [Exley Reid, Sr.] and mother [Esther McDonald Reid] had sent him here to go to school.  They wanted to go to medical school and he got into Case Western Reserve [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] and the one brother was left upstairs and they, all they did was study.  They didn't know anything about partying, nothing.  I mean, they studied, studied, studied, and he went off to Case Western Reserve.  While he was at Case Western Reserve, his father died suddenly and he could not, he said he called my aunt and he said he asked if, he can't finish school because he has no money.  His jockey days and the money is used up and so on and my aunt said, "No, you're not going to go back home, you're going to finish school," and she got these ladies together and they worked hard at raising funds and they raised enough money to pay his, his medical tuition and he finished and then he became the head of, at Einstein [Albert Einstein College of Medicine Montefiore Medical Center, New York, New York], he was the department chair and that was our first student, college student.  And following that, then she decided that she would try to help pay the tuition, or part of the tuition, of many of the student, of the fellows that came by the house.  They were mainly men in those days, or boys, young men, and that's how The Dedicators started, about 1970.  Every year, she said we'll try and give money to different youngsters and, that will come by.  In '70 [1970], I think, she, we became, they were called Las Servidoras Buenas Tardes [ph.].  Servidoras are people that serve.  So from '53 [1953] to '70 [1970] they were Las, L-A-S, Servidoras, S-E-R-V-I-D-O-R-A-S.  In 1970, they became incorporated, got a 501(c) and changed the name to The Dedicators, Incorporated and we have functions, raising fund, primarily fundraising was, we went to doing cotillions.  We were one of the first groups in the city to do cotillion, Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York], et cetera, et cetera.  We had Cab Calloway at the church for, for musical programs and we just became a very, very involved cultural organization of women that worked.  A lot of members were not degreed women at that time.  They were women that just had a cause, a purpose, and the purpose was to educate.  It started out primarily with Panamanian students and then it was open to African American students and Africans and then after we got some more Caribbean students.  So over the years, to this point, right now a lot of the women that started it, have died, and the last one just died recently, last year, Ms. Ruby [ph.], and we have raised nearly a million dollars over that period of time.  It's going to be, the organization is dying now because there are, you know, young people don't want to go through the same kind of experience that they had with the older person.  They don't have the time to give like we did but I made a commitment to my aunt that, because that was her life, absolutely her life, beside her family, a dedicator as everybody knew was what she believed in, worked for, that I will try to maintain it as long as possible.  Next year, God willing, will be the sixtieth year.  This last one, that's how I started with The Dedicators, we did our, we did cotillions, raised lots of funds from that, and we were known for that and then, when that starts falling off and the interest was dying in that area, I decided to introduce the idea of having a fundraiser, a large fundraiser by celebrating black artists and that came at my love of African American art and in doing that, we then started to invite, you know, I structured it and developed it, about, oh, some five years, maybe twenty years ago, eighteen years ago, to honor outstanding African American artists, that in our community don't get enough recognition.  Young people are not educated enough about what they do and talk about their commitment, their compassion, their dedication, and so on, and how hard it is to be an artist and with that I then started introducing well known artists, two or three of them to be honored, and then I will recognize also local artists from the community and the five boroughs and sometime, I did not have people from other states, initially.
Story_ID: 634264
Speaker 1: I want to get in that story later on--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but we'll, but that's, that's The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.] and what they do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's The Dedicators that did that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --and that's how my [maternal] aunt [Anesta Pond Samuel] then, because of the work that she did inter- with the students here and with them coming, primarily, initially from Panama, Panama started an organization called, The Dedicators, the Panama--the local Dedicators, and they have their own organization--
Speaker 1: In Panama itself?
Speaker 2: In Panama, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it became an international organization.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Roberto Reid [Roberto "Bobby" Reid] from my note here says, it says that he became the chief of urology--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --at Albert Einstein hospital [Albert Einstein College of Medicine Montefiore Medical Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Of urology, not neurology, U-R-O--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's in, that's in here.
Speaker 2: --urology, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, urology, right, okay.  So, so is The Dedicators still going on in Panama?
Speaker 2: No, The Dedicators are, because they just lost their, the head of their program, Reverend Josiah [ph.], and it slowed down with his death and so on and, again, the group has become older just like on this end, we are slowed down considerably.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a wonderful story.  I mean, it's--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, so we have had, we have given a scholarship every year since 1953.
Story_ID: 634265
Speaker 1: You got married after you finished Lincoln School for nursing [Lincoln School for Nurses, New York, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got married before I finished Lincoln School.  I got married one year before I finished.
Speaker 1: Yeah, before, yeah, in '58 [1958]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you finished in '59 [1959], then, then what did you do?
Speaker 2: I left and I lived in Brooklyn [New York] and the nearest hospital to my home in Brooklyn, to my apartment, was Jewish Hospital in Brooklyn [Brooklyn Jewish Hospital; Interfaith Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York] and I went there, sought a job, and I was hired to be a nurse on the obstetrical unit, which is what I requested, and that was in 1959 and I climbed the ladder there in the obstetrical department, I became the, one of the nurses in the unit, then I became the head nurse, in labor and delivery, and I moved on to being the supervisor for the entire unit and I became the chief of that, of nursing, in obstetrics and pediatrics, not pediatrics, in the prenatal, prenatal and, I'm very sorry, in the premature center, premature center and I worked the night shift, which is 11:45 to 8:00, I believe, and the reason I did that is because I then found out that, you know, I was not going to move ahead if I didn't have a degree.  Now there are some schools that allowed you to get your degree and, when you graduated you got your, you pass a state board and then you also worked from a degree school like Bellevue [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York]  did that.  I did not.  I had to return to school, which is what was common in those days, and at the university they gave you only fifteen credits out of 120 or, 128 that was required, and I started back, I went to Long Island University, which was in Brooklyn [New York], and I stayed there until I earned my bachelor's of science in nursing.
Speaker 1: With only fifteen credits after--
Speaker 2: But only fifteen credits, I had to go back and go to 128, I believe it was in those days, 120 or 128, and so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was, so when, what year did you go back?
Speaker 2: I went back to school, I think I must have started in, I don't want to lie now, I think it was in, it was in the '60s [1960s], mid-'60s [1960s], I believe.  I will have to look up the number, but I graduated, probably around '70 [1970], or before that, before that, and then I went back and got my master's.  I cannot tell you right away what are the years.  You'll have to look at my, my listing that I gave you there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: And I was able to get some help, financially, by getting a public health grant while I was in school.  In the meantime, we had moved out to Queens [New York] in '63 [1963], I moved here in 1963, and that meant that I worked in Brooklyn still at nights and it was very difficult, trying to go to school in Brooklyn, university, work at nights and study.
Story_ID: 634266
Speaker 1: You moved to Queens [New York] in what, what year was it, I'm sorry?  Moved to Queens in 19--
Speaker 2: Okay, I moved to Queens in 1963--
Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963], okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --because I've lived here ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.  All right, so, so you're working on a master's degree--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, at Long Island University [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 2: I was a--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I went alone.  I followed up and went to, and got my master's at Long Island University also.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  So, now did your, were you still at the Jewish Hospital [Brooklyn Jewish Hospital; Interfaith Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York]?  You still were working there?
Speaker 2: I left Brooklyn Jewish in 1970, I believe, '70 [1970], '71 [1971], and I went into the neighborhood to a facility called Provident neighborhood health center [Provident Clinical Society Neighborhood Health Center] and I became their healthcare administrator.  Those days they were working on the War on Poverty, et cetera, et cetera, and I was put in charge of handling all of the, the facility that handled homecare.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Provident--
Speaker 2: Neighborhood health center, they were in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On Bedford Avenue, on Bedford or Nostrand, Nostrand Avenue, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a community health center?
Speaker 2: Yes it was, and I was in charge of it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And I was there for about, nearly two years, I believe, and I left there and moved, this is a two family house, and I have a tenant that, had a tenant who was a classmate that I met at Bellevue [Bellevue Schools of Nursing; Hunter-Bellevue School of Nursing, New York, New York].  When we did, when you're a--training, we went to different facilities from Lincoln [Lincoln School for Nurses, New York, New York].  I went to Bellevue School of Nursing for, to do psychiatry, that was a three month rotation and we went to Vandoren [ph.] for tuberculosis and so on, but at, at Bellevue, I met a friend, a woman that I became a friend, her name is Earline, Earline Ross, and she felt that it would be good for me to specialize in psychiatry because I'd done so well and I said, "No, that's not what I'm interested in," and I still wanted to stay in obstetrics and, and psych- even though when I graduated and took my boards, psychiatry was what my, the highest grades that I got. But Earline went somewhere different and I did also after school and turned out that, she got married and I'd moved here and I was looking for a tenant and she became my tenant.  So this is a classmate that I met at, at Bellevue School of Nursing and so, and I just saw her a couple of weeks ago, she lived here with, she had three sons and they became my three sons and so on and so forth.  So, I went back and, and got my master's that I said, and then I went, left, no, the way I started telling you, I said because she, when, while living here, informed me that there was a long term care, they're called nursing homes, that, was looking for a good administrator and that they wanted someone to start with them, from hiring staff to, to purchasing supplies so, and it was new, new building, and she said, "I recommended you," and I said, "Why would you do that?"  I just started over at, not even two years at Provident neighborhood health center and she said, "Because I think that you're capable of doing it.  You're a good leader, you're good, interacting with people, you have a good business sense, et cetera, et cetera."  She sold me a bill of goods which was, okay, and she said, "It's a two hundred bed facility, it's new, it's in a community that doesn't have a home and the community's up in arms.  They want to find somebody that can, you know, with the politics of calming it down and assuring them that they will hire people from the community, et cetera, do that."  So I ended up at Midway Nursing Home [Maspeth, New York] and I did just that.  I opened up the home and I stayed there for about eleven or twelve years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that was 1973, I think, right--
Story_ID: 634267
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], at Midway Nursing Home [Maspeth, New York] now.  You're the director--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of nursing services and administration and you were there for more than twenty-five years?
Speaker 2: No, no, no no--
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was there for ten years.
Speaker 1: Ten, okay, (laughter) we've got that wrong.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ten years, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Ten years, all right, that's a big difference.  So, well tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: It was an interesting experience because as I said, when Earline [Earline Ross] recommended me it was a new facility, it was a facility that was put into a community called Maspeth [Queens, New York] which was made up of people, Lithuanians and, and so on, Slavic areas and they, this community existed in a place called Maspeth, M-A-S-P-E-T-H, and the arrangement that the owners of the facility, Midway Nursing Home, had to make with them is that they will be willing to hire people from the community to work there, for them to get permission to put this site on, in the neighborhood, well, they shortly did, they got their approval.  So when I was hired, I did not know that I had, I had to hire people from the community, solely, and I started doing that and when you came into the facility, and again I always seem to end up indirectly with some sort of racial situations, I, on the first floor was the administration staff.  I was the only black person in, in the building, in the position of authority and because of my background, I was able to, the owners of the facility left me in charge of purchasing supplies, of hiring, developing their policy and procedure manuals and it was just a really tough job getting started but it was good, I looked at it as good experience for my future.  And so when I started hiring, I was able to get people from the community to work the day shift which was seven to three [o'clock], up, a few to work three to eleven, very few to work eleven to seven was a difficult, a night tour, and, in the process of doing that, and this is way back then, in the '70s [1970s], right, in the process of doing that, I had to hire, no, I could not find people from the community to work nights and I'm having difficulty staffing.  So I went to the owners and I said, "Look, I'm going to have to put an ad in the paper, not the local papers only, seeking help and hoping that people will come in, if they meet the criteria, then I'll hire them and I cannot just strictly depend on, because I cannot depend on the neighborhood people," so I did.  And then when I started hiring, I had difficulty later on and in no time, the community had a community board meeting and they were raging against the owners and they're hiring people from out of the neighborhood and so, of course, all of this came to me, they said, "What are you doing?"  I said, "I'm hiring people.  I have to staff the place.  I have a health code that I have to follow.  I have to provide--." Well, "Why are you hiring those people?"  Who are those people?  I mean, I'm not conscious of those people.  I'm hiring people to work that are willing to work and, and, and the community got together and said that they were not happy because I was hiring people, and I said, well you all define who I'm hiring that's a problem and then I had, they said I had, I was hiring people from Haitia- you know, Haitian people, I was hiring African American people, I was hiring Spanish people, I was hiring some Chinese, I had a few Chinese people, Vietnam, whatever it was, and I said, "Well those are the people that applied and they're qualified.  I don't have people from the community coming in to work nights.  If you can get me some people from the community that are willing to work the night tour, then I will not have these people and I will follow the guidelines which you all originally agreed to that, people from the community will be given the first choice," and I couldn't get them. And that created some stress between the day shift, the evening shift, and the night tour.  So I was constantly, you know, refereeing things through the supervisors, well, to the point that one lady came in one day and she said to me that, it was a horrible story, one of the aides, they had, you know, negative terminologies to call them as they took care of tha- them, as elderly, and this aide was from Brazil, came and said to me, "Mrs. Ingleton [HistoryMaker Grace Y. Ingleton], I don't like to be called names," and so on and so on and this lady, I said, "You're dealing with the elderly, you're dealing with people are confused and maybe they don't know what they're saying but your job is basically to provide care and not to be interacting in a negative way," and so on.  She said, "That's fine if you're not delivering the care and having people call you all that they call you."  I said, "That goes with the territory of having a job, human behavior, and your point is that you do not react to people the way they are treating you in that manner."  Well, a couple of times I had residents that were so hostile from that environment that they spat in the face of one of the, the aides and she unfortunately returned the same negative response.  And so, the reason I raised that is because it became quite a, quite a issue in the community and, you know, what the aide had done, not saying what the patient had done, and was back and forth.  So I went through that period.  I had to terminate the aide and then I thought about it and I said, well, you know, I'm going to give her a long suspension and I'm sure she will resign after that.  She never resigned, she came back after nine months that I suspended her for but, but the problem with the situation that became a very hostile one, for me, for a period of time, but I was just determined that if I cannot find people from the community to work, I have to provide jobs to be fair to people that were willing to take the job and do it and I said it's going to be a battle of the wills because I, my goal was always, you bring me staff that were willing to work and I will be willing to hire them.  If you cannot do that, then I think we meet halfway and you accept the people that are working, willing to do the work, and it took a while.  I mean, I gained an enormous amount of respect from the staff and many of the community people and there are those that never ever accepted the fact that we were not able to staff with the people from the community, not looking at the fact that they were unable to provide the staff.  It was a good learning experience for me because it, I mean, it made me a good administrator, I think, better than, than just the paperwork and the ordering and the budget and the policy and procedure, it taught me a lot about human behavior and, and learning when to be flexible and when not to be flexible and learning where to believe, to work by your, by your value system and it brought a lot of issues and value.  What does it mean?  Do I sacrifice providing quality care for the residents, for those people that are willing to come and do it and learn and provide good care or do I succumb to threats, really, subtle threats and, and verbal threats and so on.  They used to look out for my car to come in, there were times that I would have a flat that, no one would know how I got the flat, you know.
Story_ID: 634268
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic makeup of the neighborhood [Maspeth, Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's what I, when I started, I said that they were from, people from, from Lithuania, from the Ukraine, from--
Speaker 1: Eastern Europe?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Polish, very big mixture in that neighborhood and it was the first time I'd gone into a community where it was just so closed that, you know, I learned a lot about the culture and, and so on and I had, and my administrative staff [at Midway Nursing Home, Maspeth, New York] was primarily Caucasian staff because people from the neighborhood did not, really they're not open to, and these were, were either lower middle class, some middle class, but they were not open to having people that were different coming into the neighborhood, and especially in a position of authority.  So, it took a while but I, I became, after a while they started inviting me to, to events in the community, you know, if they needed to get a word back and, and I think that what, what won them over is the fact that I just believe in providing quality care for their family members and for whoever was there.  This is why you're here, you want us to give good care and all the surveys that they have from the healthcare department, we passed them, it was an annual, if someone called in a report and they came to investigate, they could not find anything that we were doing incorrectly and so, again, it just taught me the importance of standing up for what you believe in and not falling short and saying, "I put my hands up and I don't have to put up with this. I'm going," and I would have deserted my staff and, you know, the people that were there, I needed someone that will look out for them and, and it worked out fairly well but in the end I left, I left one day and, probably after it--
Speaker 1: This is 19--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: This is 1983?
Speaker 2: That's '83 [1983], not even '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: That would make it ten years.  That would make it ten--
Speaker 2: Ten years, or it was ten or eleven years.  When I left, because the owner's sister was very, very, what would I say, she, she, I had developed such a trusting relationship with my staff that the staff was really very, very supportive in terms of anything that I produced.  I mean, I'd probably keep up with them with their education and families and so on and so forth.  I went above and beyond sometimes, the need to protect the staff, not protect them but to treat them fairly and in the process of doing that, they had a lot of respect for me and they were very caring and the owner's sister was really very upset that I had that kind of relationship and rapport with the staff and, and made threats that if I, you know, do things with the staff that, if they did go out of their way to do perhaps something that will be sure to ensure that we do well and she'd feel it will give me a better name, than she will become really hostile and one day I just, I think I got to the end of the, I know I got to the end of my rope with that and, you know, you don't like to go to work to have that kind of friction that doesn't, you know, I had a friend, a psychologist, that used to say to me, you obviously like having difficulty with, with this administrator because if you didn't you would say, you put in your, your time, you've done well, you have a good reputation for the facility and it's time to go.  He said, "No, you're waiting to have this confrontation and, and I think you're enjoying that."  I said, "No, I'm not," and I went in one day and I think whatever she had done was end of the line and I just said, "Thank you very much, but I'm out of here."  And after that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you just resigned then?
Speaker 2: I just resigned and left.
Story_ID: 634269
Speaker 1: And I became a consultant for a few months after that.         I was at St. John's Episcopal [St. John's Episcopal Hospital] facility as a consultant, they had a facility in Brooklyn [New York] and one in Queens [New York] and I had many offers for, for work because during the period of time that I was at Midway [Midway Nursing Home, Maspeth, New York], I became the president of the directors of nursing for the Nassau [Nassau County, New York], Queens, New York area and I then also developed, while I was there, a program for healthcare administrators that I sponsored seminars and during that period of time doing that, I was able to meet with a lot of the, the directors and the administrative staff of nursing homes and made an impact on, you know, how we operated.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1984?
Speaker 1: In that area going forward, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 1: I did consulting with St. John's.  I did it with the Rockaways, St. John's in Rockaways [St. John's Episcopal Hospital South Shore, Queens, New York] and Brooklyn and then I kept getting offers for different positions and I ended up going to Haym Salomon [Haym Salomon Home for Nursing and Rehabilitation] in Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: Haym Salomon.
Speaker 1: H-A-Y-M, Salomon.
Speaker 2: Is that a hospital in--
Speaker 1: It's a long term care facility (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Long term--
Speaker 1: A nursing home, long term care.  It was, each home was larger than the one that I previously left.  The first one was two hundred beds, I think.  Haym Salomon was probably over two hundred, over three hundred beds, and I was there for, with the same administrator, name was Ernest Regan [ph.], and I was the director of nursing in that facility for about six years before he asked me if I will move with him to New Rochelle [New York], to Glen Cove.
Speaker 2: It's called Glen--
Speaker 1: Glen Cove nursing home.
Speaker 2: Glen Cove.  That's G-L-E--
Speaker 1: G-L-E-N.
Speaker 2: N, just one N?
Speaker 1: Yes, C-O-V-E, separate word.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I think I stayed there also until, for another five years.  So I worked with the same administrator for ten years and then I moved from there and I went to Brooklyn, to, Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation and I was there, I believe, from '93 [1993] to '98 [1998], 1993 to 1998.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay, now, so, all right, so, so you served in a basically, a similar capacity there as you did--
Speaker 1: Yes, but in administration, always I was the top person for nursing administration.  I handled all the hiring, all of the budget, all of the guidelines, to maintain the guidelines for the health code, responsible for the quality of care of all of the residents and I handled a lot, it was the largest, any facility in hospitals, usually nursing is the largest department, so I always had the largest department to handle and interim, and I, and I started doing, doing some adjunct work as an instructor at three facilities, I worked over that period of time teaching nursing, different areas of nursing.  I did, I worked at Long Island University, where I graduated from, Queensborough Community College [Bayside, New York].
Speaker 2: Queensborough Community, okay.
Speaker 1: Those two places.  I was three, I can't remember the other place I went to now, but I taught nursing there as an adjunct, oh, and Medgar Evers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Medgar Evers.  I wrote it down, I actually didn't say it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, Medgar Evers College.
Speaker 2: --so when you said two, I said, oh, I've got three here, yeah.
Speaker 1: Medgar Evers College, Medgar Evers was the last one.
Speaker 2: Medgar Evers community college, now that's in, that's here in Queens [New York]?
Speaker 1: In Brooklyn.
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Medgar Evers is in Brooklyn and Queensborough Community in Queens; Long Island University, Brooklyn.
Story_ID: 634270
Speaker 1: So I stayed quite busy between doing the adjunct work, doing consulting work for different facilities and then in '98 [1998], I left Center for Nursing and Rehab [Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation, Brooklyn, New York] because my administrator, again, differed with me over the running of the nursing department and felt that I was compliant in, what would I put that?  That I was addressing the needs of the staff over that of the administration and I, I just thought, you know, I think it's time for me to go and work for myself.  So 1998 I, I left and I then developed Heart to Art [Heart to Art, Inc.], my business, H-E-A-R-T, to, A-R-T.  I developed it because, I called it Heart to Art because of my love for the healthcare system, of nursing, and art because of my, my, my love of African American art.
Speaker 2: Heart to Art?
Speaker 1: It's H-E-A-R-T, to A-R-T.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this is 19- 2000, right?
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: This is in the year 2000?
Speaker 1: From 19- I, I left 1998 and I think I formed my corporation in '99 [1999], probably.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's what I worked with from that time until now.  I've, I did consulting for different facil- first I started teaching certified nurse's aides how to pass their, their certification exam.  I also did some consultation.  I think probably it's earlier and I did elder care. That was before that.  I used to monitor the elder care workshops for businesses and, and administration and nursing, might be somewhere around there, but I then decided that I would, again, go back into the community, have some seminars with, with people that ran businesses in healthcare and I, I got called by Parker Jewish [Parker Jewish Institute for Health Care and Rehabilitation] in Long Island [New York] to, to come in, and they had gotten a grant for a program called the effective management of the dementia resident, and they needed just one person that will teach that program for them to healthcare providers for, at different facilities in the five boroughs and I was that person for, oh from about, let me see, two thousand--I just, I just finished the last program last year, 2011.  I did it for about eight years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when their grant ran out, then I, they had other grants for other programs that I did within the facility also.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is at Parker Jewish hospital?
Speaker 1: Parker Jewish, and then I went to, someone called me and asked me if I would write a program for EOC, that's the education opportunity center [Manhattan Educational Opportunity Center] in Harlem, at the Harlem state building [Harlem State Office Building, Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building, New York, New York]. They work with part of CUNY, city university system [City University of New York, New York, New York], and I wrote the program once and, and because they did not, the physical setting of the building did not work well, the program did not go through the first time that it was sent and the second time it got approved about five years ago and I then started a program there for certified nurse's aides to pass their exam, people from the community that wanted, they want to improve their skills and provide, you know, job situation for them and I hired, I chaired the program, I coordinated it, I hired several nurses to do the day program, evening program and so on and I stayed there until, this year is the last year I, I decided to do that because one of the things we're having is that the program was one of the best programs they had of that nature going on but they were not able to provide a number of jobs for the staff when, the students, when they finished because a lot of facilities, when they start looking at the record, show that in order to get into, work as a certified nurse's aide in a long term care facility, you had to deal with the union, which meant that you could not be hired off the street, you had to work as a volunteer and then after a volunteer you got a part-time job and after a part-time, before you get a permanent job, and there's no guarantee, and you have to do it in sequence, like, by seniority.  So it was always very difficult so they decided that they wanted to try certified nurse, not certified nurse's aide but a home health aide program which is very popular today and, but does not pay as much as a CNA [certified nursing assistant] and they wanted me to become part of that program but I decided that I wanted to wait and take a look at it next year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So those are some of the things that I, and in the interim, I, I worked with, you know, doing consultation for, for other agencies that wanted advice in healthcare, or how to do it, so on and so forth, in long term care, okay. So that's, that's what I've been doing for the last couple of years rather than retiring.
Story_ID: 634271
Speaker 1: What's the most satisfying part of that work over this period of time?
Speaker 2: In which one, which one of the categories?  Overall?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, in administration, nursing administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Administration can be very frustrating but administration also provides you with satisfaction when you see growth and development.  Let's say I have a nurse by the name of Cynthia, that I know, her name is Cynthia Hughes, she's now a doctor, Cynthia Hughes, and the reason for that is that when I met her at, I met her at Center for Nursing and Rehab [Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation, Brooklyn, New York] and she was one of the supervisors and she did not have her degrees at that time, she said, "I'm not going back to school and getting a degree," and so on and so on, and I said, "Yes, you will."  I said, "If you're going to work with me, you have to be moving forward, and looking ahead."  Well long story short, I was able to get her to go back to school, get her bachelor's [degree], get her master's [degree], and now she has a doctorate and I had been fortunate and blessed to have developed a good relationship with staff throughout my work years, that I've, a number of people that moved up in the world of, you know, career decision making, serve as an advisor for that.  I have a young lady that worked with me as my, not as my, but of the, the teaching staff at Haym Salomon [Haym Salomon Home for Nursing and Rehabilitation, Brooklyn, New York], and she came in one day after I've just given her a promotion to be the, the advisor for education, in service educator, and said, "I had this offer to," she just finished Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], "to, to go to Africa to work and, for UNICEF [United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund] and what do I do?"  I said, she said, "I don't want to take that job, that's too far."  I said, "Are you looking at your future?"  Well, long story short, she just retired at age sixty-two and has a wonderful pension and she has traveled around the world and she lived in Zimbabwe for the last ten, fifteen years.  So I've had a lot of satisfaction from people that I've worked around.  I've had people that, I've, you know, sent them back to school, helped them with their decision making and, and so on and just teaching, teaching for me outside of administration as being one of the most satisfying areas for me and watching people grow out and develop from the teaching programs that I've been involved with.
Story_ID: 634272
Speaker 1: Tell us about Heart of Art?
Speaker 2: Heart to Art [Heart to Art, Inc.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Heart to Art, I'm sorry. Heart to ar- to art (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Heart to Art is basically, from 1999, I think, '98 [1998], '99 [1999] when I left Center for Nursing and Rehab [Center for Nursing and Rehabilitation, Brooklyn, New York] and decided I wanted to work for myself, I said, well, if I was able to get some consulting work prior to leaving this facility, and I decided that I didn't want to work for anybody anymore that was going to be holding my future in their balance, that I was going to be doing it for myself and I started out with training certified nurse's aides, I mean people to become certified nurse's aide, which was a very difficult thing to do because I had to step back and I started walking the different facilities and homes and carried my little bag to test people and so not a very glamorous and a very cost effective way of doing, but I wanted to start from the ground up with that and I learned how to become a good evaluator for that program.  And I said, if I become a good evaluator, then I can teach the program and I started doing that also.  I became one of their instructors through the system, okay.  When I left doing that, I decided, okay, I'll get back into education and that's how I ended up getting a con- working with, well no, it's a classmate of mine that, that classmate, she came in two years after I left, I was in nursing, and she, when I was a junior, Sylvia [ph.] was a, probably a sophomore, no, just coming in, yes, and she recommended me to her facility and she said, you know, this is a woman I think that she's very capable, she has done this, she's done that and I think it will be good for us to take her on a consultant here.  And they took me, I had the interview, that went well and I became a consultant there in a number of areas in nursing and health and education and that was very, very satisfying.  So I did that and that's when I, but that program, effective management of dementia care, I went to different facilities in the five boroughs and I was the only person teaching the program.  They had the contract, they had the grant but I was the only person employed to be able to do that for those five or six years that I did it.  As I said, I just ended the program last year when the grant ended and also, in the meantime, I used the, the Heart to Art as an avenue for art.  I became, I could sell artwork, I gave art presentations, different galleries and so on, and I also used it as a means just to, with different programs to have programs that will benefit people from the community.  I started teaching an etiquette class.  I did that mainly for teenagers at the time.  I got involved with my church [Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York, Jamaica, New York] and I did that through them also and different programs that, that required event planning, I did some of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now a person who was denied a job because they could not draw (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you spent like a lot of time involved with some of the greatest artists.  You have a home full of beautiful artwork.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I recognize a lot of the artists here, some of the greatest African American artists of all time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --are represented on your walls.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 634273
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in this deep appreciation for art?
Speaker 2: Well there's a good question.  There was a gentleman, picture is right over there, and I will show it to you later also, his name is Lawrence Dorsey, and Mr. Dorsey is world renowned, I wouldn't say, well I don't know about world renowned internationally, but he is known around the country as one of the greatest framers we ever had and I walked into, I went to a friend's home in the '70s [1970s] and she had a piece of artwork or diploma framed so beautifully that I said to her, "Who did this for you?"  And she said, "There's a man over on Rogers Avenue, his name is Dorsey, has a little hole in the wall called Dorsey gallery [Dorsey's Picture Frame and Art Gallery, Brooklyn, New York], and he does magnificent framing," and I said, "Okay, let me walk in there one day."  I walked in probably weeks later, or months later, and I said to him, "I was introduced, sent to you by, by my friend Louie Walker [ph.] and his wife and they said you did this fabulous job and I need to have this piece of work framed."  So I did.  "So, why don't you sit down a while," that was one of his favorite phrases, "Sit down for a while and talk to me," and I sat there for a little while, and I started chatting with him and then he started telling me, I'm watching him as he's framing, and I, I mean I was fascinated with the framing process and then he said, "Why don't you stop by here on a Friday evening and, and meet some of my friends?" And I said, "What do you all do?"  He said, "We just sit and talk."  I said, "Okay."  So on one Friday when I decided to go back at the end of the week and you want to relax and he was not that far in Brooklyn [New York] from where I was working and I sat down and in came all of these different people and then I said, "Who are all these folks?"  And they asked Mr. Dorsey, "Who are they?"  He said, "They're, most of them are artists," and I said, "Well, you all have a different conversation going on in here, I don't know what," you know, he said, "No, they're, they're people," he said, "Let me show you some of the work of these people."  Then this little tiny man came in and I'm going, "Well, who is he?"  He said, "That's Ernie Crichlow [Ernest Crichlow]."  I said, "Who's Ernie Crichlow?"  He said, "You don't know Mr. Crichlow?"  I said, "No, I do not know Mr. Crichlow."  He said, "Well I want you to meet Ernie," and, "Ernie, come and meet this, this woman over here," and so and so, he's a funny man, very, very nice man.  So we met and then every week I started going because I was beginning to get fascinated, between the framing, the discussion, the interest they had and these names that I've never heard of in my life and then, I think it was at that time when they talk about, he said, "Well Elizabeth is coming in on Friday out here," and I said, "Who's Elizabeth?"  He said, "[HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.  You don't know Ms. Catlett?"  "No, I do not. Never heard the name either."  He said, "Well you have a lot of learning to do," and I said, "Well, I'm willing to learn."
Story_ID: 634274
Speaker 1: You were talking about meeting [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, Ms. Catlett, he said, "Ms. Catlett is going to be coming by to visit, she's in town," and he, I said, "Well, what does that mean?"  So then he went on to explain that people that came into the gallery [Dorsey's Picture Frame and Art Gallery, Brooklyn, New York] on a regular basis that were collectors, art collectors, I began to understand about the art collecting now, he said, "She will be bringing in some work," and they were all excited and I said, "What does that mean?"  He said, "Well, she bring works in, work in and for us she will provide us with a discount and will also provide you with a time payment."  I said, "Oh, so you can pay for it on time?"  He said, "Yes, you can do that," and then I started getting very interested.  So here I met James Denmark, I met Otto Neals, I met Ann Tanksley, Ms. Chandler [Violet Hewitt Chandler] and on and on.  I started getting familiar with these names, [HistoryMaker] Jonathan Green was coming, no, he wasn't there Sunday, much later and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Romare Bearden and--
Speaker 2: I met James Brown [James hd Brown], I met Mr. Bearden out there but I met him at another event after I started socializing with, with the artists and going to their shows.  I started meeting a lot of well-known artists and artists that were not well known but artists that I, I learned to, to respect the passion they had, their dedication, their, their, just, they lived for art and I'd never been in that world before so I was captivated and I, I have to say I developed a bug for the art community was an understatement.  So I, I went to Mr. Dorsey [Lawrence Dorsey] on a regular basis, he became my tutor and I, I learned about processes, I've learned this, you know, how to, to understand looking at artwork, what type of work it is, what it meant to, it's a whole different world.  What it meant to have an original, what it meant to have a series of prints and what are prints and, and it was just very exciting and meeting the people of different backgrounds and, and some, but the one thing that I respected that they had in common was their dedication and their, their, their love of what they did and I just felt, as I observed over the years, I started going on a regular basis.  I just became one of the, the Dorsey family members, a certain group of people went in that were always there, that was known as a family and I became part of that family and it was a blessing to this day.  And out of that, I started collecting and little by little, what again, what with Mr. Dorsey's help, a lot of artists, because I met them there, were very generous in allowing me time to make, to complete a payment and to educate me along the way until out of that I developed some, a close friendship with many of the, the artists and they served as my educators, it could not be coming from a greater group that I decided that, with The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.], I was tying it in with The Dedicators, that I will start, when The Dedicators started losing some clients because of change in, in interest, such as the cotillion, I decided to introduce honoring black artists and I did that starting out with Ernie Crichlow [Ernest Crichlow] and that brought me people.  When I started honoring, I selected two well known international and national artists to be honored and I, when I wanted to, it was too late to do Romare Bearden but his wife [Nanette Rohan Bearden] is an artist also so she was one, at one of our first shows.  Again, as you look around, and I can go through the room and just name a number of people that, that have been honored by us and they're all named people, Ms. Catlett, Ernie Crichlow, James, well I don't think James Brown was part of it as yet, who do I go on to?  I, I'm just blocking, looking at the names I should be able to give you a million names as I go through this.
Speaker 1: Is this the James Brown that was in the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: James Brown, yes he was, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know him.
Speaker 2: You know him?  Oh wonderful.
Speaker 1: He was stationed in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Oh, that's, that's his piece over there, on the top up there.
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Louis Delsarte, James Denmark, Otto Neal, what's the name of the lady we call from Chi- Detroit [Michigan]? Mrs., you asked me if I had any of her work?  Is it Detroit?
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: You just said she will have her work rolled up and so on.
Speaker 1: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs--
Speaker 2: Margaret Burroughs, of course.
Speaker 1: --from Chicago [Illinois], yeah--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the founder of the National Conference of Artists, right.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Tom Feelings.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And on and on.  It has been a whirl--
Speaker 1: So, Jacob, you've got some Jacob Lawrence here too, wasn't he a part, yeah.
Speaker 2: Jacob Lawrence, yes, um-hm.  Romare Bearden.
Speaker 1: Now this is a who's who of black art, as you, and--
Speaker 2: It is, it is.  I'm trying to think of his name.  I'll get to that gentleman at the top, he's, the small piece up there called, 'Grayson' [ph.]. It will come back to me and I'm beginning to forget names and know that my, Ann Tanksley, was very, very highly respected.  Jonathan Green.  Who's the artist I showed you from Texas, in the bathroom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, John Biggers [John T. Biggers], yeah.
Speaker 2: John Biggers.
Speaker 1: John Biggers, the great John Biggers.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, all these great artists--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Camille Billops.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Camille.
Story_ID: 634275
Speaker 1: Faith Ringgold--
Speaker 2: Faith Ringgold.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Definitely, and they have all been so generous.  I just got through with a donation, I just made a donation through Heart to Art [Heart to Art, Inc.], to The Links Foundation [The Links Foundation, Incorporated, Washington, D.C.], of which I'm a member, I'm a Link, from 1998, and I have just, they had their celebration of the sixtieth anniversary of The Links [The Links, Incorporated], in November, and I went down for the celebration and when I went to headquarters, which we had purchased, the organization and they were very pleased, and while during the tour, one of my colleagues, not colleagues but a Link sister, Marcella, Dr. Marcella Maxwell, said to me, "Grace [HistoryMaker Grace Y. Ingleton], why don't you donate a few pieces of work to them," and I said, "Okay," and I went over and spoke to the person in charge of the building and they said, "That'll be nice," and I guess they thought that, you know, I was making light of it and I'll give them a piece or two.  I came back home and I wrote to twenty, I wrote to sixteen artists first because they didn't, weren't sure that they'll have enough space and I, when I called later, she said, "Ah, you have so many stuff, collection."  Well, I wrote sixteen artists in February of this year and I told them that I would like to have a donation, if they could, to enhance the work of African American artists, that will be in a permanent collection, it will be seen by numerous people because that's the headquarters, and it will also provide people the opportunity to ask questions and to appreciate their heritage and with that information, I sent it out and it did not take me two weeks to get a response from everyone that I wrote, to say "Yes, we will donate," and I told them I, you know, it was up to them what they wanted to give.  I would have preferred if it were original work but I didn't say that and I got back a response.  I have my spreadsheet because I just finished up the project.  I have two friends that are wonderful, doctor, no he's a professor, Robert Carter [Robert T. Carter].  As a matter of fact, he, The HistoryMaker [The HistoryMakers], I don't know if any of you did that with him, Robert Carter, and a connecting link, Douglas Thomas [ph.].  Two of them worked with me.  Doug did the framing for people, the artists that sent me work.  Some of them were framed, or not framed, and when I asked for the value of the work, somebody sent me a piece of work for three thousand dollars and they didn't send it framed, I certainly was not going to ask them to frame it.  So I paid for the framing on pieces like that or if I had a piece that was donated that I did not like the framing, because artists have a hard time paying for their frames and I, I paid Doug for them and he reframed them and right now I'm looking at a bottom list, line, of my lists I got the sixteen, Bob and Doug took them to, drove me from here [New York, New York] to Washington [D.C.] and we delivered those sixteen pieces a month ago, maybe six weeks ago and following that, I asked them, I had a few more pieces that I was going to donate to someone and asked did they want, and they were thrilled and I sent the other four pieces down and I have now gotten a donation of nearly thirty thousand dollars, which I've given to them through Heart to Art, as a donation, to The Links, and they will put it up as a permanent collection in the building in D.C., of the different artists and as I said, out of those artists, I have Faith Ringgold, a piece from a friend of mine that is a collector, she gave me an [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.  We have Otto Neal [Otto Neals], I could, Ann Tanksley, Nancy, yeah, Nancy Bla- Bryan [Nancy Bryan (ph.)], I think, Mrs. Chandler [Violet Hewitt Chandler], that you saw inside, and just on and on.  I have plenty people (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 634276
Speaker 1: Let's break this down now.  A lot of people don't understand how, how art works.  So, when you buy a piece, you're making an investment in it?
Speaker 2: Yes, so I'm giving them an investment.
Speaker 1: Yes, so when you, so when you buy a piece, Romare Bearden, twenty years ago, now it's worth--
Speaker 2: Yep, tons of, much more.
Speaker 1: --much more than it was then.
Speaker 2: It certainly was, yes.
Speaker 1: So when you donate a piece now--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --it's going to increase--
Speaker 2: The value--
Speaker 1: --the value.
Speaker 2: --the value.  It's just like when, Ms. Catlett [HistoryMaker Elizabeth Catlett], when she passed away, I had spoken to, Stella Jones has a gallery in New Orleans [Stella Jones Gallery, New Orleans, Louisiana] and I had gone down to Ms. Catlett's eighty-eighth birthday in New Orleans and I, because of Mr. Dorsey [Lawrence Dorsey], I knew her personally.  So if she was in town, if I needed, I mean she attended The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.] tribute to artists and, with her husband, I have a picture of the two of them at that time, he passed away many years later, but her work, when, she passed away this year and Joyce [Joyce White (ph.)] and Benjamin White [ph.] gave me the donation of her work to give to the foundation [The Links Foundation, Incorporated, Washington, D.C.], the value within the period of time that she, they gave it to me at one price and in a couple of weeks after her death, the price had escalated a couple thousand dollars.  So, the value of what I'm giving them will continue to increase.  So, but it's, I, all I ask in return from the foundation, I have an agreement which basically I'm saying to them, all I want you to do is to thank the artist, because I'm not charging anything for this project, write a letter of thanks to the artist for their generous donation and the value of the work that was given is something that they sent me the price, I have the cost in dollars, I have what they wrote, telling me w- I did not create any of the prices and that if, for any reason, if we have to move any work, that artist be notified first and then me, or at the same time, we have a joint understanding of that but all I want them to send a letter to the artist with the, the donation that they set it as so that they can also get a tax write off because that's a generous donation that they have made.  And every one of them said, without any hesitation, Faith Ringgold, Otto Neal [Otto Neals], Violet Chandler [Violet Hewitt Chandler], just looking around the room, Emmett Wigglesworth, James Brown [James hd Brown] and Denmark [James Denmark]; Denmark is in South Carolina.  When I wrote him the letter, he sent back, created a piece of artwork and sent it back to me and no one has asked for anything in return.  It was, that, I have been fortunate over the years to have beautiful letters, which I will put in your file, from artists that just appreciate the fact that there's someone that appreciates what they do and that they're willing to see it pass on to other generations to appreciate oral history and I think that's what, we tell, nobody can tell you your story better than you and as a people, I appreciate it for that, this is what they try to do, different types of art, some of it is not my style but others, but they need to have a voice and you need to have a forum where you can say what you, what you believe in, and these artists do.  So, I, I, I'm a great respecter of, of the work that artists do, I really do and I believe that's one way, that's an easy way of learning your history until you delve into it and then you find out where, why and, people do what they do or what caused them to start doing this type of work, it's just very interesting.
Story_ID: 634277
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite kind of work, artwork?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite--?
Speaker 1: Type of artwork?
Speaker 2: I'm more, more realistic.  I, I tend to have more realistic artwork than I do abstract but I do like the abstract work also.  You can look around the room and find that there are places where I'm into abstract work but most of it is, is more realism and there's some abstract--this is Herbert Gentry over there, that's a very, very well known old timer.  Gentry passed away and that's a beautiful piece of his work.  That was Delsarte [Louis Delsarte], James Denmark, oh, and this is one of my favorite that passed away, but he's a giant, Benny Andrews, right here, that's Benny Andrews' piece behind me.  So on and on as we go through.  I just came from Cuba about a month ago and work over there, there's an artist called Choco [Eduardo Roca Salazar], he's one of, and next to him is Wifredo Lam, and those are two leading artists from Chin- from, from Cuba, the work that's there.  And, and, as a matter of fact, next week I will be, have the pleasure and the honor of being honored by a group in Southampton [New York] for my interests with, with African American art.  So on the 11th, at the Southampton Cultural Center, I will be the honoree because I received the Smithsonian award [Smithsonian Latino Center Legacy Award] a few years ago for my interest in the humanities and, and, primarily, again, for my interest in working with, with, promoting the gift of African American art, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you've used it to promote the gift of education through the Heart to Art [Heart to Art, Inc.], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, though that's basically what I do in Heart to Art.
Speaker 1: This is, yeah, very few people come up with a program where they can satisfy a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --needs to give.
Speaker 2: And also that there are lots of people.  I mean, there's, I have a group that I started twenty-one years ago called Imani [Imani Literary Group, Inc.], and there's not a member in that group that doesn't own a piece of artwork.
Story_ID: 634278
Speaker 1: Let's don't run over that name, Imani, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Imani, Imani that means faith.
Speaker 1: --it means, yeah, faith in Kiswahili, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and so it's the Imani literary--
Speaker 2: Group, literary reading group [Imani Literary Group, Inc.].
Speaker 1: --literary reading group, and how did it get started?
Speaker 2: It got started twenty-one years ago, yeah, about twenty-one years ago because as a healthcare administrator and director of nursing services, vice president of nursing, which are entirely amusing, I would speak to some of my, my friends in business and, but in the healthcare, in particular, and asked them, well, you know, like "What are you doing, you guys doing for the summer?" And everybody said to me, not everyone, many of them will say to me, "I'm going home."  I said, "Well what do you mean you're going home?  Where is your home?" And I will hear Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica, so on and so forth and, and I said, "Well, it would seem to me that you were living here for most of your life, so I know that wherever we're from, we're born, that's where we consider home."  I said, "But, I think you spend more of your life in this country and you, how much do you know about African American art, I mean, African American history?"  And people hesitate and so on and I say, "You know what?  I think we need to get together and just have a discussion about African American history."  And with that, I, I invited them to a meeting at my home in the summer, it was a summer month, and let's see if we can get some discussion going and I invited about maybe fifteen people to start with and they all came and I recommended, Before the Ma- 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America,' Lerone Bennett] I think it is, and we started reading and I said, "Well, what we're going to try to do is to read a book a month and, or if not a month, every two months and, with an African American artist and we'll have discussions," and they thought it was a good idea and the idea took off and we started with many members and different books that we, I would assign a book monthly before, later on I opened it up that, you know, anyone could recommend a book and we will look it up and, and read it and have discussion and we have had some wonderful discussion.  We, over the years, we have had fights because we'll have disagreements and we have topics that some people don't think we should be looking at and I know we've always had a big thing on differences and people, lifestyles and so on and differences on, on culture and differences in, in races and so on and so, it has been really a wonderful learning experience but out of it also come that I recognize them as my sisters.  We have watched over the years, in twenty-one years, we have lost loved ones, we have lost parents, we have, you know, parents included, we have gone through a few divorces, we have gone through, what else have we had?  A number of things that, that, you know, a family goes through together, we have together, watch your children grow up, watch them get married and the last three years we have had children of about four members get married.  And so, and they have had children so it's been a generational thing, just like if you're doing a genealogy tree.  We have been doing that and I've introduced them to the Kindle.  I've introduced them to, we also have a part where we enjoy the theater, we enjoy dance and, we just have different ideas.  What we have done also is that we have, I've always believed that you always help somebody else, no matter what you do and at the end of the day it's about, not about you but it's about what you've done for someone else.  So we have given donations to people in our community that have gone through hardship or maybe nationally, and international events and so on but there's always a need to give back.  We just provided for Doctors without Boundaries [sic. Medecins Sans Frontieres/Doctors Without Borders], I think they're called, and we had a young girl the other day that was on Broadway that had leukemia and she died and we provided, she was buried at my church at Allen A.M.E. [Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York, Jamaica, New York], with the place where, the ministers there, and we made a donation to that so we try to always find someone that need that.  I, I've introduced us getting Books for Africa, they come out of Atlanta [Georgia], there's a main, I think it's some part of Georgia.
Story_ID: 634279
Speaker 1: That's Dr. Dudley [HistoryMaker Julius Wayne Dudley].
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Dudley, yeah, we've interviewed him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, well I, I am forever, send him my, last year I took probably about thirty boxes to the post office and, and donated to them and if I'm not doing that, I'm raising funds for people that need clothing but there's always something to be done for someone else and, and the members of my organization, they have a great deal of respect for me which I love and, I love them because, I told them this is just about what we do because they think that, you know, I'm always looking ahead at someone, or you can help somebody else and they come along with a program, or they have ideas that we support and I think that it's all about making the world a better place to live in because it's so difficult today, especially young people trying to direct them into things that are meaningful and that's long lasting and to understand that if it doesn't work over here try over there, it will work over there but you have to be, you have to have commitment, you have to understand that nothing comes for free, you always have to pay back.  There's a lesson to be learned no matter how fortunate you may be, your life can be richer if you give to somebody else, to, at least make their life better and, and I come out of a family, my, my Aunt Anesta [Anesta Pond Samuel], my mother [Edith Pond Brown], my Aunt Rosa [Rosa Pond Binnom], that always said, you know, you just cannot go to bed not knowing that you have done something good for somebody today.  It was a smile, it was a compliment, if it's something and, and learn, one of the hardest thing to learn today is not to carry bitterness with you and not to be revengeful, things like that.  So those are old fashioned ideas that I, you know, I try to surround myself with people that feel the same way and it helps.  So, Imani, Imani Literary Group [Imani Literary Group, Inc.] has really been a, well I wouldn't call lifesaving experience but for many of us it's what we believe in.  We believe that we get together, we can save the world.  If that kind of a relationship we have with each other, you can have, you know, spend time being critical of each other.  I mean, you can tell someone what you feel but you don't spend time being, at least spend time talking to my girlfriend about her, we don't do that, and because of that there's always that effort to get to the meeting the second Saturday of the month.  When I became a Link [The Links, Incorporated] twelve years ago, fourteen years ago I would say, when I became a Link, our meetings, The Links meetings is held, when my chapter, the second Saturday in the month, my meeting with Imani had been going on, I'm sure, for more than eight, ten years at the time and that was held the first Saturday in the month, or the second, and they were willing to switch the meeting dates, which is a lot for me to be able to get to The Links meeting the second Saturday, the first Saturday and have them the second Saturday, we switched, and I truly appreciated it.  Those are the kind of things that they give thought to, you know, because to do that it changes what is routine, their lifestyle, you know.  They have babysitters for their children, they had other engagements that they had and they were willing to change it and it makes a difference.  We have had authors, as a matter of fact, we just had an author here a couple of months ago and it turned out, the wedding, the wedding plan, the wedding game, she was introduced to us by a colleague, she's an attorney, and she had this wonderful book that Valerie Belby [ph.], who was the world's biggest art collect- well, not biggest art collector but art connoisseur and art lover, but she introduced us to this other woman, the artist, the author, and she came and met with us, which is what I tend to do is invite artist, authors, and she had such a wonderful, we had such a wonderful discussion about the book and then she just sent it to us and the book has been picked up as, for, to be a movie.  So, again, you know, we try to expand the horizon.  We went down, we have a colleague that moved, a member that moved to, Enid [ph.], moved to, to, not Atlanta [Georgia], she's in Virginia, and she wanted us, she formed a group down there and then she invited us to come down to meet with the group, so we have done that also.  So we're always thinking of ways that we can, you know, get ahead and move ahead.  That's you?
Story_ID: 634280
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Imani Literary Group [Imani Literary Group, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, what that's meant over the years.  How many sisters are involved in that?
Speaker 2: It's usually, our quota rests at about, there are between eighteen and twenty-one, usually an average of about fifteen of us get together monthly, depending on what's going on, but they look forward to coming to the meeting, we really do.  We, we have a good time and they, that, I think I showed you something earlier.  We went to a play and a lunch at a Cuban restaurant a few weeks ago and I have been using a cane and, 'cause I had surgery on my back last year, and I'm just learning how to really get around, walking quite well again, and so while we were there they had a band, a little trio, and I started dancing.  So one of the, someone took my photograph and everybody was, I mean, they really, everybody had a comment to make, you know, that I really had a good time, they were, enjoyed watching me have a good time, and it was just, just a lot of fun.  So, I didn't realize that they had not gotten a photo- they were talking of the experience.  They just thought it was a lovely, lovely afternoon, good weather, a Saturday, and when I sent out the picture, well now they've all gone crazy, ballistic, it was great to see me back in form and so on, but, but, you know, we take time to celebrate things.  We have gone through our share of good time, bad times, but one of the thing that I always said I hold just together that we have faith.  I come from that school of the three Fs, which is faith, family and friends and the faith, that's what everyone of us at Imani says, no, just about all of them, have strong faith background.  We go to different churches but we all, we never start a meeting without a prayer, we never end without a prayer.  We don't, I mean we understand that, it doesn't make a difference what religion you are, just that you have something that you believe in and that it stands for helpful.  Family, we, I think that's a bond that keeps us together.  We have the same value system, many of us, different, different as all get out, but value system in that family means a lot to each of us, whether it's your children, it's your parents, your extended family and, of course, being friends means an awful lot.  I have a friend that, I think it all blends in nicer today.  I had a call from Dr. Herrington, Herrington Bryce, and he was the person I mentioned my father [Patna Brown] always wanted to know, you know, you have these Bryce boys, these brothers.  Well Herrington brothers, older brother, who was a very good friend of mine also, Dr. Roy Bryce-Laporte and just, those are the kind of names you put in and volumes of stuff come up and authors that they are.  They have taught at William and Mary [College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia], at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], at Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York], the one that died was the, was the professor for many, many years but over the years they have donated to the, the, The Dedicators, Inc. and developed a scholarship fund because they're very close to their parents and just seeing the success that they have had in life, that they wanted to give back and they started with The Dedicators.  We don't have a lot of money anymore, things have changed but they provided scholarship funds for, in the name of their mother, father and, and their aunts and the two of them have had the scholarship fund with us yearly, that we can give a scholarship to someone.  So today, just before you came, he called and said that, you know, they're in a hurry, I was supposed to get down this weekend to, to go to the funeral but they said that they had to put if off 'til next week because a number of people that would like to attend, however, his request to me is, he wanted to know whether or not he could ask that in lieu of flowers that monies be sent to The Dedicators, Inc. to provide scholarships in his brother's name and I thought that was such an honor and at the same time so meaningful, you know, going around the circle that they were honorees, they have come out of the environment that I came out of that we, you know, just believe in giving back and parents that taught us, that that's what life is all about and here they're turning around and, with his brother, he's saying, well, we will put these scholarships out to educate some other young people.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I thought that was very, very moving, um-hm.
Story_ID: 634281
Speaker 1: This kind of segues into a question we always ask, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: There's so many.  I think that we have lost our way in defining who we are.  I don't think that we understand the value of, of who we are.  I don't think we know our history well enough.  We do not know what background we came from, we don't understand.  I was in Egypt a few years ago, three years ago, and in just reviewing the history of Egypt, I have a friend that traveled with us, that, that just becomes specialized in, in studying Egyptian history and so on and saying, you know, like when are we going to pass this along so people learn who they are, African American, black people in general understand their culture but I think that we are so misdirected that we seem to have lost, there's a generation that just seem to be missing where we, we, and we sort of ingested positive things in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s], and then we seemed to have just dropped it.  We, we, we find out that things are, you can't get everything easy, it's not that instant, we're not instant, you don't change overnight, that you have to work towards things, that you have to have goals, you have to have values, and I'm really worried that we have seemed to have lost our way trying to get to where we want to go and that it's going to require a strong foundation, underpinning for people to understand that, you don't just get up to dance, I'm successful tomorrow, that it does require some building and I, I think that it's just one person helping another person that's going to get us back to focus but I, I am saddened by the fact that I think that we have lost a lot of time, we have lost our way and that we don't seem to be able to find a way to get back to where we want to go, except that when you, you listen to stories like these, on The HistoryMakers, that you say, "Well, there is hope, there are enough people out there that are still making an effort to, to seem to right a wrong and to get us to believe in ourselves," and I, and it's kind of hard to battle what's in front of you but you have to look beyond that and still say, you know, "I'm excellent, I am, I am good, I am, I'm a good person and, and that the world still can be fixed and that I have to play my part of it and I cannot do it by being a destructive person."  I have to be constructive, I have to look forward to, to, to building a foundation that it's going to launch us off into good things and, and there are enough people out there doing that still.  When I get totally discouraged, I said, you know, I pick up a story and I, I said there's hope still.  There's hope when I see positive things.
Story_ID: 634282
Speaker 1: Ma'am, when you look back over all the things you've done in your career, to this point, both vocationally and as a volunteer, is there any major thing that you would go back and do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: That's an interesting question, go back and do differently, I'm trying to think, differently, differently.  No, I prob- well, no, I was about to say, I probably would have gone to a school that provided me with, with a bachelor's degree when I finished my school, my nursing, nursing experience rather than having to go back and do four years, literally, of college, that I think is something that if I had known earlier, I might have gone to school that will have provided me with a RN, BSN but, then I would not have gone to Lincoln [Lincoln School for Nurses, New York, New York], I don't think, but, I would not have gone to Lincoln 'cause Lincoln did not provide a bachelor of science in nursing, and I feel that today my life is what it is because I went to Lincoln and it provided me with a kind of education that has been the foundation for what I've done and I think that, so really it's not looking back, looking back, yes, I probably would have, at the top of my head, just said, gone to a school that would have provided me with a BSN rather than having to go through and do four more years, but I gained so much knowledge and, and experience and so from going to Lincoln and at the same time from having gone back to school [at Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York] and done it the hard way that I can appreciate my education much more.  So I can't look back and tell you there are too many regrets.  One of the regrets that I, I, looking back at my life, is that when I, when I, but again it prepares you for the future.  When I got married in '58 [1958] and we, after school in '59 [1959] and I started, I went back to school, then formed, that I decided that we wanted to start a family and this is why, this is a two family house.  We bought a two family house figuring that we will get started with a family here and then move into a one family home when we had children and that was planned and I was fortunate that whenever I, we planned a pregnancy, I became pregnant and I had, unfortunately I had about three, three, I had four, three miscarriages and, and each pregnancy went longer and, then I had an early birth of the last pregnancy and I lost that baby after she was born, a little girl, and my husband [Edward Ingleton] said, "Well, you know, enough of that, you were too sick this last time, I don't think we're going to go through that again."  So, I didn't have any children and my [maternal] aunt had, that same Anesta [Anesta Pond Samuel] said, she said to me, "You know, God has in mind that probably, that you didn't have any children because you would become mother to more than, than the children you would have had," and it turned out that, that it took a long time to get through that process, because it was a very painful part of my life, very difficult and, but once I was able to overcome that, I realized that today I'm so blessed, I have children that, if I'd given birth to them, they could not be closer.  So, my girlfriends always look at it and say, "You didn't have children because on the weekends we know that Aunt Grace [HistoryMaker Grace Y. Ingleton] is coming by to pick up our children and take them to the museum and to, to restaurants and to take them for their birthday presents," and so on.  So that I spent a lot of time doing also but that was a period of life that I, I don't know if I would want to go through it again but at the same time I understand what it meant to me later on and what it has provided.  I missed having natural born children but the children that I've taken the place of those I would have had are many more and it brought me a lot more joy.  So, a lot of joy, I shouldn't say a lot more 'cause I don't know what it would have been having, you know, having the children of my own.  So, I don't think there's too much I would go back and change in my life.  My, that, that experience was also a very difficult one because I came home from the hospital, not just sounding like a sob story, but I came home from the hospital a Sunday, spoke to my father [Patna Brown] during the week and he was very upset that I had lost this pregnancy and he said he was coming to see me.  He had planned to come back to visit with me and he never did and he said, you know, he always wanted to travel and I said, "Well that's something I'll do for him," but I came home on a Sunday and on the Wednesday my husband, who works in the evenings, went to work, came back home, seemed to me like he had just left, and he said to me, I said, "Why are you back home?"  He said, "Well, your father died," and I said, "What do you mean my father died?  My father's fifty-six years old." And he said, "He had a massive coronary after coming in from work this evening and he died."  So, I came out of the hospital Sunday, he died Wednesday, Friday or Saturday I was on a plane to Panama and, and that was just such a very difficult time in my life, you know.  You look back at your soul.  What are some of the things that make you be able to overcome some of the things that you go through and I looked and I said, "You know what?  All of us have more trials in life and you never know what they're going to be and if that's what it was for me, he lived, at least he lived a comfortable and happy life up to the age of fifty-six," so I moved on from there and he said that he wanted to travel and that's what, I made a vow that year that I would travel for him.  So, from 1957, I would say, to this day, I have every single year, I have left the country and I've gone somewhere and I do it in honor of my father.  I said, "He couldn't do it so I'll do it."  I said, I've traveled literally around the world.
Story_ID: 634283
Speaker 1: Sometimes you travel with the members of the Imani Literary Group [Imani Literary Group, Inc.], yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the last, in the, since 2001, I started traveling, many of them will, have followed me, not followed me, but we get together and we plan, I plan the trips and then they come along.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: So many of them have traveled with me.
Speaker 1: Where have you been so far?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: Where have you been?
Speaker 2: Oh, we started, they started traveling with me in '01 [2001], right after the World Trade [World Trade Center, New York, New York] problems and we went to South Africa that time and we have gone from South Africa, we have been to Australia, New Zealand and Fiji.  We have been to Panama twice.  We have been to Australia, I said that, I said Australia, already.  Where else have we gone?  We were in China for a couple of weeks.  We were in, where else have we been to?
Speaker 1: Ghana is one place, right?
Speaker 2: I'm going to Ghana in November. We've planned a trip to Ghana.  We have been to South Africa, we have been to West Africa, Senegal, to the Gambia.
Speaker 1: I think, Egypt, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Egypt, did Egypt.  Really, we had a wonderful time in Egypt.  We just did a Mediterranean cruise in last October, so, I've been around the world.  I've been, you know, throughout the United States, a lot of places.  I've been to Alaska, covered, covered quite a bit.  I've been to Japan, Hong Kong, where else did I, and, and if you look at my kitchen and you look on the wall and look on the refrigerator, you'll find mugs from every country that I've gone to that's throughout the house also and then I have the, the what you call them that you put on your refrigerator?
Speaker 1: Magnets (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The magnets and so that will give you, just looking, and looking at my passport, my passport it always says, my passport, my school of nursing diploma [from Lincoln School for Nurses, New York, New York], I think there's something else I always add to that are the reasons for my, my joy in living, because they have provided me with the things that if I didn't have the education to make a good living and if I did not have an opportunity to travel, it provided me with the means to travel and out of traveling it has taught me again, that people are basically the same the world over, that they, they're interested in the same thing that we talked about, whatever faith they belong to, that they have their interests in their family and that they're looking for friends, and to work with people.  And so people, relationships is just so very, very important and then at the same time it has also opened my eyes to so many things that we take for granted in this country that we have that when you travel you realize how, I have one of my, the ladies that traveled with me in Imani, (unclear) said, "You know, one of the best choices my family made, my forefathers, was when they stayed on that ship that was coming to America," because when we get to look at some of the places in Africa that we have seen and the poverty in some areas, even though progress has been made, it is just very difficult to know how you overcome that.  I know that I, I try my best not to waste water because I've seen the ingestion of water that is either not enough or too much with too much debris in it that, that makes you ill, is, and killed a lot of people that we just turn it on and leave, let the faucet run so I'm always very conscious of things like that.  The things that we take for granted, so I don't take them for granted anymore from having traveled.  So, I, I have had a blessed life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really have had a blessed life.
Story_ID: 634284
Speaker 1: We always ask this question too: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: To be my legacy?  I would consider the fact that my, my, living by example and by teaching, would be the appreciation of our history, in terms of visually through the arts are things that are provided but also trying to lead a life by example and that I feel that it's not about me but it's about what I have tried to do to improve the quality of life for my brother and that's basically by, getting up every day and trying to figure out, I don't have to figure too hard, but figure out how do you improve the quality of life for another person.  It doesn't have to be with money.  It doesn't have, it can be just with a gesture.  It can be with a kindness.  It can be with a thought.  It can be a note.  It can be, and, and that it is to be of, to have compassion and to have an appreciation for another human being.  I think that, that to be my legacy will be the one of self-awareness and being involved with other people, just making the quality of life better for another person and that's basically, I think that's, that's the most of us can do without it costing you anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you've been married for a long time--
Speaker 2: I've been married for, this, God willing, it's going to be in September, the day before my birthday, it's going to be, I got married in 1958, so it's going on fifty-four years, yeah, and it's been a fairly comfortable marriage and my husband [Edward Ingleton] and I are completely different.  He's not involved in all the things that I'm involved in but he has always given me the opportunity to do what I want to do with an understanding that, you know, we respect each other and, and that works.  Respect is, you know, you can have differences but if you have respect and understanding, you can have a, get through a relationship, no matter how, tumultuous it get at times but you can get through them and, and, again, it's a matter of respect, respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I have not asked you about that I need to ask before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well I think I've told you a little bit about The Dedicators [The Dedicators, Inc.].  I've told you a little bit about Imani [Imani Literary Group, Inc.].  I've told you about The Links [The Links, Incorporated], and I did not go into The Links.  I joined The Links because it was an oppor- organization that my, of women that they believe in friendship and, and service, are the two things, and service to me was one of the keys to getting involved and, I think that, in looking back in our discussion at, the three things in common that I have, the three organizations which will be, again, The Dedicators, which was started in '53 [1953], and I didn't become an active member until years later but I grew up in a house with them so I always feel that I was there from the inception and then, after that, Imani, and followed by The Links and they all have same, similarities in that it's just providing service to other people, to the community, to, to improve the quality of life for someone else, it's not about just having a good time or a social network.  This is about community service is what we're doing and giving back and that, I think, is something that, that, has been the basis of my life and because of that it becomes traveling and learning again, and learning experience through traveling and through the things that each organization have exposed me to and allowed me to be involved with, I think has made the, the difference in my life so, yeah, I think we've covered, you know, those three ar- and the area that I did not include but has always been, always been a part of my life, is at my church.  Whatever the church is, that, that's what our church is because in the last, maybe fifteen years or more, I've been going to Allen A.M.E. [Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York, Jamaica, New York] but, but it's always church.  I mean on Sundays, I, my Sunday is, you don't do Sunday without saying I'm going to church.  So, that, that is where my faith is very important and that is the most, that's the foundation on which I stand and I try to get up sometimes, many times I get up in the morning and I, I always sit in one of these chairs out here and I will read Daily Word, I'll read the Bible, I will think of something that I need to read before leaving.  Sometimes I don't.  Sometimes I just pray as I take my shower, you know, and have communication with God or whoever I'm talking to and, and that's important to me, my faith, really, is a foundation of which I stand on because I think sometimes if you don't have a system to channel your thoughts, ideas, your belief system, that you can go too far, belief, you know.  So faith is really the foundation on which I stand.
Story_ID: 634285
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of what I just said is what I would like to be remembered by, the fact that--what would I say?  Would I say she was a friend to the friendless or that she, she remembered others, basically.  I would like to be seen as a person that gave and hope that, that my giving, well really once you give, that's what the person does with what you give is up to them.  So, I just want to be remembered as a person that gave, gave of themselves and that was it, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much, it's a pleasure, pleasure.
