Story_ID: 638713
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell if for us please?
Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Gwendolyn Smith Iloani.  G-W-E-N-D-O-L-Y-N, S-M-I-T-H, I-L-O-A-N-I.
Speaker 1: All right now, is there a story behind Iloani? What kind of name is that?
Speaker 2: It's actually a Nigerian name.  I was married to someone [Alex Iloani] of the Igbo tribe in Nigeria.  And then after we divorced I decided to keep the name because it was an icebreaker, it was unusual, it's African.  And Smith is a slave name, so I thought it was a little exotic, a nice twist to it.  In addition, I'm in the investment arena and when you spell Iloani, it's I, the word loan, and then I.  So after I had taught all of Wall Street to say it, I decided to keep the name.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, thank you.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 19th, 1955, and I was born in Jamaica, West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an investment professional.  I am the chairman, president and CEO of Smith Whiley and Company.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 29th, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You are located at the offices of Smith Whiley and Company, which is located in Hartford, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 638714
Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone we interview, they're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So they only require a short answer.  First one is do you have a favorite food and what is it?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is curried goat.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a Jamaican dish, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the fall, in particular in New England because of the changing of the leaves.
Speaker 1: Right, and it's supposed to be particularly pretty here in Hartford [Connecticut], yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well sort of.  My favorite vacation is going on the Tom Joyner cruise [Tom Joyner Foundation Fantastic Voyage], and we cruise through several destinations.
Speaker 1: Okay, Tom Joyner cruise, okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "The only helping hand that you have is the one at the end of your arm" [Sam Levenson]. In other words, if anything's going to happen you need to make it happen.  Nobody else is gonna do it for you.
Story_ID: 638715
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Woodrow Smith] side.  But we're gonna start with your mother's side first.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: It's Doreen Isoline Smith [Doreen Johnson Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: D-O-R-E-E-N, I-S-O-L-I-N-E, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind her name, Isoline is an interesting name, I haven't heard it before?
Speaker 2: Well she was named after a great aunt.  And in my family we've kept the tradition, a few of my cousins also have the name Isoline, either as a first or middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay now, wh- what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is September 12, 1936, and she was born in Jamaica, West Indies in the parish of Westmoreland.
Speaker 1: Westmoreland Parish.  Now what ca- what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How, how far back can you trace your, your mother's ancestry?
Speaker 2: I know that she is a direct descendant of the Maroon people which were the, the people that led the uprising against the British, in particular the women that led the uprising against the British and won.
Speaker 1: Right, there's a famous--it's Nanny, the famous black woman, Maroon leader.  Captain Cudjoe, proud tradition in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: That's correct, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, did she tell, have, have any stories about the Maroon days or when they came down from the mountains and you know?
Speaker 2: Well she talks--she talks about the decision to basically everyone had to go and if they didn't they killed the slaves that did not join them in the uprising.  In other words, mostly the field slaves were ready to go.  The house slaves had to be convinced, and if they did not come, they were killed because they were afraid if they left them there they would tell the master where they were.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the situation, the Maroons are coming down from the hills where they have independence and to recruit new members and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When they first decided to go, everyone had to go, and if you didn't go, you were killed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they periodically came down through (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and they did.
Speaker 1: --and they couldn't leave anybody that could tell who--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I think Har- Harriet Tubman said, "If you turn back now I'll shoot you where you stand."
Speaker 2: That's right, very similar.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so.  That's--okay any other stories like that, 'cause that's a rich, I don't know, kind of a cultural story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  And nothing that I can think of.  I mean it was a difficult thing to do and then a lot of people died in the process.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, are there any--
Speaker 2: 'Cause they were fighting can- against cannons and things like that, and they didn't have those type of military ar- arsenal.  You know, they're using machetes and sticks and stones, but they, they defeated the British.
Speaker 1: Are they--were there any relatives remaining in the hills, you know, after the, you know, after, you know, they struck a treaty with the British?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So well, wh- what else--did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: When I was young, very young, but after I came to America they passed a few years later.  But my grandmother and grandfather sort of raised me for some of my earlier years because my, my mom and dad, after I was born, or maybe I was two, they came to this country to, to offer us a better life later on.  So I did stay with my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can, can you give us the name of your grandparents?
Speaker 2: It's Emma Thompson and Walter Thompson is my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Now that's a--that's a familiar pattern where people--the parents, you know, set, set the stage for the children to come a little later.
Speaker 2: I said--it's Emma Thompson Johnson [Emma Johnson], and Walter Johnson, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, okay--
Speaker 2: But in Jamaica, you know, we believe in the extended family.  So it, it was very common for younguns to leave Jamaica and to come to America and to try and make a better way of life.
Speaker 1: Wha- what did your mother's pare- parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, she cooked and washed clothes, and you know, and my grandfather just did odd jobs doing with agriculture.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they own their own land?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.  And we have a large piece of land today that has been passed down through the family that's in the parish of Westmoreland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is, is there anything about their personalities that stands out now when you look back and--?
Speaker 2: No, not that I can say.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you were there until you were six, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Story_ID: 638716
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Doreen Johnson Smith] tell you about growing up in, in Jamaica in Westmoreland?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother is from a large family.  I think there were seven kids in all.  So she had wonderful stories to talk--to tell us--to share with us about how, you know, they were raised or even in times of, I think it was World War II [WWII] when planes were flying over looking to, to bomb certain places.  How they had to have a total blackout in the part of Jamaica that we lived in for fear that the house would be bombed and it was scary and you know, things like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an interesting that--how the West Indies were, I guess, deployed in World War II.  I, I hadn't thought that much about it, but, but Germans were control--they controlled the French colonies I guess.  So that could be, you know, they were very close by, I guess you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was scary.  I think she was like eight, nine, ten years old.  So it was kind of scary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most of her stories are growing up on a farm and the fun that comes when you have older siblings, so.
Speaker 1: Okay now, did she talk about going to school and what?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She went to school, completed high school, but she was always somebody's little sister (laughter).  When you have a ton of brothers, you know, they're always looking out for you.
Speaker 1: Was there--was there--was there a specific high school that she, she, she mentioned or?
Speaker 2: I don't re- I don't remember the name of the high school, but it was in Grange Hill [Jamaica].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now wh- what did she do when she finished high school?
Speaker 2: When she finished high school, she just became--she got married and then became a housewife.  She did some--she was a seamstress as well and so when she came to the--to the U.S. she ended up working as a seamstress in Brooklyn, New York.
Story_ID: 638717
Speaker 1: Can you gi- give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Woodrow Nathanial Smith [Woodrow Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on June 4th, 1927 in Nicaragua.
Speaker 1: Okay. And his parents, I don't recall their name right now, but they died when he was very young--a young boy, like maybe eight or nine.  And then he moved with his older sisters to a relative that lived in Jamaica.  So that's how he ended up in Jamaica and how he ended up going to the same church that my mom [Doreen Johnson Smith] went to, and that's how they ended up meeting.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I'm just wondering if he--now in reading the story of Marcus Garvey, I read that a lot of Jamaicans went to Central America and worked for United Fruit Company [Chiquita Brands International, Inc.].  And, you know, there's a lot of back and forth between Central America and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think his father might have been in agriculture, which is why the family ended up staying in--in Nicaragua, but after his parents died they kind of went to Jamaica to connect with family there.
Speaker 2: Un- unless I'm wrong, he considered himself a Jamaican rather than Nicaraguan, right, okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  You would not know he was born in Nicaragua.  He had a very strong Jamaican accent and he was Jamaican through and through.
Speaker 2: You had quite a few Jamaicans went to Panama, and to all those Central American countries to work, you know.  So, okay.  Now, are there any, any stories about his ancestors that are passed down?
Speaker 1: Not that I can think of.
Speaker 2: No, nothing much.  He didn't talk--did he talk about growing up and what it was like?
Speaker 1: Well he, he fought in--he went to England and he did fight in a war, what is--I don't recall the war.
Speaker 2: World War II [WWII], I guess.
Speaker 1: Well yes, but there was another war too that England was involved in.  But, then he went back to Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah he would've been age--World War II age, but he, he was--so a war after World War II?
Speaker 1: I think it was before, but I don't, I just don't re--
Speaker 2: Was this some colonial conflict or something in West Africa or?
Speaker 1: It could've been--it could've been.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Britain was on the hot seat in a lot of places in those days?
Speaker 1: The sun never set on the British Empire, so, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay so, he served in the Bri- in the British Army I guess?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So wha- what did he do during, during World War II, was he?
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, now did he have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 1: Oh yes he went to--he completed high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was looking at going to--becoming--he became a minister and he was looking at going to a ministers college in America.  But after the kids started to come, he changed his mind and he, he ended up working at the Daily News [New York Daily News] in Manhattan [New York] and then at the New York Transit [New York City Transit Authority].
Speaker 2: Okay, so he worked for the New York Dai- Daily News and--all right.  Did--is there a story about how your parents met, you said they went to the same church, is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 1: No, I--not that I, you know, he was always--he was a very bad boy.  And then he converted to Christianity and came into the church.  And my mother said he sang like an angel.  And she has--had always grown up in the church and I guess going to, you know, wh- they're both of the Pentecostal faith, they spent a lot of time in church and, and they became friends that way.
Story_ID: 638718
Speaker 1: Do you know how or is there a--do they relate how they decided to, you know, come to America or what, what, you know, prompted that decision?
Speaker 2: I think what prompted my father [Woodrow Smith] was just looking for a better opportunity for himself and his family.  And his older sister had come here and he came to visit, and decided that he would--he would relocate us there ultimately.  Initially he and my mom [Doreen Johnson Smith] came.  They were here for maybe three years and then then came back and brought my two older brothers [Wendell Smith and Ivanhoe Smith] and me back with them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, when you think about your parents' personalities and talents and, and dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I'm a nice blend of both.  I have the integrity and the honesty of my father and I have the compassion of my mother.  So I think I'm a nice blend, and I look like both (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, well what are your first memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well one first memory was coming to America and I was excited to come because my father said--told us the streets were paved with gold.  So as a six year old I'm thinking when I get off the plane at JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] that I'm gonna see gold streets.  But what he really meant was that the streets were paved with opportunity that was there for you to grab it.  So that--that's an early memory.  Another early memory is the first time I saw snow.  I thought--and in Jamaica there is snow in the Blue Mountains, but I had never seen it.  So I'm thinking--and I think I came here in October or so.  So we were getting ready for the cold weather in New York [New York], and I thought snow was gonna hurt.  I'm thinking it's gonna look like ice cubes and it was just gonna really hurt when it--when it fell.  So I wasn't looking forward to it and I was pleasantly surprised that it was soft, it was very white and pretty, and it tasted good (laughter).  'Cause I remember sticking my tongue out trying to catch snowflakes.  And we had a huge snow storm and I remember I, I went outside and I--we grew up in the Brooklyn section of New York, and I--we must've had maybe two feet of snow because I remember stepping out and going down and everything covering me, and I was terrified.  So that was pretty exciting.  Another nice memory was the first time I saw television.  I know we're in the technology age, but I had not seen a TV.  And we went to our house when we came here in, in, in New York, in Brooklyn and my dad had a television there.  And I, I could not wrap my brain around how they can get a horse in this box.  I think 'Flicka' ['My Friend Flicka'] was on or something or 'Mister Ed' or one of--one of those.  And that was just wild to see how they could fit the horse in the box, and then when Mister Ed started to talk, I just want off the deep end.
Speaker 1: Were you--was radio popular in Jamaica or did you have--
Speaker 2: Radio was very popular.  But you know, not everyone could afford a television and we did not have one until we came here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do, do you have any early memories of Jamaica?
Speaker 2: I have very, you know, I have what people told me, I've forgotten.  'Cause, you know, I came here at the age of six and I, I see the pictures of me playing in the yard or on the veranda, but I don't really remember, that was so long ago.
Speaker 1: So New York had such a big impact it kind of wiped out the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 638719
Speaker 1: So this is 1961 I guess, right, 1961?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] the president.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so--
Speaker 2: I remember the day he was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Well what were you doing that day?
Speaker 2: I was at school and they told us and everybody just started crying.  They, they closed the school and I remember walking home and cry- with my brothers and we were crying.
Speaker 1: Why do you suppose people were cry- crying, did you think they would've cried if Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had been assassinated or if (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a good pre- he was a good president and you know, those were turbulent times in the Civil Rights Movement and he, he, he took a lot of risk.  He was, you know, as a young child I didn't realize that, I just knew he was very much loved.  And I think that's why I was crying.  But when you look back on his legacy, he and his brother [Robert F. Kennedy], the family hav- and they've done a lot.
Story_ID: 638720
Speaker 1: Can you describe for us the neighborhood you grew up in and some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood I grew up in was in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn [New York] and we lived in a brownstone.  And it was a residential area.  We had blocks and blocks and blocks of brownstones, lots of kids that played outside.  And then we had the elevated trains a few blocks from the house, which is how we basically got around.  My dad [Woodrow Smith] ultimately purchased a car, but initially we would take th- the subway.  And there were lots of different types of stores under the elevated trains and you can basically get any kind of food whether it was West Indian, whether it was Italian.  We grew up--it was a melting pot, the, the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Bushwick, okay.  Now wha- what did you like to do as a little girl, wha- what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I liked to ride my bike, pick on my brothers (laughter), beat them up.  Just play.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had time to play, okay?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  And then you know, there're eight children in my family, I'm the third oldest.  So I always was outside with the younger kids.  You know, and they, they would be in their stroller, just kind of walking down this--the blocks or just playing, that's what I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a great childhood.
Story_ID: 638721
Speaker 1: Were you engaged in any entrepreneurial activity as a child? Did you have any--
Speaker 2: No we went to church a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay. You're still Pentecostal?
Speaker 2: Yeah, although I now attend a Congregational church, but I grew up Pentecostal.  And we spent a lot of time in church 'cause my father [Woodrow Smith] was a minister and that's what we did all day on Sundays and most Saturdays.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so he continued to be a pastor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah a deacon.  He became a deacon.  He was a minister, he preached, but he was a deacon.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was--so he had a--he worked for the, you said he worked for the Transit Auth- New York Daily News and the Transit Authority [New York City Transit Authority] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had two jobs, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, you know, was a minister too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  And did your mother [Doreen Johnson Smith]--did, did she work as a seamstress when she was?
Speaker 2: No, she did that for maybe three years and then when we came up she just became a housewife.  But she was very active in the school system as you could imagine.  So she was always there, school board president, you name it.
Speaker 1: Oh was she, okay, so she was like volunteering activities (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, she was very, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now, some might not know it, but a high school education in Jamaica probably, some have said, its equivalent to a college education here?
Speaker 2: It's probably equivalent to maybe getting an associate's degree, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, you learn how to write well and to, you know, communicate well, and that's what I've been told, hadn't seen actually.  So, so they had good communication skills and I would take it?
Speaker 2: Yes, and you know, when you're--when you're involved with the school board you have different personalities.  She always held her ground.
Speaker 1: Okay so she, she was involved in the school board as a volunteer?
Speaker 2: As a volunteer, 'cause she put, you know, eight kids through the school system, so she was very involved in our schools.
Speaker 1: So, so did they have like a Local School Council, elected (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had the parent advisory groups and then they would elect representatives and that's how she ended up getting involved in the--in the school system.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now was it good to have your mother so involved in the school system and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause everybody, she knew all the teachers.  We were--we were always pretty good anyway with our studies.  But you know, she would be in charge of the bake sales and helping to fundraise, even way back then.  So, it was good.
Story_ID: 638722
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up, it just crossed my mind, was there--I know there's lots of people of Jamaican ancestry in Brooklyn [New York] and in Harlem [New York, New York] and other places in New York [New York]?  But did you feel like a difference or a separation from African Americans who were from South Carolina or Georgia or from the ne- grew up in New York?
Speaker 2: Growing up no because you could not tell I was from Jamaica, I didn't have an accent.  My father [Woodrow Smith] did, my mother [Doreen Johnson Smith] did, but I didn't and none of the--my sisters and brothers did.  So people really didn't know unless I told them.  But it was funny because by the time I went to college [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York], suddenly it was a big deal.  You had African Americans from the U.S., then you had African Americ- Africans and West Indians from outside of the U.S., and all of a sudden different groups were formed.  And because I, I just felt we all were black, I didn't see why you had to distinguish like that.  So I was always trying to hold the groups together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were--it didn't--it wasn't anything like you were extremely conscious of growing up.  I'm from Jama- I'm Jamaican ancestry rather than, you know, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Story_ID: 638723
Speaker 1: What was your first school?  Now you started--did you start first grade in, in, in Brooklyn [New York] or?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I started at a public school, I don't remember the--it might have been P.S. 182 [Brooklyn, New York], but--Public School 182.  In Brooklyn they number them like that, they don't have names.  But it was a elementary school, K through six [kindergarten to sixth grade].
Speaker 1: Okay, did you go all, all the way through?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then by the time I graduated, we relocated from Bushwick [Brooklyn, New York] to East New York [Brooklyn, New York].  'Cause prior to that we were--we were renting an apartment from my aunt.  And then my dad [Woodrow Smith] had saved enough money so we bought our home in East New York and then I ended up going to P.S., I think it's 299 [P.S. 299, Thomas Warren Field School, Brooklyn, New York], which was an int- it was a must've been a seven - eight school [seventh grade to eighth grade].  And then after that I went to an all-girls high school, Prospect Heights High School [Brooklyn, New York] which is in the--it's right near the botanical gardens [Brooklyn Botanic Garden] in Brooklyn.  So I would have to take the subway to go to school every morning and I went there from ninth grade through twelfth.
Speaker 1: Okay now, Pros- this is an all-girls--
Speaker 2: All-girls public high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) public high school, okay, all right.  So okay.  Well what are your memories of grade school?  Did--were there any special teachers that--that you had or personalities in the school that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well I loved my math teacher, but I think that's because I also--he was a great guy and I love--I love math.  But I was always a g- I always liked going to school.  I enjoyed learning and that's because my father, his focus on why he brought us here was so we can get a better quality education.  So I just remember, I've always had a positive experience in school, and even though there was peer pressure, particular in like junior high I remember it starting, I couldn't care less because I was focused on my education.  And so when people would be doing things, I, I never did it because I was focused on my education.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were a serious student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was a serious student.  In high school, my name was written in gold in the high school 'cause I was a top student.
Speaker 1: It was written in gold?
Speaker 2: In gold.  I was on the--well yeah honor society, I won every award.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about somebody actually putting your name in gold?
Speaker 2: When you were the top student your name, right as you walked into Prospect Heights, they had a plaque, so that was my thing (laughter).  If I got an A minus I'd have an attitude 'cause I wanted the A plus or I didn't understand why it wasn't A plus.  So I--everything I did was socialized around being the best.
Speaker 1: Well this is the first time I've heard of that concept of actually writing the student's name in gold in the, you know, that's--that--
Speaker 2: Which was a big deal for me.
Story_ID: 638724
Speaker 1: So you were striving for excellence--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so you can get that--your name in gold.
Speaker 2: And--and I'm learning and you know, trying to figure it all out.  And I'll tell you a funny story.  Growing up I thought I would be a doctor.  So I remember when I was fifteen years old, I became a candy striper at the Brooklyn Jewish Memorial Hospital [Brooklyn Jewish Hospital; Interfaith Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York].  Why, because I thought I was gonna be a doctor and I wanted to get some experience in the medical field.  And I did this for about six months.  And initially the first day I knew I did- I didn't like it.  I just, but, but, but I stuck it out and at the end of my session I realized that--I had done some research on what it would take to go to medical school and just the types of things you'd have to do.  And at one school they said that I would have to kill a rat and take its heart out in one minute.  At another school, I would have to dissect a cat and label the parts of the body, and at this other school I would be working with cadavers.  I didn't know what a cadaver was.  So when I went home I looked it up and I realized it was a de- a dead body.  And for whatever reason at fifteen, it never occurred to be that I'd be dealing with dead bodies as a doctor, 'cause you know, you're trying to make people healthy and whatever.  I just never focused on some of the training you'd have to do.  And when I saw that, I realized that I would not--I, I couldn't do that.  And I--it was at that point I decided I would be a businesswoman.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any, were there role models for you in the community or, or, or just in the world that you focused on?
Speaker 2: No, there, there were a few role models but they were white male doctors. My, my family doctors who were, were the role models.  They were great doctors, but nobody, no, no women and no minorities.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: But they were my role models, so.
Speaker 1: What about on the business side?
Speaker 2: None.  None that I can recall.  I just knew I couldn't be a doctor.  I didn't have--I didn't like being around sick people.  I wasn't compassionate enough and I didn't like the sight of blood.  But it took me being a candy striper to realize this.  So I didn't know what business involved, but I knew I couldn't be a doctor.  So the medical profession wasn't gonna work.  And I even applied myself even more in high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York] so I, I can get positioned to go to a good sc- college and then ultimately (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you--I'm sure you all probably got that Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and Jet and Ebony and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I don't remember seeing Jet I'm sur- maybe we got Ebony. I just don't remember that, not at that age.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Story_ID: 638725
Speaker 1: Sometimes, you know, they had individuals, you know, positioned as role models in those, you know, for different things.  I just wondered that--it should be--to go into business in those days it seems like there would be somebody--
Speaker 2: But I didn't know what business meant. I just knew I couldn't be a doctor.  So I knew I had--it had to be business but I had no clue as to what that would entail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were any of your relatives entrepreneurs?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's interesting that I think, you know, a lot of pe- people see Jamaicans and, and people from Barbados as- as entrepreneurs?
Speaker 2: As entrepreneurs.  Now my dad [Woodrow Smith], you know, he--we started out with my house, and then he bought like five, six other houses.  So you can say that he had an entrepreneurial spirit--
Speaker 1: Yes he did (laughter).
Speaker 2: --and a lot of my relatives did the same thing.  But when you think of a true entrepreneur who is running a company and employing people, they didn't go that route, but they knew how to build wealth.  And just about every aunt and uncle did that, own multiple homes and in my--in our case, when you have eight children that--that we became the demolition crew (laughter).  So we would go in, get the houses ready, when people would move out we would go--like I became a, a excellent painter by the time I was in tenth grade [at Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York].  I loved to paint and my father taught me to paint.  I didn't love to paint before he taught--but I could paint houses, do ceilings, walls, fixtures.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have all free time to ride your bike, you, you did have to do some--
Speaker 2: Well as I got older we began to take on responsibilities like that.  So my job was painting.  So I would paint the stoops, like in Brooklyn [New York], you know, everybody has a stoop.  I'd go paint the stoop, paint all the, the, the metal fencing and then go into houses that we owned when people moved out or if we had little projects to do.  He wouldn't hire painters, he'd have the kids, so it was me and my--one of my brothers we'd go in and do painting.
Speaker 1: Okay, now I have neglected to ask you the names of all your brothers and sister, so and, and where you fall in the order so, so?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother is, is Wendell [Wendell Smith] and he's about five years older than me.  Then I have another brother Ivanhoe [Ivanhoe Smith], who you met, and he's about--almost two years older than me, and then I--then it's me.  Then I have a sister named Princess.  She's actually named that--her name is Princess Grace [Princess Smith Sally], she's named after Princess Grace [Grace Kelly], and I have an aunt whose name is Princess Grace, and she's about three years younger than me.  And then I have twin brothers--a brother and a sister, and they are four years younger than me.  And then I have a sister, Jaleith [Jaleith Smith]--well the twins are Patrick [Patrick Smith] and Yvonne [Yvonne Smith], then I have a sister Jaleith who is se- seven years younger, and then I have the baby brother, his name is Arthur, Whiley Arthur Smith [Arthur Smith] and he's ten years younger than me.  So I'm the third oldest child and the oldest girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 638726
Speaker 1: You're fifteen when you decided you were gonna be--go, go into business instead.  Why not law or something like that, did you think about that?
Speaker 2: I always was motivated to do something that you could really accumulate wealth quickly.  And when I looked at people who did that, in addition to being compassionate and helping the sick, doctors seemed to have a pretty good living, and I, I thought business people would.  So I never really thought about law.  I was good with numbers.  I was--I felt I could speak to, to a group, so I was articulate and I--it could've been law, but I just never focused on law.
Speaker 1: Now in, in high school were your involved in high school activities, as well as in, you know, you studied, you were a serious student?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was a booster, cheerleader in high school.  I belonged to every club.  I was pretty active.  On school newspaper, math club, debate club, I was very active.
Speaker 1: Okay now your name was enshrined in gold but we- were you the top student in your, your class?
Speaker 2: There were three of us, there were three, and they had to put all three down because we were equal.
Speaker 1: Now was your high school integrated or was it--was it a black?
Speaker 2: It was probably 99 percent black and Hispanic.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's Prospect High School?
Speaker 2: Prospect Heights [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York].  And I don't know if you're familiar with Boys High School [Boys and Girls High School, Brooklyn, New York], but we were the sister school.  There was no Girls High, it was Boys High and Prospect Heights, we--that--that was our brother school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So when you was--oh who were your mentors in high school and were there any particular teachers or?
Speaker 2: In high school I, I had--I just really loved my teachers.  So I would say it was--it was a range, a bunch of them that I kind of held in high regard.  But my feeling is that mentors they come and they go depending on where you are in your life cycle.  And the constant mentors to me have always been my parents [Doreen Johnson Smith and Woodrow Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you're very close to your, your parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So they've just been the constant ment- and I've had mentors in business and so forth, but they're the overwhelming mentor to me.
Story_ID: 638727
Speaker 1: Now you were in, I guess, in junior high school when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated and were there riots in Brooklyn [New York] in those days (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes there were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about some of that and how did that affect your, your family and you?
Speaker 2: I think that I mean it was--it was just a turbulent time.  It was a confusing time because he was assassinated, Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated, just like a lot of--like Malcolm X.  I mean just a lot of people--
Speaker 1: That's right Malcolm X (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) really great, great people were assassinated and so what that did for me personally was just to be able to focus on why I was here, why I was going to school and what the end goal was, and that was to, to pull myself up some kind of way using education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's how it was framed for you and how you saw--
Speaker 2: He believed you can do this, you can do this, focus on doing this.
Speaker 1: And did your, your family--
Speaker 2: And then my father [Woodrow Smith] kind of reinforced that, my mother [Doreen Johnson Smith] reinforced it.
Speaker 1: Did they follow the Civil Rights Movement very closely (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your mother was a school activist I guess in a sense and a volunteer.  Did she--was she involved in political activities?
Speaker 2: Not political, but she was--she was aware of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Civil rights activities?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no.  I mean we would go and do a sit-in and things like that, but she was--
Speaker 1: Well that's, that's involvement.
Speaker 2: But not, not like some of the great people, not like [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height, you know, kind of stuff.  But we did what little we could do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, but you actually go out and sit down in a res- that is--that's a first person involvement.  You were in it if you do that--did that, you were def- definitely in it.
Speaker 2: And then we kind of watched things unfold on TV like everybody else.
Speaker 1: Tell me about a sit-in.  Now if you all sat in did, did you participate in--in one of those?
Speaker 2: I did not, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay she did, okay, all right.  And you, you rec- remember the circumstances at all, whether it was in a lunch counter or?
Speaker 2: I think it was some--it was a building.  It wasn't to integrate a restaurant or anything.  They were protesting discrimination and then she and my father went as part of the protest.  We did not go.  She kept us--they kept us at home.
Speaker 1: Did they ever get arrested or anything?
Speaker 2: No they were not arrested.  People were arrested, they were not, thank goodness.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  Well that's a legacy that, you know, should be passed on.
Story_ID: 638728
Speaker 1: Oh were there any other personalities in high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York] amongst the students that you remember that, that--?
Speaker 2: Well I just--there were a lot of people--there were people that I competed against who sort of motivated me to one up them and they were trying to one up me.  So that was a lot of fun.  And you know, other than that, no, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Nobody went on to do anything special or, or anything that you--
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Nothing you're aware of, okay.  All right well--
Speaker 2: I mean they might've gone on to be doctors and lawyers, but I, I, I haven't really kept touch, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well as a senior, what were your prospects?  Did you--did you know you--I assume you knew you were going to college and you had that--that lined up, but you know, did you--were there any people that played a prominent role in your deciding to go to--you went to Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York]?
Speaker 2: I went to Colgate because I selected Colgate.  I worked with my guidance counselor on my choices 'cause my parents [Doreen Johnson Smith and Woodrow Smith] hadn't gone to college so they really couldn't he- I could run things by them but they really couldn't help me 'cause they didn't know exactly some of the challenges that it--that were involved in that.  And my older brothers [Wendell Smith and Ivanhoe Smith] ha- were at the school so they kind of helped me.  Now one of my brothers he had gone to one of the top high schools in, in New York [New York] and then he ended up going to Cheyney State [Cheyney State College; Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania] 'cause he wanted a different experience and he went to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] to get his M.B.A.  So (laughter), you know.  And then the other went to Hunter College [New York, New York]; he didn't wanna go away.  So I was the first girl to say look I wanted to go away so I could be more independent and I wanted to go to a good liberal arts school.  So I ended up going up to Colgate and spending a few days and just loving it and I knew it was the place for me.
Speaker 1: So this is what you, you graduated from high school in what, what year?
Speaker 2: In '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], okay.  So then you started in the fall of sev- '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Fall of '73 [1973].  And I was the third class of women at Colgate, which was, which was a pretty big deal.  They were just putting lights on campus at night (laughter) and I was normally the only girl in my classes.  So when I would go to class, I'm in a classroom with white guys.  If there was one other black guy that was a lot, it was mostly white guys.  And so those were my classmates.  So and I think it was invaluable experience for me because they became my buddies.  And I began to think the way they think and you know, it's always weird when you're a girl and you're, they don't really pay attention to a girl 'cause you're a girl (laughter).  But I, I, I really built some valuable relationships with them and I think that really helped me when I got into the business world.  Colgate helped because it's a fabulous school and I developed critical thinking skills.
Speaker 1: Now, now where is Colgate?
Speaker 2: It's Upstate New York.  It's in Hamilton, New York which is a college town.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause it's Hamilton College--
Speaker 2: Hamilton College is about twenty minutes or so away.  And that's in Clinton, New York (laughter).  So, but I, I had a fabulous education there.
Speaker 1: Colgate is an Ivy League school, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh [sic.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So when I went into the workforce I know that a lot of young African Americans had difficultly sometimes just trying to assimilate.  I never--I didn't have a problem because I, you know, of, of what I had been exposed to at Colgate and when I--when I went into the workforce it was more to learn my craft than to deal with the, the politics.
Speaker 1: Now that's unusual, 'cause usually you find (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean there were politics there, but I was able to handle the politics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was your social life like at Colgate, you know, you--there weren't very many women there and?
Speaker 2: There weren't many women and it was--out of twenty-seven hundred students I think there might have been 100 minorities including Asians.  So it--there, there was a small group of African Americans, maybe forty, fifty tops.
Story_ID: 638729
Speaker 1: Did they have a black student organization?
Speaker 2: We had a black student organization and we had a building.  We did, we protested and we marched on the quad and we got our building, and then you know, we had a lot of firsts.  Like we got black professor- a black professor, we had visiting professors.
Speaker 1: Who's your first--do you remember who the first professor was?
Speaker 2: I think it was Professor Henry [ph.], and he came from another school and he was a visiting professor initially, and then he became a full professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got--we got Jane Pinchin, first female professor at Colgate.  So--and she is still there today.  So there was just--between the women's movement that was happening at the same--close enough and they had the black movement (laughter), we, we did a lot of marching and it did a lot of good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're proud of wha- what you all did?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  It's really changed.
Speaker 2: And today Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] is about 53 percent female.  So it really has come a long way and I was on the board of trustees there and was instrumental in hiring the first female president, and this was back maybe ten years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So were there--who are some of the professors or--at, at Colgate that, that really standout in your mind?
Speaker 2: You have Jerry Balmuth, economics professor.  You had--well Jane Pinchin, she did sociology, English.  They stood out.  You had Peter Mastrocola [sic. William E. Mastrocola], he did math.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's more then what you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are any, any students that went on to do something or, or did something significant (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot--a lot of the students have gone on.  It's funny, they're, they're either running private equity firms (laughter) or they're doctors, lawyers, and you know, some are in government, you know.  So, again I think it's because of how you're educated and, and, and you're taught to turn things upside down and have no boundaries in probing things and learning.  I, I think that helps you to then--when you go on to the next part of your, your career to kind of make decisions that are out of the box.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look ba- back on it, are you glad you went to Colgate instead of some other?
Speaker 2: I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And wha- what was your major in?
Speaker 2: I had sociology and math.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how--when you look back on it how did sociology help, you know, you--or has had an--what influence has it had on your--
Speaker 2: I think it's been phenomenal because you use your creative side and then you use your analytical side (laughter) with the math, and in investments you need both.  I call it whole brain investing where when you're looking at, do you put money in this company, you have to say, do you back this management team, what are the dynamics, how do they get along, can they execute the vision, who has the vision, can it be, is it executable.  It's real important when you're looking at a company and you're putting money in the company that, that management team can execute, otherwise you're gonna lose your money.  They can have a good idea but if they can't pull it off and there's some psychological or other problem in how they interact so that they're not coordinated and they're not focused on whatever your--you think they should be focused on, it's a problem and you'll never, you'll lose your--you will lose your money.  And so that really helped me with some of the softer people skills, management skills types of things.  And then the math is just the pure analytics: are the returns good, do they have the proper margins, can the revenue grow, can their earnings grow, can you make money (laughter), what is the return on your investment.  You kind of need both.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the math skills help, help you give a--
Speaker 2: The analytics.
Speaker 1: A logical analysis of--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes. And then you got the people stuff which is funky.  So I think that's how it all came together for me, in addition to developing the critical thinking skills.
Story_ID: 638730
Speaker 1: Okay so you learned a lot of that at Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now it's interesting because I then went on and got my M.B.A. from the University of Hartford [West Hartford, Connecticut].  While at the University of Hartford, I learned about financial concepts.  So I took the analytics and the social skills, I start working in the workforce and I started doing that--
Speaker 1: You started working first before you went to grad school, right (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  I was doing actuarial evaluations at Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] at the time.
Speaker 1: This is 19--you finished Colgate in three years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like three and half, but I waited to graduate with my class in '77 [1977].  I actually got out in the summer of '76 [1976], but they only have one graduation.  I didn't wanna graduate with the class of '76 [1976], and they graduated in May.  I finished in August, so I waited until May of '77 [1977] to graduate with my class.  And then after that I worked briefly in New York [New York] at New York Life [New York Life Insurance Company] as a math analyst.  I was there for a little over a year and then I went to Connecticut Mutual [Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company] as a management trainee and I was there for about a year and a half before I ended up at Aetna.  And at Aetna, I worked in the pension department doing actuarial evaluations, meaning I was working with actuaries looking at morbidity tables, mortality ta- tables, making certain interest rate assumptions, and working with them on pension plans.  And while I was there in the actuarial department of Aetna, they had a job opening for an investment professional.  They typically recruit from the business schools, but because this was January, it was like the fall, they decided to do it internally to see if there were any candidates at the company and I applied with about a hundred other people (laughter) for this job.  And it's interesting because the pension department was down the hall from the investment department.  So whenever I would go on the elevator to go down to the cafeteria I'd be on the elevator with these, these guys, mostly white guys in dark suits.  They look like bankers, they were always talking about Wall Street, investing money, the economy.  So I would listen to what they were talking about, I knew they were in the investment department and I knew that it would be an exciting place to work.  So when they had that position open up I applied.  I made it through the round of interviews and ended up being hired as an analyst trainee in the investment department.  I was the first black female hired in that--in that department.
Speaker 1: Well wha- what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was 1980.
Story_ID: 638731
Speaker 1: And things were tough because, you know, it was a pool of analysts and it was extremely competitive.  And I knew ho- I knew how to compete but it was real- it was really competitive and they just throw you in.  And I remember I would get to work at two in the morning just studying and learning about investments and I was too proud to say to the people that I worked with show me how to do something.  So I made friends on Wall Street (laughter) and I would ask them, how do you do this and learn that way so that when I go into them I at least had some knowledge of what the heck I was doing.  And I would work until, you know, eleven, twelve at night, just learning my, my craft.  I started out investing in electric utilities, natural gas pipeline, distribution companies and then telephone companies.  And there's a whole art to that, and a lot of the electric utilities were building nuclear power plants.  So I had to learn who- learn about investments and then learn different specialties: telephones, electric utilities, natural gas pipelines, natural gas distribution companies.  They all had their own language and you had to know that for you to say does this make sense as a good investment.  And at Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] they would say, "Here Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Smith Iloani] this is a $30 million investment you need to work on this."  I need to do the analysis to make sure that it was a good investment and then I had to stand in front of a group and present the investment with them ripping it apart, and I had to defend the investment.  So that's where you end up.  Initially as an analyst trainee, my boss would be with me, but then as an analyst I was doing it on my own.  (Laughter) So it was just a lot, it was--and, and I was--I always had to have every answer before I walked in there, which meant I did a lot of prep and what I didn't know I got to know by the time I was walking into that room.  So it was a lot of fun. It was a lot of peeling the onion, ripping it apart, putting it back together again and then anticipating every question that someone could have.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So it was just intense.
Story_ID: 638732
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you left off, you wanna pick up from there?
Speaker 2: I think I was talking about--oh you're ready (laughter) okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're rolling, yeah.
Speaker 2: So I worked doing analysis in the utility group for about three years and then I wanted to learn a different sector.  So I requested to be moved into the banking group where I would be investing in banks, insurance companies.  I was doing solvent risk analysis, basically looking at different countries and investing in, in, in these countries.  And I did that for about three years.  And then I moved over to run the media group.  I became a managing director and I was investing in radio, TV, cable companies, any kind of entertainment companies on behalf of Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut].  And I made a very good investment in BET [Black Entertainment Television] at the time.  We were their first institutional investor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is--this is what 19?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988], '89 [1989].  I invested in BET in '88 [1988] and invested fifteen million [dollars] of Aetna's money--I think it was ten million of Aetna's money in BET, and ended up owning a part of BET--so Aetna owned a part of BET.  And then two years later, the company went public.
Speaker 1: Now how did BET, for instance, convince you to invest in them?
Speaker 2: What happened was, I was at a cable show in Dallas [Texas] and I met Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson].  He was checking into the hotel, we were staying at the ho- the same hotel and we started to talk.  And he said that he had been to every bank and every venture firm and private equity firm in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Virginia, and Maryland markets trying to get this money.  He needed the money to purchase a satellite--a transponder which is on a satellite and--which would transmit signals through cable headends and ultimately through either fiber optic or coaxial cable down the street into your home so when you turn on your TV you'd get a picture, you'd get the BET show.  And the transponder that he had had reached the end of its useful life and he wondered whether or not I would consider such of a transaction.  I said I don't know what a transponder is, I don't understand the risk involved in launching a satellite.  What happens if you launch it and it goes off course, it's a lot of money.
Story_ID: 638733
Speaker 1: Just put it in perspective, when he [Robert L. Johnson] launched BET [Black Entertainment Television] what, in the late '70s [1970s] when cable started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The late '70s [1970s] when cable was in its infancy.
Speaker 1: About '77 [1977], '78 [1978] I guess, or--maybe even a little earlier, I don't know?
Speaker 2: And th- he was on initially for two, three hours a day, then he went to six hours a day.
Speaker 1: This is when they had Donnie [Donnie Simpson]--what'd they call like 'Video Soul,' with Donnie, I can't remember his last name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Video Soul.'  But he had the pretty eyes and he had [HistoryMaker] Bev Smith, on her little talk show (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bev Smith, right, right.
Speaker 2: But when they would come on, they were not on twenty-four hours, it was only a few hours a day.  And I ended up looking at the deal and it was attractive to me, once I understood the satellite risk and how to mitigate that risk.  What was nice about it is that it was a low-cost operation, it was all these music videos, didn't cost that much, you know, whoever made them would give it to them to play it on air.  So the challenge was, and the nice thing about it was that he had negotiated increases with the cable company of one cent per year.  So like if you have a cab- cable bill and at the time this is '88 [1988].  Let's say you pay forty dollars a month for cable.  One penny would go to BET per month and that's how they made their money.  Well when he came to me, he had negotiated an increase from one cent to five cents over a five-year period.  So each year it would go up by a penny.  And then when I compared it to MTV, MTV was getting seventeen cents per month, but that was a twenty-four hour network.  And so I knew that there was a lot of upside to go from five to seventeen.  I knew that advertisers, Colgate-Palmolive [Colgate-Palmolive Company] and whoev- you know, the airlines would love to try to tap into that demo.  He tended to pull African Americans and then, and then you- youth--the teens, black, white, yellow, green, they watched that show, the, the videos.  And so that was all the appeal to me.  So I could see the advertising dollars flowing in as they try to target those demos.  So I took about three months and did the analysis, and then recommended that Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc.] put the money in and, and they did.
Speaker 1: I think '88 [1988] and '89 [1989] was about the time that the hip hop was--
Speaker 2: Was starting to blow up.
Speaker 1: Starting to blow up and a, a lot of other people you're talking about started to watch--other youth started watching it.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  So he had crossover appeal, which the advertisers love because they had MTV, now they have BET.  VH1 might have been in its infancy at the time, but BET was more established.  And you had two niches, African Americans and he had crossover youth.  So tho- these are some of the reasons why it made sense and then you look at the management team and you look at where they're headed and how they can grow the business, and he had those negotiated rate increases.  So these were all of the reasons that I considered in deciding that this is something that we should do and we did.
Speaker 1: Well I'm glad I walked you through that--now that's a classic example and it's important to black people.  So, now he--they eventually sold--
Speaker 2: He eventually, I think it was like 2001, 2002, eventually sold BET to Viacom [Viacom Inc.] and they paid him like a little over $2 billion (laughter).  That's wonderful.  And then he went--and he started a whole other set of companies in the private equity space.  And he does some other investing.
Story_ID: 638734
Speaker 1: Can you give us a financial analyst, I guess analysis, I guess, of, of that transaction, 'cause it's still one that makes the black community a little sore on some level.  They, they feel like yeah well you know, we made BET [Black Entertainment Television] big, it was ours and now it's sold.
Speaker 2: Sold out.
Speaker 1: Is this--sh- should we think that way or how, how does a financial person think about it?
Speaker 2: Well I think there's a sense of ownership because he [Robert L. Johnson] was the first.  But you know, when you think of most of the products that you use it's not--it's not really black owned, really and it's, it's--most of these companies issue stock in their ho- and the stock is held by a variety--a range of people.  So wh- what was happening at the time, you know, he wanted to pursue other interests.  Media was continuing to consolidate, that's why you see NBC owning all of these labels and brands.  And, and, and so it, it was only logical for that to occur.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you know, just as you said a lot of--I don't think people, for the most part, are cognizant of public ownership of, of thi- of ow- you know, black people felt well it's always said we don't own anything and then when we get something--
Speaker 2: They didn't own BET (laughter).
Speaker 1: We really didn't own it.  Yeah, that--that's the point we really didn't own it anyways.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean they were proud of BET. I certainly was proud, I watched it.
Speaker 1: It was started by a black man and we supported it, do, do we--
Speaker 2: But I support NBC, I support CBS, so you know.
Speaker 1: But you can't own it anymore then you can own, you know--
Speaker 2: Shares.
Speaker 1: As, as--it's like saying white people own CBS, but it's not necessarily true.  I mean it is, but it's not nec- or at the same time?  Right, okay.  I mean it's just complicated.  But people do still--
Speaker 2: They say that and they say that with the black hair care companies, you know, when Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] and all these companies start--started buying them out, Soft Sheen [Soft Sheen Products, Inc.] out of Chicago [Illinois] included, but it's just consolidation going on in the industry and they have to do that to survive.
Speaker 1: But do you really have ethnic ownership at all when a corporation gets so large, is there such a--I mean?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  And you also have to think about transitioning wealth for the owners.  And although they may love the market that they serve, they have things that they have to consider that would promote them to wanna do this type of thing.  And on the cosmetic side and the, the hair--and the black hair care side, it's just really cutthroat out there.  And it was--I think it was inevitable.
Speaker 1: There's concern now on a smaller level about the funeral parlor and I know people are (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that's still so fragmented that it--it'll be a while.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's no real big consolidated funeral parlor yet then.
Speaker 2: And people are so funny about burying their loved ones and they're very specific about which funeral home they wanna use.  So I don't think that that would work as well in that very personable kind of business.
Speaker 1: I know there are a couple of chains that are trying to get the black market on--
Speaker 2: But they've been trying for a long time.  And people won't sell to them or there's a falloff in, in the people who use them.  Then you have cremations and what that's doing to all of that.  And then I've seen caskets on TV (laughter), you could buy it off TV.  So the whole thing is changing, but I don't know.
Story_ID: 638735
Speaker 1: All right, so before we leave the '80s [1980s] I wanna go back to--now you, you got married in the '80s [1980s] too right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: So how did you meet your husband [Alex Iloani] and what happened?
Speaker 2: We met because we both were working on our M.B.A.'s at University of Hartford [West Hartford, Connecticut], we're actually classmates but we didn't start dating until after we graduated (laughter).  And then we got married in '84 [1984].  We dated for maybe two years and then got married in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. Now you all, you all didn't have any children?
Speaker 2: We had no children and the marriage didn't work out.  And I think it didn't work out because he's Nigerian, I'm not.  And believe it or not, although we, we went to school together, he had certain expectations of a wife and he could not have married the worst person.  Because here I am making, you know, billion dollar decisions and, and, and running a group [for Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut].  At the time we got married, I was a managing director.  I had pe- managing directors reporting into me.  So I would go to work, making decisions, investing money and then I have to come home to be a traditional wife.  It was just a problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah now I've heard now that--
Speaker 2: He's a great guy, but it was just a problem.  I was young, he was young.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: True.  Core- correct me if I'm wrong, a lot of the financial business among--and he's a Igbo--he was Igbo--
Speaker 2: Igbo, yeah.
Speaker 1: --is, is split up in terms of gender.  The men, you know, at parties and gatherings would discuss business in one room and the women are in another room completely, you know, and, and a lot, a lot of transactions take place in social situations amongst them.  And so--
Speaker 2: And so that was just a major problem.  It was, you know, he, he--it didn't help that I had the kind of job that I had.  It just made it real hard.  And so we finally decided it wasn't working and then we got divorced in '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was wondering if he was a part of the--I know there were quite a few Nigerians who were involved in the oil boom in those days and were really, you know, we, we had several millionaires in Chicago [Illinois] and they were--was he, was he a part of that group?
Speaker 2: No he was not a part of that.  Those were mostly Nigerians from the north and he was more southeast.  And they're very restrictive in who has what (laughter).  So he's from businesspeople, but not oil.  So his father had Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] dealership, things like that.  So they were business people that they fought in the Biafran War when they tried to create a separate state--or country for the Igbos.  But the oil is from the people in the north, they, you know, they rule with that.
Story_ID: 638736
Speaker 1: Did you go to Nigeria?
Speaker 2: I did. I've been many times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's a fabulous wonderful place, if you have money (laughter).  And I would not wanna go if I didn't have money (laughter) 'cause it didn't look like fun.  But I had a wonderful time and my cousin also married a Nigerian.  So we--you know, I went down there quite often.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you thought that you could handle this situation before you got married, but--
Speaker 2: You know, I thought I could handle the situation, but I never real--I knew that I'm, I'm the kind of guy--I'm the kind of girl that likes the guy to lead, okay.  But, but I ain't gonna let you do nothing stupid, okay (laughter). I'm gonna stop you.  And whenever I tried to, to jump in that way it was just a major problem and I'm like, no, no this is not gonna work.  So that's really where we kind of broke down.  Now if I would've just let him [Smith Iloani's ex-husband, Alex Iloani] lead, which is what I wanted him to do, but he claims that he would--he--that he always wanted my input and at--and there were certain things why--I mean it was just stupid stuff like--and it always dealt with money.  It was like--I remember our very first Christmas.  We go to buy a Christmas tree.  We had the biggest fight in the store over the decorations, because he wanted multicolor and I only wanted one color.  So then I compromised with three colors and it wasn't enough.  He wanted multicolor and that--and this is our first--this is our first Christmas (laughter).  I said there's a problem here with how we make decisions.  So we talk about it and it always reinvented itself whenever a decision was to be made.  We bought a house.  I think we'd been married maybe a year and a half, we bought our first house.  I was terrified to buy the chandelier for the dining room, because he wanted to have input, because it was a lot of money for the chandelier and I didn't want him to have input.  So we never bought a ch- I never bought the chandelier until after we got divorced, I went and bought the chandelier.  But it was--I was young, he was young, and you know, it's not inconceivable that I'm going to work shooting out orders to people that I would come home and that would--that attitude would continue.  I confess maybe it did continue a little and that got in the way.  And then with his traditional upbringing and me being a modern type of female that is not a secretary that's not gonna sit there and just do whatever you have to say, I wanna have input, it--we just clashed.  And, and, and then because of how he was brought up he didn't believe in going to counseling.  I think when we talk--we have friends that are judges that are ma- that were married at the time that were really good friends and they're like, "Well you guys just going through usual stuff that married people go through.  You gotta figure out the boundaries and stuff like that.  You need to go for counseling," but he wouldn't go.  So we just--but we do talk.  He is my oldest son's godfather, so.
Speaker 1: So he's still in your--?
Speaker 2: He's still--he's still in.  I mean I see--he lives in Maine now but I do see him from time to time and he comes and he visits his godson [Smith Iloani's nephew, Corey Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's--it was an amicable relationship (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. And I kept his last name because it's a fun last name, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there--you know how he feels about his last name being a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't mind, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638737
Speaker 1: This is a successful business though, I mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in--. Okay.  So we have you in the late ei- '80s [1980s] here--oh, no, no, no--well yeah, yeah--so you're approaching the founding of your--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So what happened was, I, I had done very well at Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut].  I had essentially been promoted every year I was there.  And you know, I was a senior member of the organization.  I had a reputation for doing difficult deals and I was well known on Wall Street.  And in 1993, the entrepreneurial bug bit me and I decided what could be better than working at Aetna, well to work for yourself.  And after all I had invested $4 billion of Aetna's money and I made them an indecent amount of money on that 4 billion.  And I thought maybe, just maybe corporations would hire me to invest their money.  So in 1993 I had gotten--I, I approached the third in command at Aetna to see if they would consider partnering with me with--in this venture of forming this firm and Aetna agreed to do that.  And then we were formed in May of 1994.  And we will celebrate sixteen years in business on May 23rd of this year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now there's some good stories here about how the name Smith Whiley [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut] was chosen.  I mean it's a good story--I mean you went through several different versions, I think it was first version was supposed to be Onyx, yeah--
Speaker 2: Onyx Investment Benefit [ph.].
Speaker 1: Well, well wha- what happened with that one?
Speaker 2: Well what happened was, Aetna owned one third of the firm and I owned two thirds of the firm.  And we were doing all the paperwork and getting it organized.  So I had--I negotiated to have access to everything that I had access to when I worked at Aetna, like the private helicopter to take me to New York [New York], 'cause I would say, "You don't want me to get on Metro North [Metro North Railroad] and spend three hours going to a meeting in New York when I can get there in a half hour just jumping on the Aetna helicopter."  So they said, "If we were not using it Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Smith Iloani], you could--you could use it or you can get a seat on the helicopter and your people can get a seat on the helicopter and you can bring people from New York to visit you on the helicopter, so long as you didn't displace an Aetna employee who was lined up to use it."  So I neog- I thought of everything and--including their PR [public relations] people.  So we had come up with our logo for Onyx.  We had started buying onyx jewelry (laughter) and all those silly things.  And maybe it was a week or so before we were formed, officially formed, all the papers signed and everything that The Wall Street Journal, they said the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] had indicted the president and the chairman of a company called Onyx Financial Group.  The chairman of Aetna calls me up, "Gwen did you see The Wall Street Journal?"  I'm like, "Yeah, it's Onyx Financial Group. We're Onyx Investment Management [ph.]."  He says, "Gwen it's too close."  He said, "People gonna get it confused.  You're a new company starting out, it would be--it would not be good if people think you were them.  You'd have to spend the time explaining you're not."  I said okay, so I met with the PR people and I changed the spelling of onyx to not O-N-Y-X, but A-W-N-I-C, you know something, yeah.  And they kept saying well it's still, it doesn't work.  And so then--
Story_ID: 638738
Speaker 1: We needed a name, we didn't have a name.  And they're like, "Where, where did you grow up?"  And I said, "I grew up--I, I was born in Jamaica."  "Well what about Jamaica Investment Management?"  I'm like, "Are you kidding, nobody will take me seriously if I name it Jamaica Investment Management.  People thinking they're going on vacation, having a good time, they're not gonna give me money."  So we looked at Maroon, we looked at everything trying to come up with a name.  This is me and the pe- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maroon is a (unclear)--
Speaker 1: My brother, Ivan [Ivanhoe Smith], who you met, the PR [public relations] people.  And then I remember I went home and I was telling my mom [Doreen Johnson Smith]--my brother goes, "Well just call it Smith Whiley.  That's what all the firms on Wall Street doing."  I'm like, "No I'm not gonna do that."  I wanted a name that was gonna encompass everybody and not be a family name.  And I went jogging with my girlfriend and then when I came back one of my, my neighbors he wa- he was outside and I went to him and I said, "What do you think about Brownstone Investment Management?"  He said he thought that was nice, this is an older gentleman, white--older white gentleman.  So I figured what the heck let me just ask him.  I said, "Well what do you think about Smith Whiley and Company [Hartford, Connecticut]?" He said, "That's the name."  (Laughter) So that's how we ended up with Smith Whiley and Company.  And Smith is my father's name [Woodrow Smith] and Whiley [ph.] is my grandfather's name.  And I have a young--a younger brother his name is Whiley Arthur Smith [Arthur Smith].  So he tells everybody I named the company after him.  But that's how we ended up with the name.
Speaker 2: It has a ring similar to Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].
Speaker 1: It sounds like Smith Barney and my neighbor says, "Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn Smith Iloani] it sounds like a firm that has been in business over a hundred years. It's run by a bunch of white guys."  I said, "Okay that's the name."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You see old white guys, dark suits on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A successful strong firm.
Speaker 2: --the same guys you used to see, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So that's how I ended up with the name.  And Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] liked it when I came back.  I said this is the name.  They said good, they like it, so.
Speaker 2: Well that's a good story.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a good story.
Story_ID: 638739
Speaker 1: So you started up in 1994?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 1: With that name [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut].  I guess it wasn't difficult to change the name after all the papers?
Speaker 2: No, because we had- we hadn't filed the papers, so they just literally went in and did a name search and changed it.
Speaker 1: Okay now, you have to tell us in detail for the simple minded, you know, or for the general public like what you do?
Speaker 2: Okay, we basically make private equity and mezzanine debt investments in companies.  These are companies with revenue up to about 250, 300 million [dollars].  And what that means is, when a company needs money, they go and they get money from equity investors which are at the very bottom level in a corporation.  As an equity investor you put your money in and you have all the upside and you also have all the downside because you could be wiped out if the company goes bankrupt.  On top of the equity investor you have the mezzanine investor, which is like subordinated debt and it's not as low down as the equity because the equity is still below them, but on top of the mezzanine investor you have bank debt, and bank debt is the most secure debt.  They want your first born, your second born, your third born (laughter).  They like to have lots of security and they like looking down and seeing the mezzanine or subordinated player below them and then the equity below them.  It makes them feel comfortable that there's enough cushion if the company gets into trouble.  We invest at the equity level and at the mezzanine level.  Both are high risk areas.  Equity has more upside then mez, but mez has more upside then the bank which is at the top.  We tend not to have security and so we really need to make sure that the value proposition that a company presents is good, it's achievable, it's realistic and that if they're, they're selling product we do a lot of analysis on the competition, on the pricing strategy, on consumer appetite or whoever you're selling your product to.  I mean we look at every aspect from operations to compliance, every aspect of running that company we rip it apart, put back together again to make sure that the right people are leading the company and doing the execution to grow that company because we're coming in either as the equity or the mez.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what you do is riskier, you've got to be a keener analyst in what, what to invest in (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And it's a lot of fun.  We invest in six sectors.  So we invest in food and beverage because Americans love to eat and drink.  We don't do spirits, but we do waters, which is phenomenal; different types of water, vitamin waters, all type of water, is always interesting.  We do--in the food space--we do generics.  In a recession, people go--skew towards generics, like your grocery store Publix [Publix Super Markets, Inc.] or Stop and Shop [Stop and Shop Supermarket Company LLC], whatever their brands are.  People tend to buy that versus paying more for the other brands.  We do restaurants.  We do companies that manufacture power bars or other ingredients.  So anything to do with food, whether it's packaging, and then beverage, but not spirits.  So that's one category.  Another category is healthcare, I don't need to say anything else, but within healthcare we don't do hospitals, but we'll do pharma [pharmaceutical] companies, we--we'll do imaging companies and anything at all to do with healthcare.  We do--we invest in telecommunications and, and media, and technology.  We invest in industrial companies and these are companies that make products and sell them to other companies and there's a huge number of them in the Midwest.  And we invest--
Speaker 1: Products is what kind of thing would you, you--
Speaker 2: For example, we invested in a chemical company in Upstate New York and they make a moisture scavenger that is put in sealants and paints to prolong the life.  Well they're not gonna sell that directly to the consumer, but they'll sell it to whoever makes paint for Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc.] or Lowe's [Lowe's Companies, Inc.] or whoever.
Speaker 1: Like Thompson's WaterSeal or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.  It prolongs the life of that product.  The consumer would then buy it from whomever.  So they make products that they sell to other, other companies.
Story_ID: 638740
Speaker 1: And it--it's very, very exciting.  No--some sectors go in and out of favor like technology.  Oh when you had the meltdown of 2002 it was just bad, bad, bad, and we lost some money there.  And then you have other, other sectors--like we target the consumer.  We have a consumer goods specialty and any product that the consumer buys we would look at that, including specialty retail to just other products that they buy.  And the, the consumer is very finicky, so in this recession they have not helped out as much as they have done in previous recessions.  But there's still value there.  So it's just a lot of fun.  And we have an office in Hartford [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut] and then we also have another office, a Midwest office in Evanston, Illinois.
Speaker 2: So for, for companies that need money you all are able to, what I've been told, you all are able to deliver faster and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Well if we're gonna do the deal, we're gonna say we'll do the deal, and if we don't like the deal because it's deficient or there isn't a fit with where we think we need to be from our, our return perspective or whatever, we'll tell you that quickly too.
Speaker 2: Okay, whereas a bank will take a while.
Speaker 1: They take a while and then they tel- and then they tell you no after you've been waiting four months.
Speaker 2: Right.  A lot more red tape and process.
Speaker 1: Yes, but it's a lot of fun.  I have a great team of people here that have wonderful specialties and we, we really know our stuff.  And so our clients are institutional investors, we don't deal with people because our minimum is five million [dollars].  As a person, you'd have to give me five million and not get upset if I lose it all.  'Cause what we do--remember equity at the bottom, and mez [mezzanine] above it.  It's high risk stuff.  And if you--if you only have five million I would never take the money because it's high risk and if I lose that money then you would not have anything.  So we tend to target companies that have a billion dollars and more, and those are the ones that we go after and we manage their money.  And you know, we manage over a hundred million like for Verizon [Verizon Communications, Inc.], which is huge.  We do state pension funds, we manage over a hundred for the State of Connecticut, and we have a number of other state pension funds.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they--it's worth it for those pension funds and these, these big pots of money to, to risk it--I mean to give it to you 'cause you're gonna--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they have--it's worth it for them because they need to diversify their investments.  They can't put it all in the stock market, they can't put it all in the bond market.  If they have a prudent asset allocation strategy, it says they need to have some in private equity, some in futures, some in dividends, some in whatever and they put some and diversify with the goal of having the best return possible from a diversified portfolio.  So when they consider that, we are a natural possibility when they're looking for private equity.
Story_ID: 638741
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now you--when you open, from what I understand, you, you hired Colette Nakhoul and Venita Fields, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we are the three female partners of the firm [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut].  And I think we're the only firm in the U.S. where you have three women running the firm.  And Colette I have known since I joined Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], because when I went for my interview I saw her, she worked there in the investment department, and I had--I went over there maybe a week before to do some snooping around and I told her I had an interview and so she was telling me what to be careful of and what to--she kind of gave me some pointers.  And who would know that fifteen years later she would join me, and she is a co-founder of the firm.  And then Venita, I had known her professionally for many years and she was at Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation] at the time and we talked about setting up the company, and as soon as we raised our first pool of money she joined the firm.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know, we--I know we've, we've talked to Sharon Morrow who is in Chicago [Illinois].  You got two offices, right, and one in Evanston [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and Sharon running marketing for the firm.  And you know, we have other great people in Chicago and we have wonderful people as well in Hartford [Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay, now you have, from what I understand, you're among the largest African American owned private equity firms in the country, right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Larry [Larry Crowe]?
Story_ID: 638742
Speaker 1: So this is the--from what I understand this is the fourth, largest, black owned, private equity firm with how many million under management now [at Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Well we currently have a little over three hundred million [dollars].  We've had up to six hundred.  And we're raising our next fund so that should be even higher.  We're gonna look to add--almost double that and add roughly three hundred million.
Speaker 1: Well to most of us these are staggering figures (laughter).
Speaker 2: I managed billions at Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], so I'm trying to get back.
Speaker 1: Right, right, that's, that's absolutely true.  It's--I mean the idea that--that people can, if you can manage billions you can certainly manage the, the millions that, you know.  Okay.  So we talked about the criteria you use--I mean the kind of judgment skills.  I mean what--has there ever been a time when you had to really go outside your knowledge base to research something that you just had never encountered?
Speaker 2: Well, when we encounter that--like we looked at a deal that had to do with air traffic control systems for the country, for this country.  They were upgrading the technology and they were looking at buying it from this particular company.  Well as a--someone who flies 60 percent of their time on--for business, I understand what they do.  I had no clue as was this--was their product the right product for our system.  So in those cases, we would then hire a consulting firm to come in, who has a specialty in air traffic control systems who can say this is the next generation of technology or don't touch that because somebody else has a different technology that will overrun this one, you know.  So whenever it's, it's a difficult area like that, that we're not experienced in, we would then rely on consultants to come in and give us the skinny on the technology or on the product and then we would still do the analysis and so forth and decide whether or not we, we invest.  And you can see that in particular on some of the technology deals, because it, it changes so quickly, you know, and becomes obsolete so quickly that you can't really afford to, to, to take losses if you pick the wrong technology.
Speaker 1: Okay so, this is, you know, when people say they're consultants and such, I mean that you actually pay consultants in certain fields and to come in and (unclear) (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To do certain things.  We don't--we don't hire them often, but we do in--in special situations.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there ever a time when you really just misjudged the whole, you know, the whole thing was misjudged?
Speaker 2: I think it's hard to misjudge because we have so many eyes looking at the opportunity.  But sometimes when you make an investment the company just doesn't grow as anticipated, for whatever reason.  And maybe their, their product is pricey, you're hit with a recession like we've been hit with one.  And so when that happens, we're all over it to, to--maybe they don't grow the way we thought they would grow, but there is some--either it's flat or they make cost cuts so that they can manage through the volatility until they can get back to where they need to be.  So we did face some of that in the late 2008, 2009.  Because it was the--it's been the worst economic recession since the '40s [1940s], you know.  And you know, there's just a lot of companies having difficulty.  But fortunately because of our proprietary techniques, our companies have weathered the storm and they're doing just fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you weren't hurt really at all, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean we were anxious like everybody else, but we were all over our companies so, they've, they've come out of it and we had one company with a lot of auto exposure.  But all the money was paid and then they paid us down so, you know, they're hanging in there.  And auto is now on the upswing, so.
Story_ID: 638743
Speaker 1: When you started, I know most people work long hours when they're starting a business so, te- tell us about some of the, you know, what kind of dedication you had to have when you start it?
Speaker 2: When, when you start a business you need to be comfortable taking risks, otherwise--I mean if you, if you decide you want to be an entrepreneur because you want to spend more time with your family, wrong answer, that's not gonna happen.  And so when I started the business [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut] that's all I focused on was building the business.  And, and, and also making the right choices of the people who are on the team.  'Cause you're a small firm and if somebody doesn't carry their weight, it really impacts the bottom line quickly, unlike being at a large institution like Aetna [Aetna Life and Casualty Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], where you can, you can, you can straddle for a few years and nobody would notice.  It doesn't happen that way at a small firm.  So, but there were, there were many, many, many long hours, but it wasn't anything I wasn't used to, used to doing.
Story_ID: 638744
Speaker 1: In 2000 and--well the year 2000, your younger sister [Jaleith Smith] passed and you inherited, basically the raising of her children [Corey Smith, Brandon Smith and Byron Smith]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my younger sister died from leukemia.  She had had a bone marrow and she did the radiation and all this stuff, and then after maybe seven months she just got sick with a really bad cold and then she died.  But prior to that, she, she asked me to raise her three sons.  She had twins that were seven months, and she had a four and a half year old.  And I'm like, "Oh my goodness, you need to live so you can raise your boys."  And she said, "But if I don't, I need to know that you would raise them."  And I said, "Okay I would raise them, but I need you to live because, you know, I'm raising Smith Whiley [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut], I--you know."  And but she didn't, she didn't make it and I ended up with the boys.  They had been living with me, so--and I think it was the, the greatest gift that she can give to me, because I thought I had a pretty good life, but there's nothing like having three lovely chil- children come in and suddenly at first I had issues with okay, how do I do my job and, and then do this.  But I have support from my mom [Doreen Johnson Smith] and then my sister [Princess Smith Sally], they were helping me.  And there's nothing like me being able to tell you that when I'm done I'm gonna write a book on potty training twins, you know, 'cause I know how to do it now, because I did it.  Or, or you know, getting them to--watching them take their first steps.  It's priceless.  And I think that whole round--helped to round me out and make me a better person on the job and off.  So she gave me the greatest gift of all.  Three lovely boys. I call them my cherubs (laughter).  Although they're much older now, they don't like those terms (laughter).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so the twins are ten I guess now?
Speaker 2: No, they're twelve, they'll be thirteen in the fall, and then the oldest he--he'll be seventeen in a few months.  He's 6'5" (laughter).  All the guys in my family are over 6'.  All my nephews are 6'3", 6'4", 6'5", he's 6'5", so.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  So you--one, one thing that we were discussing off camera is that the--you were discussing the, the maintenance of this business as a family institution and this is something that we don't have a lot of this in the African American community.  You know, we don't have things that we can inherit and pass down to our children, build from that.  In your family, you're providing this opportunity?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  In addition, one of the twins tells everybody he's gonna run Smith Whiley.  How proud am I to hear him say that.  Then the--the other twin says, "Oh I'm gonna run it," then the older one says, "Oh no I'm gonna run."  But he re- the youngest and he's the baby, he's really into stocks and bonds, and he understands--he has a good b- he is very analytical.  He's not extroverted like his twin, but he's very analytical and I think he, he--Smith Whiley would be in wonderful hands with him running it.  So I never had that opportunity to be twelve years old to say I'm gonna run this company and he does.  And even if he ends up not running the company, what I think it does is open his perspective to what he can do.  And that makes me proud, but I hope he, he ends up running it.  He might have to fight with my niece who is here, who thinks she's gonna run it.  And then we have other employees here and their kids, they wanna, you know, be involved in running it.  So it's a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 638745
Speaker 1: How many people do you employ here [Smith Whiley and Company, Hartford, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: We, we have fourteen people.
Speaker 1: This is here in Hartford [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Oh in Hartford we have seven, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then seven in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, either seven or eight, we have maybe eight in Hartford, and six in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now you as--you said before you are a member of a lot of organizations?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you- you're a board member of several significant organizations, can, can you tell us about some of those?
Speaker 2: Well I--I'm a board member of the University of Connecticut Foundation [University of Connecticut Foundation, Inc.] board of trustees.  UConn--go UConn.  I'm a board member of The Bushnell center for performing arts here in Hartford.  I'm a board member--well I'm trustee emeritus--emeritus of Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York], I was on that board for nine years.  I just came off the NAACP Special Contribution Fund board of directors.  I just came off the NAACP's Crisis magazine board.  I was on for like fourteen years, I may go back on, on The Crisis board.  And there's a whole host of other--Urban League organization [Urban League of Greater Hartford, Hartford, Connecticut] that--that I'm involved in.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know Crisis magazine really blossomed in the last fifteen years or so to become like a wonderful magazine, I mean to achieve some of the status it had back when Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] was the editor, way back then.  I mean people seek it now.
Speaker 2: They've really worked quite a bit on the editorial content and beefed up the writing, and then there's the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] section.  So, you know, I think that all is reflective of the hard work that the staff has done.  In addition, it is influenced a bit by who the president and the chairman is of the NAACP, as it relates to the NAACP news.
Story_ID: 638746
Speaker 1: What are your chief concerns on the boards of the colleges and are you--I mean do you, you--
Speaker 2: My chief concern is just kind of managing the total cost of the tuition and it's just really--it's really like the Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] tuition, it's like, you know, fifty thousand [dollars]. Who can afford that?  How was it financed, so, it's just kind of managing that and trying to keep it at a level that's really affordable for people.  At the UConn [University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut] lev- it takes twenty-five thousand to go to UConn. That's a lot of money.  And again it's, you know, between that, the academic content which is spectacular in both schools.  I mean they offer different things.  UConn is a huge university.  Colgate is a twenty-eight hundred student body university, they do solely liberal arts.  UConn has a blend of just about everything from medicine to liberal arts.  And to me, it's just making sure that they--both schools, continue to be uplifted and they get the right quality candidates in.  And when I say uplifted, to continue to edge up the SAT scores and they get the best candidates coming in.  But the main thing I think about is the cost of the tuition and, and how do we either do need blind scholarships to make it affordable or how do you make it affordable.  It's not a challenge that these schools face, but all schools are facing the same thing.  You have the Pell Grants, you have all these other things, but it's not gonna be enough to pay for someone to go to school, and that's not a good thing.
Speaker 1: Are, are--do you still--are you still sort of cognizant of some of the concerns you had as a student from--when you all made significant changes on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Colgate came out and they're, they're anti-Greek, (laughter) it's terrible.  But the trustees decided to go that way a few years ago.  Well I'm Greek and I'm an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and that was a tough decision.  But UConn is, is pro-Greek.
Speaker 1: What do you mean anti-Greek meaning they won't let (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They won't let any more sororities or fraternities be on campus.
Speaker 1: They had some bad experiences at Colgate?
Speaker 2: They had some bad experience with the drinking, with the fraternities for the most part.
Speaker 1: Hazing, and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hazing, which is a nationwide thing.  So they just came out and said, you know, students don't need to be in a fraternity or sorority and they've come up with a new approach to dorm living, where you can have houses of twelve people, you sharing a house together kind of thing and other things to, to do away with the Greek.  There is some Greek still, but they're not letting new Greeks come on.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So and oh--now you're member of Links [The Links, Incorporated] too, right?  And, and some other organizations in community?  Do you have a lot of meetings to go to during the week?
Speaker 2: I do, I do.  I was the treasurer of the Jack and Jill of Greater Hartford Chapter [Greater Hartford Chapter of Jack and Jill of America, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], that was a lot, a lot of meetings.  The Links, we have different fundraisers that we do throughout the year.  We have one coming up in two weeks and so you have more meetings the closer you get to the event and then it dies down.  So it comes and goes.  And of the other organizations, you--normally I think they're at least once a month and I can manage that, manage that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I blend that in with going to football and soccer games, and baseball games, and hanging out with the guys.
Speaker 1: Okay, your sons [Smith Iloani's nephews, Corey Smith, Brandon Smith and Byron Smith]?
Speaker 2: My three sons.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah and they're involved in sports?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So they're all big guys and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 638747
Speaker 1: Before we started the interview we were talking about some of your travels on the--you know, to--and some of the business trips you made to Africa and other places, can you tell us briefly about some of those?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had looked at opening up an office in South Africa back in the late '90s [1990s].  And at one point I was going to South Africa every other week and we ended up deciding not to do it, and just kind of--because there's just a lot of volatility with the currencies and so forth, and we were looking at raising about $500 million to invest in South Africa.  And this was after Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had come back from his African tou- trade mission, and they issued an RFP [request for proposal] looking for private equity managers that would invest in Sub-Saharan Africa.  So, you know, we had prepared a strategy and identified about twelve countries in Sub-Saharan Africa that we would invest in and so that was what that was all about.  And we made it to the final three, the top three to be considered.  But when, when in Poland there was just a lot of volatility that leaked over to, to the South African rand, I was looking at using the, the--a lot of these countries in Sub-Saharan Africa had frontier stock exchanges that I was looking at as a way once we make the investment, these companies would go public and then we, we, we make our money that way.  But with the volatility and the uncertainty, it just kind of spooked me a little and I kind of pulled away from doing that.
Speaker 1: Now we were talking about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But Africa is a passion and wi- will always be to figure out how do you get money there and make money.  'Cause part of putting the money there is to make money, and each country has different political and different nuances that you re- I had people from these countries that would be on the team.  There's no way I can stay here in the U.S., even if I traveled to Ghana, to know the ins and outs of investing in Ghana.  So I had people in Uganda, Ghana, Nigeria, South Africa, these were bankers that would've joined the firm to help to do the analysis on the local level.
Story_ID: 638748
Speaker 1: Now with all the volunteering you do, and I, I know you--and having been a sociology student, you're keenly interested in what's going on in the black community, what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think one is to figure out how we can put more national service into some of the nonprofit organizations that are there to help underprivileged people.  And I've sat on a number of local nonprofit boards and there's a brain drain of, of people with great ideas that are--it's sort of like a national service but targeting urban markets to help bring, bring that intellectual curiosity, as well as some of the processes that you need to help deal with some of the issues, rather than just looking for corporations to all of a sudden throw money at a problem.  You need a good plan and what I'm saying is that a lot of these organizations don't have enough talent to pull the plan together.  So they need people like me and, and others, whether you're recently out of college or whether you're a retiree to give back to the community in that way to help them get the plans together so they can then have an impact.  For example, if you look at what Floyd Flake [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Floyd Flake] has done in New York [New York], why can't that be done in Hartford [Connecticut]?  Well we're still waiting for it to happen.  We'll it's not being done because although the community groups want it, they don't have the talent in how to put some of these housing deals together to make it work.  And while the banks can, can get CRA [Community Reinvestment Act of 1977] credit for doing some of this, you still need somebody pushing it from the other side and taking ownership of it to, to make it happen and we just don't have that.  We know it can be done, because he did it in New York.  It's a phenomenal economic development model, it works.  He's hired people from the church [Greater Allen A.M.E. Cathedral of New York, Jamaica, New York] to do all sorts of things and you see the improvements in the neighborhood which improves people's psyche and so forth and so on.  You go through Hartford and even in parts of Chicago [Illinois] and you just see these black holes.  In Chicago, I know, there's a lot of economic development occurring, much like what happened in the Harlem [New York, New York] area.  We don't have any of that, really, in Hartford.  So I just think that the one thing that we can do, that's easy to do is to use the talents that we have, focus them on some of these nonprofits that need our help.  They're always struggling trying to get good board members, but nobody ever really steps up and that puts a burden on the ones that are there because you're just totally wiped out.
Story_ID: 638749
Speaker 1: Now you've been the--you've been named as one of the 50 Most Powerful Black Women in Business today.  You've received Woman of the Year award and lots of awards.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No.  I can't think of anything.  Everything that I did I learned from one way or the other, so I would not rewrite it.
Speaker 1: Okay, likewise if you look back on everything to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy is knowing that Smith Whiley and Company [Hartford, Connecticut] will be sixteen years old next month.  I'm very proud of that and we'll keep going, you know.  And can you imagine, sixteen years we've been doing this.  And then the other legacy are the boys, my three sons [Smith Iloani's nephews, Corey Smith, Brandon Smith and Byron Smith].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You're talking to someone who never thought she'd have kids (laughter).  And to have three personalities there, and they're smart boys, they're good looking too, is a wonderful thing.  And I see my future when I see them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One last question it's similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Sheesh. That's a hard one.  Well I'd like to be remembered as someone who was passionate about what she did and who had a great love and concern of people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 638750
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me, I was about three years old and it was taken when I was in Jamaica, West Indies.
Speaker 2: You're three years old in 1958, I think that's right?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: That is a recent picture of one of my girlfriends, Lynnette Ann Cardy [ph.]. Well I need to start left to right--that's a recent picture of me and one of my girlfriends.  I'm on the left and Lynnette Cardy is standing beside me.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me taken about ten years ago as a publicity shot.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my three cherubs [Iloani's nephews].  The twins, Brandon [Brandon Smith]--starting with Brandon on the left, Corey is in the middle and Byron [Byron Smith] is on the right.  The twins are about eight months old and Corey is about five years old and they had just come to live with me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my three sons and me taken when--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --taken when, when they were in third grade and that's the first day of school.  And Byron is on the left, followed by Corey, then me and then Brandon.
Speaker 1: My family was honored by the Anti-Defamation League for philanthropy and community service.  That is a picture of us on stage receiving the award.  Starting out with my mother Doreen Smith [Doreen Johnson Smith], me, and then you have Byron you can see his head and then the emcee, John Motley, and my s- oldest son Corey Smith.  This was taken about five, six years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is a photo of me taken about four years ago in our lobby at Smith Whiley.
Speaker 2: That is a photo of me, center, and my business partner Colette Nakhoul beside me and my son Corey is in the background and we were receiving an award.  And that was taken about five years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That is a photo of me in the lobby of Smith Whiley and Company [Hartford, Connecticut] taken about four years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is a photo of me on the left with my sister, Princess Smith Sally and at a fundraiser for the Anti-Defamation League, and that was taken maybe three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay next.
Speaker 2: That is a photo of me taken in 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay next.
Speaker 2: That is a photo of me taken in 1973 when I graduated from high school [Prospect Heights High School, Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a photo of me taken in 1973 when I graduated from high school.
Speaker 1: Mom and Dad [Woodrow Smith].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That is a photo of my parents, my mother is on the left and my dad.  They were attending my aunt's wedding and that was taken in probably 1956.
