Story_ID: 464787
Speaker 1: My name is Cheryl Butler. I'll be conducting the interview today, also joined by Matthew Hickey who is the videographer. I will have you say your full name and spell it please.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] James Ingram, J-A-M-E-S, I-N-G-R-A-M.
Speaker 1: Where were you born and where--when?
Speaker 2: Akron, Ohio, 1952.
Speaker 1: What is your profession?
Speaker 2: Well they say I'm a professional singer and a professional musician. That's what they say.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is September the 25th.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [2007].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And where are we holding this interview today?
Speaker 1: We are in Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 464788
Speaker 1: Few questions just to get your blood pumping a little bit. What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color would have to be green.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, fish.
Speaker 1: Any kind of fish?
Speaker 2: Well, basically salmon.
Speaker 1: What about a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year I think would be the holidays you know where the family has time to break away from their hectic schedules and get together.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Well actually yeah. We have a house that's two hours north of Los Angeles, California that every weekend that we can get away from our children we go and vacation even if it's for one day to two days so that's our favorite (laughter) vacation spot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Story_ID: 464789
Speaker 1: Want to find out a little bit about your family. Tell me your parents' names and when and where they were born.
Speaker 2: My father is--was named Henry Ingram [Henry Ingram, Sr.] when he was living. And he was from Macon, Georgia. And my mother was Alistine Wilson [Alistine Wilson Ingram] and she was born in Florida.
Speaker 1: Can you spell your mother's name please?
Speaker 2: A-L-I-S-T-I-N-E, W-I-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born?
Speaker 2: I don't re- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around?
Speaker 2: She died at the age of seventy-seven and that was four years ago, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Okay, let's stop so he shouldn't guess on that.
Speaker 1: There you go thinking.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Wait a minute--three--if this is 2007, his father passed away in 2004 and the mother passed away in 2003 'cause they were buried a year apart when they passed away.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Okay, so you got that now?
Speaker 2: That's a guesstimation but anyway, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what you know about your mom's background, her family life as a child.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know a lot about my mother's background because her mother drowned when she was at the age of three. So she never really knew her mother. And she never knew her father. But her mother's sister raised her, which we called Aunt Lucy [Ethel Levins] in Milton, Florida and Uncle Will [Will Levins].
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about what they did for a living?
Speaker 2: Don't have a clue. Don't have a clue 'cause all I know is I woke up (laughter) and they were married and my father was all--my father always worked and my mother was a stay at home mom.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your dad.
Speaker 2: My father for a lot of years I know he used to do a lot of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Tell me about your father. Where was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born in Macon, Georgia and he didn't really come up with his father [Nate Ingram] nor his mother [Alice McClain Bellamy]. But his grandparents [Georgeanne McClain Macklin and Henry Macklin] raised him and he was raised up on this huge farm in Macon, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Tobacco farm, cotton?
Speaker 1: You know I never asked.
Speaker 2: Did he tell you any stories about childhood on the farm?
Speaker 1: Yeah that's the--that he hated it. You knew, 'cause it was not a lot of children around and stuff like that you know.
Speaker 2: Did your parents come from big families? Your dad, did he have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 1: No. They were both single children.
Speaker 2: Did anyone in the family pass down stories about slavery at all?
Speaker 1: To me?
Speaker 2: From generation to generation?
Speaker 1: No, it's just my father passed down stories of slavery to me, not from the standpoint of our kinship, but just us as a people, we knew about slavery all the time.
Speaker 2: What did he say?
Speaker 1: In terms of Jim Crow laws, in terms of which he grew up in, in Georgia and stuff. He hated it. He hated it. But he was a man of God so he didn't have to cuss at it. But he hated it.
Story_ID: 464790
Speaker 1: He [Ingram's father, Henry Ingram, Sr.] was brought up in the church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was brought up in the church. Matter of fact, he was a deacon in the church. We had to go to church all the time.
Speaker 1: What church did you go to?
Speaker 2: Church of God in Christ, COGIC [Wooster Avenue Temple Church; St. Ashworth Temple Church of God in Christ, Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Where was this?
Speaker 2: In Akron, Ohio.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of a church service when you were a child?
Speaker 2: Well, really sitting in the church, I wasn't paying--as a little child I wasn't paying attention to nothing that the preacher was saying. I was paying attention to the music and the choir. They had it going on.
Speaker 1: What do you remember? What songs were they singing?
Speaker 2: I don't so much as remember the song but just the organ player and his feet moving and stuff and his--and the double keyboards, right. I was fascinated with that.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what the music sounded like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know the music sounded more like God than the preacher did (laughter) in terms of me understanding at that time what they were really talking about.
Speaker 1: What do you mean sounded like God?
Speaker 2: Well I mean in terms of if something was coming from heaven, something, it felt like it was heavenly music. As a child that was my description of it.
Speaker 1: And this was obviously gospel music?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the choir was really good?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had a good choir.
Speaker 1: A big choir?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were there any soloists?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah and they could blow too.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anyone in particular?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Ida Mae [Ida Mae Bradford], which was--she ended up marrying Brother Richard [Richard Arnold] who was the organist.
Speaker 1: And they were just a talented pair?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. We had some good singers but she was the best to me.
Story_ID: 464791
Speaker 1: What is the first song you learned as a boy?
Speaker 2: First song? (Singing) "Louie Louie, oh baby, we gotta go" ['Louie Louie'].
Speaker 1: Who taught you that song?
Speaker 2: The radio, hearing it at somebody else's house. We weren't allowed to play devil music in our house. We were brought up strict religion.
Speaker 1: What religion was it?
Speaker 2: COGIC, Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I didn't see a movie 'til I was eighteen years old. Hated it. Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so where would you hear music on the radio?
Speaker 2: At my friend's house next door.
Speaker 1: Who was this?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Who was the friend?
Speaker 2: Oh, Boo. His name was Boo. His real name was James Smith [ph.], we called him Boo.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about that experience of going to James' house and listening to music on the radio?
Speaker 2: Well, I started hearing rhythms and you know rhythm and blues and stuff. And it was like, oh. You know what I'm saying? And I remember my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] buying me guitar when I was about in the sixth grade and so I was playing, (imitates guitar) dah-dum, dah-dum, dah-dum, dah-dum. And he said, "Son, don't play that devil music. Don't ever play that devil music." I was so hurt I wanted to put that guitar in the corner. And so I was confused. And so what I did was I went to church [Wooster Avenue Temple Church; St. Ashworth Temple Church of God in Christ, Akron, Ohio] and asked Brother Richard [Richard Arnold] and 'til this day, matter of fact we were in Akron, Ohio and I went over to his house. I always keep--when we go back home I always thank him because he set me free, cause I asked Brother Richard, I said, "Brother Richard, what is devil music?" He said, "Well son, I don't know what devil music is," but he took me over to the organ with the two sets of keys and he say, "if you show me a devil note," and he smiled, he said, "I promise I'll never play it again." When he set that up--when he said that to me, I waited for my father to go to work and I went behind the garage and I said, (imitates guitar) dah-dum, dah-dum. So that freed my mind up from all those isms.
Speaker 1: What shifted for you?
Speaker 2: Brother Richard, as talented as he was and he was the minister of music for our church. For him to tell me if I could tell him the notes in which I knew my father couldn't tell him the devil notes that was on the organ, that cleared me up from any kind of guilty feelings of just playing a little bit of music.
Speaker 1: Did you hear music in your head during down time?
Speaker 2: Well the thing was, my older brother, Henry [Henry Ingram, Jr.], he was the minister of music for the State of Ohio in gospel music. So I mean he would always play the piano in our house but he would play and have all of us--you know it was six of us. It was four boys and it was two girls. And he would have us singing different parts and giving us different parts so he was working out his arrangements on us 'cause he was extremely talented.
Story_ID: 464792
Speaker 1: So tell me about your brothers and sisters then. Name your brothers and sisters. Were you--where did you fall in the line?
Speaker 2: I was the third one. My oldest brother was Henry [Henry Ingram, Jr.], then my older sister Joyce [Joyce Ingram], then myself, James [HistoryMaker James Ingram], and my younger sister Janice [Janice Ingram Shine]. And then I had a brother, David [Charles Ingram], and my baby brother, Phillip [Phillip Ingram], who was in a group called Switch.
Speaker 1: And so how old were you when you started playing with your brothers and sisters, music?
Speaker 2: I wasn't really playing. We were sitting around and being dictated to. My older brother said, "You sing this note and you sing this. Now let me hear you. No, no, no, this note."
Speaker 1: How much older than you was he?
Speaker 2: He was six years older than me. So if I was in the sixth grade he was in the twelfth.
Speaker 1: And so describe, give me an example, describe a day in your house and your brother's conducting so to speak. What would you sing as a family?
Speaker 2: To this day I can't remember exactly what the song was. But he would teach us the notes and tell us the words that we should sing. I don't even remember now because I've been inundated with so much music over time.
Speaker 1: Was it like The Jackson 5 type thing?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, we couldn't do that in the house. We couldn't do that in the house. But when my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] was gone, my brother would do his little, you know little stuff and (laughter) we loved it.
Speaker 1: So you would sing popular music in the house when your dad was gone?
Speaker 2: Right, as we got a little older, 'cause other than that we were in fear. He ruled with an (gesture) iron fist.
Story_ID: 464793
Speaker 1: Your father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] was pretty strict?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because he came up you know--and he didn't know his father [Nate Ingram]. He only had a sixth grade education. And so had it not been for the church, he would not have been the man that he became, but he was still strict.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What were some of the rules?
Speaker 2: Well it's just like--well one of the things that we hated right, is that my father since he worked on the farm, he would come home and he would holler. "James [HistoryMaker James Ingram], David [Charles Ingram], get up." And so we'd wake up out of our sleep of him hollering, right, because he couldn't imagine nobody sleeping when he had to work. And so he would invent stuff to do, for us to do. It wasn't like he had chores for us to do all the time right? He just couldn't stand you sleeping (laughter) and he was coming home from work or whatever, you know, or getting ready to go to work. And so he'd invent stuff that didn't even make no sense.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Just go out here and sweep something that wasn't you know, it didn't even look like it need to be sweeping, been swept. But he just--sweep. But I thank God for that today because I have good work ethics behind this. So there was a, you know, it was a method to the madness. I just couldn't see it as a child or a teenager or whatever. It was like, what? "We're so glad daddy gone. Mommy [Alistine Wilson Ingram], why daddy so mean?" When she broke down the story and told me about his past, I was about sixteen. I said, "Mommy, daddy ain't mean enough."
Speaker 1: What did she tell you?
Speaker 2: How he came up, that his father changed a quarter and gave him a nickel and he never saw him after that. And his mother [Alice McClain Bellamy] was so distraught because of his father, she left. And so he was raised up by his grandparents [Georgeanne McClain Macklin and Henry Macklin]. And they died at the age of about fifteen so he was basically on his own.
Speaker 1: And what was your mother like?
Speaker 2: My mother? She was like an angel. She was--always had a smile on her face. She was in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and she was always--if it wasn't for her, I mean you know we were scared of my father. We were afraid of him. But like I said when she actually told me his story I said, "Mommy, why did you marry daddy? He mean." She laughed and she told me his story. And it's like I felt sorry for him and I became his friend as well as his son. But my mother, she was like an angel, you know what I'm saying? She was just like an angel until we did something wrong (laughter).
Speaker 1: What did she do for a living? She was--she took care of the kids?
Speaker 2: Right. Right, my father didn't want her to work.
Story_ID: 464794
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory at home with your mom [Alistine Wilson Ingram] and your dad [Henry Ingram, Sr.] and brothers and sisters? Is there one memory that stands out?
Speaker 2: It was a gospel singer, Rosetta Tharpe [Sister Rosetta Tharpe] or something like that and we was listening to one of these little radios and listening to the music and they bobbing their heads. And at the dinner table my father would always sing some song that he couldn't sing to save his life. And we'd be like you know putting our hands in his ears--in our ears. He couldn't sing. But he would sing this sad song, some song at the dinner table. It was so horrible I even forgot what it was.
Story_ID: 464795
Speaker 1: Do you remember holidays around your house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the times we liked because we didn't have to go to school and everybody was home at the same time and so the--some of the stuff on the TV and the decorations at Christmastime. And it was just another kind of festive thing in the air. Even though Christmas was supposed to be about Jesus, Santa Claus got more play than Jesus. And even to this day, Santa's coming to town with his reindeers and everything right?
Speaker 1: Do you remember gift giving inside your house, any specific gifts?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember getting gifts that were, at the time I wish they had more money to get me a gift. You know what I mean? It was like some little stuff sometimes you know was menial stuff that we as kids are like, what is this? I would never say it.
Speaker 1: Like puzzles and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, some little old cheap something you know.
Story_ID: 464796
Speaker 1: Take me around your block, your neighborhood in Akron, Ohio. Describe some of the sights, smells, sounds.
Speaker 2: We lived on the east side in Akron, Ohio because Akron was the rubber capital, you know at the time for the United States before they moved the industry out. And we would wake up like in the wintertime and you would have black stuff on your stuff--steps in the snow, you know what I'm saying, from the factories. So I don't know what that has done to our health or what we're going to die from or whatever, but I'm ready.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And was this a predominantly black neighborhood? Was it mixed?
Speaker 2: It was predominantly black but we had white folks speckled through.
Story_ID: 464797
Speaker 1: Tell me about your education, elementary school. Where did you go to school and were you good at sports or were you good at reading?
Speaker 2: I--my first school was, elementary school was Robinson [Robinson Elementary School; Robinson Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] and hated it. I didn't like school. I was not like a brainiac like my brother. He was just smart, my oldest brother [Henry Ingram, Jr.]. And my junior high was a good year, junior high. And then I went to East High [East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio]. Now the thing was in terms of sports, I didn't know I was good at sports but my best friend was Frank Cook [ph.] and he had the record for--in the state for the 100-yard dash and the 200, right? So we used to go to night gym when we were like in our junior high years, right? And we would come home and we would you know be running this little bit but we would be throwing rocks at cars. And one day this dude stopped his car (makes sound), and got out and started chasing us, right? Now Frank holds the record in Akron, Ohio, I mean in Ohio right, State of Ohio. I smoked him for the first 50 yards 'cause I--it wasn't a race. I was more afraid of my daddy [Henry Ingram, Sr.] than I was the police. But when I did that he said, "Man, you got to come out for some track." I said, "Man, I ain't doing that. I'm--what, rehearsing after--practicing after school. I ain't doing that." To make a long story, because of him in the ninth grade, I went out for track and I started winning trophies and ribbons and stuff you know with the--and the quarter and the mile relay and the 800 [meter] relay. So what happened, but the time we get to high school I had a track scholarship to go to the same college that he had but I never went because my band at this time was in Akron, Ohio and that superseded everything.
Speaker 1: What was the school?
Speaker 2: East High.
Speaker 1: And the scholarship was to which college?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Somewhere in Ohio?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no. I don't even remember.
Story_ID: 464798
Speaker 1: Sounds like music was really the focus from the very beginning?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Track took you know sort of stuck for a while.
Speaker 2: My brother [James Ingram, Jr.], as we got older you know he started introducing us to The Beatles right, and songs. (Singing) "Yesterday, da-da-da-da seemed so far away" ['Yesterday'], you know all the beautiful melody stuff. Jimmy Smith, you know what I'm saying? And the jazz and stuff and you know a lot of the R and B records. So he would sneak them in the house and stuff when daddy [Henry Ingram, Sr.] wasn't around and he was the devil (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your brother was?
Speaker 2: No, in terms of bringing that devil music into the house, right?
Speaker 1: So tell me about some of the other songs you listened to as a child. So you listened to The Beatles, songs like 'Yesterday'?
Speaker 2: Oh Motown [Motown Records], Stax [Stax Records], the whole bit. But I brought up The Beatles because he was diversified, you know what I'm saying? It wasn't just R and B music it was--he opened us up to a whole genre of music.
Speaker 1: So The Beatles--did you have a favorite Beatles' song?
Speaker 2: 'Yesterday,' 'cause the melody and the stories.
Speaker 1: What appealed to you about the stories?
Speaker 2: That they were clear. You got it. You didn't have to think about it and say, what are they saying?
Speaker 1: Any other sort of cross over groups, white groups that appealed to you at that time?
Speaker 2: No, not at that time, no. No.
Speaker 1: What were some of the Motown groups that appealed to you?
Speaker 2: Oh all of them.
Speaker 1: Like--?
Speaker 2: The Temptations, everybody that was on--you know Stevie and them, all of them. Stevie like to me, to me Stevie in terms of voices, he's god. Everybody else is Jesus and the angels.
Speaker 1: So tell me about the Stevie Wonder songs that captivated you?
Speaker 2: Put it this way, my wife that I've been married to for thirty-three years, I met her when I was seven years old and she was five, right? So now that I'm in the twelfth grade and she's in the tenth grade, and I had to watch her walk across the stage because she was a four point honor roll student to make up for my lack of whatever there's supposed to be. So I had my band up there and I dedicate this song to her, (Singing) "My cherie amour, lovely as the summer day. My cherie amour, distant as the milky way" ['My Cherie Amour']. Don't cry.
Speaker 1: I'm not, you really make me want to cry.
Speaker 2: Well, because of the story?
Speaker 1: The story and the music. Did you have that effect on your at that time, I guess girlfriend, soon to be wife (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. She was not even my girlfriend. She was like my little sister and me and her brother was playing football and I was trying to teach her things that we were doing so she could avoid people like us. But she was my best friend though, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Debbie Robinson [Debbie Robinson Ingram]. (Singing) "Hey Mrs. Robinson" ['Mrs. Robinson'].
Story_ID: 464799
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the school performances over the years. That was one of them.
Speaker 2: That was it. That was it. It was some kind of assembly thing [at East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] and they allowed me to bring my whole band up there on stage. We brought a--had a big B-3 Organ [Hammond B-3 Organ] up there and the whole thing.
Speaker 1: So this is high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How were you received by the students?
Speaker 2: Oh they loved it, cause see this was what I was doing that my father didn't catch me until the eleventh grade. In the ninth grade cause see, Akron, Ohio is a small city so they didn't have a lot of musicians to pick from. I was playing in a band that was called Sharp and the G Clefs [ph.]. Everybody in the band was married and had kids. I'm in the ninth grade. So we were lying to my parents [Alistine Wilson Ingram and Henry Ingram, Sr.] talking about we were playing in YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] dances cause we would be playing in Youngstown [Ohio], Canton [Ohio], Cleveland [Ohio], all the surrounding areas, right? I was playing in nightclubs in the ninth grade so they had suits made or we brought suits and had the same suit. And they'd always put a hat on me in the certain place that they'd sit me because they didn't want the owner of the club to find out because they could lose their liquor license. So that was my little, dirty little secret.
Speaker 1: And would you play keyboard, sing?
Speaker 2: No, I would play keyboards. I was not a singer.
Speaker 1: When did you become a singer?
Speaker 2: That was--well I mean you know we had a group. After that group, later on we went on and developed this group called Revelation Funk and I was still a keyboard player but I would sing background with the group. And I was the leader of the group. But the thing was we came out to Los Angeles, California and after six months the band got discouraged and they said they were going back. And I said, "Well, y'all have a safe trip 'cause I came out here to get over." And so I called my girlfriend at this time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who--and this was--
Speaker 2: --who is my wife now.
Speaker 1: --Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram].
Speaker 2: And I said, "The band is coming back to Akron, Ohio. I'm not coming back." She said, "Well can I come out there?" I said, "Debbie, I'm hustling." She said, "I don't care. I got a good job here. I can get a good job there." I said, "Well come on." And see, let me make a point. All the girlfriends in the band was telling the guys, "When you gonna get you a real job?" Debbie, she was all--she has always supported me even to the point where we had a Volkswagen. She took the pink slip to the bank and got me a four track recorder and said look we can't afford for you to go in a studio but I want you to learn how to work this stuff 'cause you do it at home cause you're playing in the nightclubs you know on the weekends and stuff as a musician and stuff and she always backed me. That's another reason why we're together for over thirty-three years.
Speaker 1: It's beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean to have your woman to be, you know what I'm saying, be behind you.
Speaker 1: Well let me take you back 'cause you--
Speaker 2: I know I'm jumping around.
Speaker 1: No, that's good. That's good. But you played keyboard to the point where you're in ninth grade playing for an adult band.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 464800
Speaker 1: So how did you develop your skills? Where did you really craft your skills? Did you play by ear, were you a natural (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. I can't read to this day, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how did you realize you had this natural ability? What was that process?
Speaker 2: To play? It was just hearing records and going over them over and over until I could find the chords and the notes and figure it out.
Speaker 1: Give me an example. What song would you hear and then you would replicate it?
Speaker 2: The Temp--
Speaker 1: Ray Charles? Temptations [The Temptations]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of that. But it's funny that you say that because I had a job with Ray Charles after my band left, that's me playing the organ for Ray Charles. (Singing) "I can see clearly now the rain is gone" ['I Can See Clearly Now']. Played organ on 'Anonymous Love,' played drums on 'Game Number Nine' for Ray where he was rapping.
Speaker 1: And you were how old?
Speaker 2: I had to be at least twenty-two, twenty-three, something around there.
Speaker 1: So even before you got discovered so to speak and before you made that trek out west, you were developing your skill, honing your skill. Were there different stages?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing is when I joined Sharp and the G Clefs [ph.] right--
Speaker 1: You were how old then?
Speaker 2: I was in ninth grade [at East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] so that had to be what, fifteen, something like that. I think I was fifteen. And Sharpie [ph.], he was a great musician, right. So some of the chords in the songs he was spelling out to me, the notes, you know what I'm saying? And then I would get them and then we you know, we'd play. But he was my teacher though in terms of getting the music fast and I would just be doing it on my own, 'cause they had a band. They you know used to, been you know playing together. And so, and then once I learned the chords I'd figure out what the notes were so I could solo and so I developed like that.
Story_ID: 464801
Speaker 1: We're talking about the early influences in your life when it comes to music. There was a moment with your brother Henry [Henry Ingram, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where you walked in on him playing. Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well what it was, my brother would play--we knew all the songs that he could play because you would hear him playing all the time right, for years all the church songs or whatever he was playing. I slept downstairs in the basement me and my brother. My father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] fixed up a thing, we slept down there right? So I was home asleep one day and I heard somebody playing the piano and they were playing some music that I knew it was not my brother because my brother has never played this music. So I creep upstairs and wonder who is in the house, 'cause they got to be with somebody, right? And nobody was home. So I crept up the stairs and I opened up the door and my brother had his eyes closed and he was in a trance. And I says, "Jr., what you play, what you playing?" He said, "Boy, don't you scare me like that." I said, "What was you playing?" He said, "I don't know." So I mean he's not from here put it that way.
Speaker 1: Just gifted completely.
Speaker 2: He's not from here. He's from another planet.
Speaker 1: And were there other experiences like that where he was just channeling something?
Speaker 2: No, no, no. That's the one and only time I ever caught him like that. But I'd always bring it up to him, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: How did that affect you?
Speaker 2: Me? Well I mean I just knew before he got his accolades for being the minister of music for the State of Ohio and all that, I already knew that he was a genius. He was just gifted, could sing. He could sing, do it all.
Speaker 1: Did you have any other mentors like your brother over the years, your young teenage years?
Speaker 2: Well, my next door neighbor, Boo [James Smith (ph.)], he played the guitar. So he showed me how to play the guitar and that's why I wanted a guitar and my father got it for me when I was in the sixth grade. And he knew how to play the blues. So I was playing that, my father, "Don't play that devil music."
Story_ID: 464802
Speaker 1: Did you ultimately play in the church [Wooster Avenue Temple Church; St. Ashworth Temple Church of God in Christ, Akron, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No. No, but I sang in the choir. I never sang any solos because I had two choices. I could sit next to my mom [Alistine Wilson Ingram] in church so I could behave or I could be up in the choir so I could fool around. I chose the choir.
Speaker 1: And how did you fool around in the choir?
Speaker 2: 'Cause we would be talking while the preacher, you know what I'm saying? Behind people me and people would be up there talking, we ain't paying attention.
Speaker 1: Were you a pretty good singer at that point?
Speaker 2: No, I could just sing background. I wasn't a singer period. My brother, Phillip [Phillip Ingram], that was in Switch right, he'd be singing around the house and I would laugh because I--Phillip, a singer? And I heard him in a nightclub with a band and some reverb, I said, aw man, he can sing. You know what I'm saying? With just singing around the house he was my younger baby brother. I--he sang all right but he wasn't like a singer to me until I heard him with his band and a microphone, some reverb and all that. I said oh he can sing.
Story_ID: 464803
Speaker 1: When did you decide, I'm going to be a professional musician?
Speaker 2: A professional musician? When we had, as the band, we had, when we developed later on before I left Akron, Ohio. I graduated in 1970 [from East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio], but I left Ohio in '73 [1973] to come to California with my band, Revelation Funk. Well I joined another band because the other band, they were working and they had families in Akron, Ohio and they were not leaving to go on the road. So we started traveling to New York [New York] and different places and I was making like maybe $150 a week when we split up our money and we were working Monday through Saturday playing four hours, right? Okay, now in between that I got a job at Ford Motors [Ford Motor Company], where my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] was working at, at the time, he got me a job and I made basically the same money and I was in there eight hours for five days a week so that was like forty hours and make the same money. And so while I'm doing this work, I'm thinking about music and everything and I'm saying wait a minute, hold on, I worked twenty-four hours and made the same money. What is this, 'cause I didn't know exactly about no music business and that I could make a living at it right cause Akron, Ohio was a small city and there was nothing around for me to see. Like if you're in Detroit [Michigan] and Motown [Motown Records] was there, you would have ambitions probably of you know how you could do that, right? It dawned on me, said, "I'm leaving. I'm gonna go on the road. I'm gonna get with a band." We were on the road so we formed a band. And I worked for maybe about six months. And when the people at, that was working at Ford, some of those brothers I knew, when you worked, put your ninety days in right, they was buying like Cadillac cars and a Deuce and a Quarter [Buick Electra] and all that. And so they asked me what was I doing with my money? I said, "I'm buying equipment." "Equipment?" "Yeah, I'm buying speakers and clavinet and another electric piano and all that stuff (unclear)." Say, "Man, for what?" I said, "I'm going on the road." "Aw man, the benefits we have. You going--man you ain't going nowhere." And one day they were coming in and I was leaving out. I said, "I'll see y'all later." But I left in a way that the general foreman there, that--because my work ethics were impeccable because when you went into the department you worked on the jobs. You could pick what job you want to. I could just put things like you're stamping out metal and just--you know what I'm saying? I took the hardest job in there which is on the pan line where the pans came out and you had to lift these things with somebody else on the other side right, cause I figure if I'm going to be there for eight hours, I want to do something that's gonna help me stay in shape. So I went that route until I got out of there.
Story_ID: 464804
Speaker 1: Were there any professional musicians who were your role models at this point? I mean, were you looking at people like Ray Charles, Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see the word professional is what I understand is when you start getting paid for it. So I was a professional musician 'cause I was getting paid for the--in the tenth grade I loaned my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] two hundred dollars. So as I look back at it not unless that's the wrong term for professional, you see what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I really don't know.
Speaker 1: So you knew you could make money playing music?
Speaker 2: Right, but I didn't know if I could make a living.
Speaker 1: Were you popular at school, in high school [East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio]? Were you known as a musician?
Speaker 2: I could have won two--when I was in twelfth grade, I could have won two things, best dressed or most talented. They gave me most talented. They couldn't give--I couldn't take two because I was with these older guys and we was having stuff made and clothes--I was wearing some of that stuff to school.
Speaker 1: You were having stuff made. Who was making your outfits?
Speaker 2: We were having tailor made clothes made, you know like our suits and stuff, right. So I'd take the pants and stuff to school, wear it with shirts and--
Speaker 1: Describe some of your outfits then for this band. This is Revelation Funk or--?
Speaker 2: Right. Well you know the Ohio Players?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The Ohio Players, that was the epitome of what we want to be 'cause that's why the name of our band was Revelation Funk. And we saw the way they dressed, you know what I'm saying and we took everything from them. They had a light show with Junie Morrison [Walter "Junie" Morrison] right, played the keyboard. He had--that controlled like--he had red, yellow and blue lights and a strobe light right? And then they would have somebody out in the audience with a spotlight controlling the atmosphere in nightclubs, right? So we patterned ourselves after them. Matter of fact when we, when the band finally left and went to Los Angeles, California, within the six months we were there, you ever heard the movie 'Dolemite'?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That was my band when the pimps was walking through the door, and there was a nightclub and we walked in, in all white with super fly hairdo. That was us. But we got the job because we had--what we would do, we'd buy two colors of material, the same material and everybody had to go to your own tailor or whatever and get your thing made. So we was--it was always like fun when we got together and said oh man, that's cool. Well we got that from the Ohio Players. And so we came out to Los Angeles, California and we were controlling the nightclub with the, we had the spotlight and we had the strobe light. So when they were dancing and stuff, you know the strobe light would be on and the accents with the piano and stuff. I would hit the lights and stuff, right? Showtime. So that's how we got the job.
Speaker 1: So this is after you moved out to L.A.?
Speaker 2: Right. I know I'm jumping around but keep me on track.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year was this when you moved out to L.A.?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973]. I graduated 1970 and we left three years later.
Story_ID: 464805
Speaker 1: Were you affected--this is a transitional period from high school [East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] to really your professional career. Also a rather turbulent time in the country, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated, JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassinated, Vietnam War. Were you aware of these kinds of social issues?
Speaker 2: All of the above. My father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] would cut our hair. I couldn't wait 'til the day that I learned to cut my own hair 'cause sometimes it was a little crooked. But we would hear all these things about the Jim Crow laws and certain things about the government and certain issues and everything. So he never let us forget that because see, he came up in the South where people went north and said I'd rather be up in the North in jail than be down here in the South. So my father went for it. And when, the first time he went up north, as soon as he was working on a job, a white person walked off from him because he didn't want to work with nobody black on the job. And my father said, well at least down there it was all, you know what I'm saying, it was known. So in other words he got tricked. So he never let us forget that, none of that. So we were very aware of all that.
Speaker 1: Very race conscious?
Speaker 2: Yes, that we were second class citizens in this country. But we learned through scriptures like Moses said, "Who shall I say sent me?" He said, "I Am that that I Am" [Exodus 3:13-15]. I know who I am because I know the god that sent me. So, I didn't have those insecure feelings and so we knew certain things that we are not--like in the '40s [1940s] we were colored, in the '50s [1950s] we were Negroes, in the '60s [1960s] we were black. None of these are nationalities. And now we're African Americans. We have African American friends that have dual citizenship and their last name is Mutave [ph.]. Well, all of us have slave masters names and you don't have your first citizenship because Bill--I mean Bush [President George Walker Bush] just passed the bill of rights for our voting act [Voting Rights Act Reauthorization and Amendments Act of 2006] cause it's not a voting law. Therefore it's a privilege like a driver's license. So therefore when it runs out in twenty-five years, you go get it renewed 'cause you don't have full citizenship. So I was up on all this. I was up on a lot of things because of my--
Speaker 1: Were you involved in the Black Power movement at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean you know the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], they knew the law. It wasn't just a bunch of crazy black people going wild right? Yeah. Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton], them, and all of them, I ran into Huey Newton when we was flying from Los Angeles, California to San Francisco [California] and I had a chance to talk to him. Shortly after that he got killed on the same day that one of the policemen got killed, at the same place okay. You figure it out.
Speaker 1: (Pause) Interesting.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 464806
Speaker 1: Did that make its way into your music?
Speaker 2: No. No, what made its way into my music was on my first album ['It's Your Night'], I brought y'all "Yah Mo B There." Had I said Yahweh would be there--'cause people in the church be talking about hallelujah and not knowing they're saying praise be God by his Hebrew name. Hebrew being the first in which the Old Testament was transliterated in. And the New Testament was transliterated in Greek and it took over four hundred some years to put the two together. So we came with "Yah Mo B There." Mo is black slang for where. "You coming to the party?" "Yeah man, I'm mo be there." So a lot of people to this day--so what you had was a spiritual record coming through in a secular situation but because we had to be--we had to go in sideways with it right, it was the most played record that year. Had we would have said Yahweh will be there it would only have been played on the gospel stations. But we was wise as a serpent, harmless as a dove and tricked them.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And Michael McDonald went down there with me, brother, thank you.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's interesting cause that's a tool that's been used by African American artists for generations really. I mean even writers use that double-talk, double-speak.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, layer their poetry, Langston Hughes, people like that. Is that something that came innately to you or something that you were taught?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no. What happened with that particular song, me and Michael had started writing the song and so the song was like, (Singing) "If your luck runs low, reach out and call my name, and I will be there."  Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] said, "No man, Michael Jackson had a song called I will be there ["I'll Be There"], right?" And so we was trying to find a slang. So, (Singing) "Reach out and call my name and I mo be there," right. He said, "No, I can hear the deejays right now, 'I Mo Be There'." So it went from there to a-h, (Singing) "Ah Mo Be There." So I never put none of my philosophies on Quincy or none of that because if you don't bring it, you might not be ready for me. So what I did was I went and got the dictionary in the studio and looked up the word Yahweh and I gave it to Quincy. I said, "Quincy, I dare you to put a Y in front of the a-h, Yahweh, the Hebrew name for God." "Aw man, my kids are studying Hebrew," because he was married to Peggy Lipton, okay? And then Michael said, "Oh yeah Jah, dah-dah-dah." I said, "It's spelled hallelujah but there's no Js in the Hebrew language. That's why you pronounce it hallelujah," thus giving us the--Quincy, he went for it and so that's how it happened.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't like we sat down and--you know what I'm saying? But when I had my chance I went for it and it worked.
Speaker 1: And how was that received by the public? Did they get it?
Speaker 2: It was the most--no. It was the most played record that year.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-three [1983], 'cause that was on my first album. But people would come up to me and say, "What does 'Yah Mo B There' mean?" And I'd tell them, they say, "Oh my god." I say, "Right, oh my god." I say, "Listen to the first lyric, 'Heavenly father watching us fall. We take from each other but give nothing at all. Well it's a dog gone shame but never too late for change. So if your luck runs low reach out and call his name. Yah mo b there.' Meaning God will be there." "Oh I get it." But like I said had we not did it like that, it'll only have been played on gospel stations.
Story_ID: 464807
Speaker 1: Are you deeply spiritual? Have you always in your career been spiritual?
Speaker 2: I, from my teachings from my parents [Alistine Wilson Ingram and Henry Ingram, Sr.] right, once I started understanding and separated myself from religion, I'm a very spiritual person. I'm into the scriptures and the word of God. There's hundreds of religions, there's only one God. You can't play me in that game. Are you Democrat or Republican? Why, you go down the middle? No, no, no, unh-uh, no. I played at too many nightclubs, seen too many pimps. So whether you're a spiritual pimp or whatever you can't pimp me with all that nonsense.
Speaker 1: Was this sort of philosophy, was that created or did you create your own philosophy out of the '60s [1960s] or just seeing hypocrisy in institutions?
Speaker 2: I didn't see a movie 'til I was eighteen years old because of religion. And when I started reading the Bible for myself, none of this stuff was in there, a lot of these isms. And as I got older I was like oh no, no, no, no. So my kids said well if people ask us who are we, say you're a child of God. Tell them that.
Speaker 1: And what was your first movie at eighteen?
Speaker 2: 'Putney Swope.' He said a cuss word in there and I couldn't believe it. And publicly did it, 'cause I'd never seen a movie. My wife [Debbie Robinson Ingram] and them, they was up at the rollercade skating and they knew how to dance and stuff, right? Dancing was devil--you weren't allowed to dance right? I can't dance to this day. I never went to the rollercade until later on in life. I never even seen it 'cause all this religiosity or whatever you want to call it. I'm aller- (gesture) I'm allergic to it.
Speaker 1: And so when you left Akron, Ohio and went to Los Angeles [California], did you also leave the church behind at that moment?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't leave the church. I didn't leave the church.
Speaker 1: You left religion.
Speaker 2: Right. See, if you could speak to me and speak scripture, you can't give me some of your, (makes sounds) and God, you know what I'm saying, all of that. I can ad lib myself. I can ad lib myself, you know what I'm saying? You got to come with something so I can go back to the scripture. If I hadn't read it where I can make sense of what you're saying. Other than that, duh, I'm not there. I'm past that. I'm a--I was allergic to it.
Story_ID: 464808
Speaker 1: So spell out for me what happened when you got to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] initially. So your band [Revelation Funk] was there for a while but they got a little bit discouraged?
Speaker 2: Well see when we first came out there you know we didn't know nobody. We came out there and we all bunched up in this one motel room and stuff or we, I think we had two motel rooms, right? And we went to this club 'cause I was the leader and I would take some of the cats with me. And we'd say you know, "Hey man, we're a band and we, you know you let us play for you, you'll see we can do this thing, right?" So we were on Western Avenue at a club called The Godfather [ph.], right? And so he said, "Well man, y'all bring y'all stuff in and let me see what y'all can do, right?" So we playing, he said, "Well you got the job." He said, "I can't afford to pay you, but you can take the door, right?" So some people started coming in and some girls was telling us, "What's this? This club wasn't even open last week." So he wasn't really open for whatever reason. I mean you know it wasn't like a new establishment but it wasn't open. So we started from there and we started getting jobs. And then we started working up at Hazel and Herb's [Los Angeles, California]. And they had an after hour thing where you know when people, when entertainment went from like ten all the way until like almost six o'clock in the morning and they would have more than one band. And they owned apartment buildings so we had a chance to stay in one of their apartment buildings. And then we started getting around to the other clubs in the local area you know Los Angeles and then we stretched out to San Diego [California] and Phoenix, Arizona and all that kind of stuff. And we could make a living and we made a living you know.
Speaker 1: How long did you do that?
Speaker 2: We did that for about maybe seven months, something like that.
Speaker 1: Was it what you thought it would be?
Speaker 2: Can I tell you something? I was making a living doing music. I was living my dream. But like I say the guys got discouraged but they didn't have no back up. My woman [Debbie Robinson Ingram] was like, "Do your thing honey." You know what I'm saying?
Story_ID: 464809
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your woman? So you guys met when you were kids and at what point did you get together with Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram]?
Speaker 2: We lived in the same neighborhood. She used to walk down the street and me and my friend was talking about which one was going to get her first, see what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: She was the cute one, huh? On the block?
Speaker 2: Oh, fine. But we were just friends though, you know. I didn't want to spoil her innocence with my nonsense.
Speaker 1: And so when did you get together, high school?
Speaker 2: Well I was out of high school [East High School; East Community Learning Center, Akron, Ohio] and me and Debbie was friends. We've been friends for years, just in the same neighborhood and all that stuff, right? And like I said I was trying to protect her from people like me and her brother, 'cause we wasn't looking for no wife. (Laughter) I was telling her everything we was doing so she could watch out, you know what I'm saying, trying to protect her like my little sister. So one time she told me, she said, I want to go--oh, let me tell you this first. I bought my first car 'cause my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] said when we graduated, you going to college, but I can't afford to send you. But I was already making money in the club but I had to work a job that summer to afford college. So I bought me a Mustang [Ford Mustang], a red pretty Mustang with white interior, right? So Debbie was my friend. She was like--I could run up that house in like less than five minutes, right? So I drove over to her house. I said, "Debbie, how you like my car?" "Oh that's cool." That's cool and everything, right? So she said, "Let me drive it." I said, "I can't be caught with nobody driving." She said, "Come on boy." So I let her drive my car. I said, "Hurry up." She took it around the block and came back. She didn't even have her license. So this is what happened, this is the turning point. She said to me one day, she said, "I want to go to Canton [Ohio] with you to hear your band play." I said, "Girl, what?" She said, "I want to go to hear you play." I said, "Debbie, if you go with me girl, you're gonna be with me--." She said, I ain't gonna tell you the word she said, but she said, "Don't nobody want you." She went with me and she been with me ever since. Now she has a different story. If you want to turn the thing over there on her she'll tell you, but that's the story. That's the real--(gesture) that's the real story, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And she never left your side from that day and you never left her side, that's probably the real story, huh?
Speaker 2: Right. No, but she was backing me. See, Debbie was so smart that they wanted to move her up two grades but her parents wouldn't let her move up two grades 'cause she you know, emotionally didn't feel that was right for her. So they moved her up one grade. So she was always a brainiac. I remember sitting in twelfth grade out in the auditorium and she walked on by the stage as a four point honor roll student. I said smarty.
Speaker 1: Smart and beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she was smart enough to pick me. What can I tell you?
Speaker 1: So she was supportive of you when you made the trek to Los Angeles [California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was supportive of me as a friend all my life. You know what I'm saying? I mean I would share all my hurts, my pains, I mean we were friends. You know what I'm saying? Like I said I didn't want to spoil her innocence, innocence with my nonsense, so I never even tried to go that way even though you know I knew she was fine. It wasn't--I wasn't blind.
Story_ID: 464810
Speaker 1: So tell me about L.A. [Los Angeles, California] then? Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram] wanted to come out and join you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. And by the way, because of us as boyfriend and girlfriend, we had saved up $1,500 back then, right? So when she said she wanted to come up, she sent the money and that's what got our start.
Speaker 1: So what was the next phase? So the band [Revelation Funk] kind of broke up?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't kind of, they broke up.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And who were the members of the band?
Speaker 2: We had Melvin [Melvin Brown], we had Dap [Gary "Dap" Gibson], we had Tee [Norvil Tucker], we had Bobby [ph.], we had Jackie [Jackie Morrinetti] and we had Bear Kat [ph.] and myself.
Speaker 1: So they went back to Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: When they told me that, before they could leave Los Angeles, California 'cause see Hazel and Herb's [Los Angeles, California] is where I worked at right. Bands came through there all the time. So I went and was looking for somebody that needed a piano player. And one of them needed a piano player and that's--that started me, you know kept my income flowing.
Speaker 1: Which band was this?
Speaker 2: Different Bag [A Different Bag]. And they were from Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and they were another group that came out you know from another state to Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: And where did you perform with this band?
Speaker 2: We performed all over. As a matter of fact in 1974 is my first time leaving the country. We played in Japan at the Mugen [Club Mugen] in Tokyo [Japan].
Speaker 1: That's a pretty big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you remember from that experience?
Speaker 2: That the people--cause see we were just, Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram] and I were just boyfriend and girlfriend and we were living together, right? Living in sin, right? When I went to that country it had such an impact on me because these people don't even know me and they're bowing. And bowing to me was a form of humility. It does something to my spirit. I looked at myself in the mirror and I said you know what, you have a lot of false pride about yourself. And I called Debbie with my ego and said when I get home I'm going to marry you. I didn't ask her nothing. So it had a huge impact on me.
Speaker 1: And what about musically, did it affect you?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no. No, no.
Speaker 1: Why? Why do you say that so emphatically?
Speaker 2: Well whatever their music was, it didn't touch me.
Speaker 1: What did it sound like to your ears?
Speaker 2: I couldn't tell you.
Speaker 1: How were you received, your music?
Speaker 2: Oh they loved American music. We--our music is loved all the way around the world.
Speaker 1: And did you notice a difference when it came to race and how you were received in Japan compared to here?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. We were treated totally different, totally different.
Speaker 1: Tell me a story about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just saying we were treated almost like celebrities. We played in a huge club that was the Mugen and Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner opened up. You know what I'm saying? And--I mean not opened up. We opened up for Ike and Tina Turner. And so the people were just so nice and just, you know what I mean, they were so polite. It was just their culture. Their culture was different from ours.
Speaker 1: Tell me about Ike and Tina Turner. Did you get to interact with them when you opened for them?
Speaker 2: Well not so much them as the musicians that played there. You know we were communicating.
Speaker 1: Was that exciting?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was very exciting, 'cause the musicians there, you know some liked what we were doing and they would listen, come early to listen to what we were doing before they went on.
Speaker 1: And Tina Turner at the time was she pretty powerful?
Speaker 2: Very powerful, dancing and singing, and fine and just doing her thing and she had all of them in a spell. And the thing about it is that right across the street [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick was performing, right? So eventually in life when I became a singer, I got a chance to talk to Dionne cause we did a show and stuff together, right? And she remembered. She remembered the band. She didn't know it was me 'cause I had a big Afro out like this (gesture).
Speaker 1: Wow. And at the time did you get to talk to Dionne Warwick or you just--?
Speaker 2: Well she was--she came over because Ike and Tina Turner but she came down and spoke to us 'cause we were from the United States and she was just so gracious and just you know the epitome of a woman.
Story_ID: 464811
Speaker 1: And you had listed some of the members of your group [Revelation Funk] and you were going to tell me about another member?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wayne Arnold. He was the lead singer in our group and the reason why his name kind of slipped me because our original lead singer was Bernard Lawson. And so at the last minute Bernard pulled out and we took Wayne so that's why.
Speaker 1: Did any of the members of the group ever resurface as musicians?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dap [Gary "Dap" Gibson], the drummer, he came back out and I was playing with The Coasters and I got him a job playing with me. But him and Melvin [Melvin Brown], the conga player, we played with Brother John and so we worked you know locally and stuff before I got with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones].
Story_ID: 464812
Speaker 1: At what point did you meet Ray Charles?
Speaker 2: That had to be in 19--1976, somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: And tell me about that encounter. How did you meet?
Speaker 2: I met him because my brother Henry Ingram [Henry Ingram, Jr.], my oldest brother was living in Los Angeles, California. And he had a friend that we knew from Chicago [Illinois] that came through our hometown in Akron, Ohio, extremely talented. His name was Larry Woods. And so Larry Woods came to our apartment with my brother and he was telling me, I need to turn you on to Joe Webster 'cause you know, he knew I could write. You know by this time I was writing songs and doing things and stuff. He said I need to turn you on to Joe Webster. Joe Webster was Mabel John's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mable John] son who was one of the background singers in Ray Charles' studio and he was signed to Ray Charles' label [Tangerine Records]. So Joe and I we met and we hit it off and we started writing songs together. So then I started coming to the studio and singing backgrounds with him you know. I could at least sing backgrounds you know and playing some of the instruments. But one of the tracks I had a click track and I played the drums and I played the bass and I played the keyboards. So the engineer told Ray, you got to see this dude, he can--you know what I'm saying, he's real talented and stuff. So Ray heard me and that's how I got the chance to play organ on 'I Can See Clearly' ['I Can See Clearly Now'] and 'Anonymous Love.'
Speaker 1: What did he say when he heard you for the first time, Ray Charles?
Speaker 2: He said, "Son, you talented." I said I don't know, I'm just here Ray. And, but Ray liked my personality and sometimes he would just like, he would have the engineer call for me just to be around even when I wasn't working because he--Ray was giving me a lot of information not only about the music industry but about you know, about techniques. I saw Ray Charles, which I don't know most engineers could do this. Back then they weren't cutting with click tracks, click tracks you know the drummer would listen to it and it would keep the tempo steady all the way through the song. So naturally the song would speed up a little bit you know just through naturally playing right? Ray had a track like that where he took--I saw him, supposed to be blind right, and of course he was right? The engineer wasn't even there. It was him. I was in the studio with him. And he took the horn parts and flew them over to a half inch tape right, and sent them back to the back of the track even though the track was going faster, an eighth note at a time on different tracks and he put them together. Ray Charles did that. He'd walk all over there. He'd walk out there to the mic [microphone] by himself and all that. Ray Charles not hand- he was not handicapped. He was not handicapped.
Speaker 1: He had a sense, he could see with his mind.
Speaker 2: Right. Right, I don't even know how to explain it but--
Speaker 1: And what did you learn from him?
Speaker 2: He was deaf on drummers. Your timing had to be impeccable, right. And it wasn't like I was a great drummer, but my time was impeccable. So what happened was he heard about, from the engineers, that I fixed a track that the track had sped up right. And so I had to learn where the track was, where it sped up and kept--until I got it and then I got it. So Ray had a track that needed fixed and so they called me to fix that track. So I was in there with Ray and I found out exactly where the tape, it was kind of speeding up, where the musician kind of sped up and it was kind of slowing down and I finally caught it and I had the groove right. Once we got finished, Ray said, "You know what, you did a good job, but I'm going to scrap this." He said, "We're going to cut this all over." So they had a bossa nova, a thing that had these little beats, right? And this was pre-drum machines and all that stuff in terms of the (unclear) and all that stuff. So he said we're going to cut it over. Ray went out there to the drum machine and put the keyboards down, right? And then he gave me the beat to play and I played the beat. Then Ray hummed all of the turnarounds for me to play. "(Scatting) No (scatting)," right, and we'd move on to the next one when I--until--you know what I'm saying? And he punched me in all the turnarounds. So I'm playing drums along with the track and you hear these--feels like I'm going to--you know what I'm saying, because that was the magic of recording.
Story_ID: 464813
Speaker 1: Matter of fact that's the first time I met Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones]. Quincy didn't remember it but Quincy and Ray [Ray Charles] was in a band together in Seattle, Washington. So Quincy came by to bring Ray some arrangement of some musical charts right, that Ray needed and he knew Quincy had it. So Quincy came by and Ray said, "Oh this is my partner, [HistoryMaker] James Ingram, dah-dah, dah-dah, you know he's playing you know music and stuff and such and such." "Hey, how you doing Quincy?" "How you doing son?" And he kept on moving.
Speaker 2: And what did you think of Quincy Jones at the time? Did you know that this was a talented producer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I knew he was a talented thing, a talented brother and the mere fact that when I found out about his history with Ray right, I thought I was squoze [ph.] between history at that time, with the handshake and the whole thing. I was squozed, now that's a--
Speaker 2: I like that word.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's not in the dictionary but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But it conveys a very specific meaning.
Speaker 1: Yeah for those that don't know, I was put between a very important time in my life between two of the giants of my people. And I was blessed and I knew that that was God, you know what I mean? It was a moment in time.
Story_ID: 464814
Speaker 1: And what did that moment lead to next?
Speaker 2: Lead to next? Well what happened was--you ever heard of Carl Carlton, (Singing) "She's a bad Mama Jama" ["She's A Bad Mama Jama (She's Built, She's Stacked)"]?
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: Well that's me playing the keyboard on his whole album ['Carl Carlton']. Leon Haywood was the producer. And that was me, Phil Perry [Phillip Perry] and Howard Hewett, which are from my hometown, Akron, Ohio, and that's us singing the background. So I knew I could sing a little bit but I didn't think I was no singer. But to make a long story short, Buzz and the--Buzzy Feiten [Buzz Feiten] and--guitar player, good friend of mine, we were writing songs together and I could sing better than him. And we couldn't afford nobody to sing the song so I would sing our demos. So he got me a job singing demos for fifty dollars at ATV [ATV Music Publishing; Sony/ATV Music Publishing]. And ATV, they--it was a publishing house that had writers and they needed you know people to come sing their demos. One of the demos was "Just Once." It was a fifty dollar demo. So I get on my moped and I'm going on down to Leon Haywood's house and I say, "Hey man, I want y'all to--." 'Cause they would give me demos of my tape, of what I've done. So I said, "Hey man, listen to this song, may be a good song for Carl." Leon heard it. He said, "It's a good song. I don't think it's for Carl." I said, "Okay, no problem." Little did I know five months from there, I was going to be on [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' album ['The Dude'] up against Carl with "One Hundred Ways" and win a Grammy [Grammy Award] for R and B when Quincy told me that you can't win a Grammy without having your own album. Ours was the first time in history--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --that it ever happened. And I know I'm jumping around, but Quincy talked Pierre Cossette into, at the Grammys, to open up with "Just Once." I had never stood up in front of nobody and sang in my life. You talking about somebody scared, I was frightened to death.
Speaker 1: And you were twenty years old?
Speaker 2: No, I was twenty-eight at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, by this time I was twenty-eight.
Speaker 1: And so back in 1976, this all started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: This all started in 1976.
Speaker 2: With Ray Charles.
Speaker 1: With Ray Charles.
Speaker 2: Right, I jumped.
Speaker 1: And then you met Quincy Jones in what year?
Speaker 2: That was in 1981.
Speaker 1: So what hap- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm sorry, that was 1980. The record came out in 1981.
Story_ID: 464815
Speaker 1: So tell me what happened between 1976 and 1980 musically? Did you continue to work with Ray Charles? Did you meet other greats?
Speaker 2: Well, I was working with Ray Charles only in the studio 'cause I couldn't read to be going out and doing all those charts. But I was working behind The Coasters with a John Goines. And also you know, we were playing for a lot of--'cause we did the tours. Wasn't really a tour but we were like in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and Reno [Nevada] and Tahoe [Tahoe City, California] and all that kind of stuff. It was the 'Oldies But Goodies' show with Dick Clark and he would have the oldies but goodies a part of the show. And I was the organ player. "Ladies and gentlemen, the oldest living teenagers (scatting "Bandstand Boogie")."
Speaker 1: For the 'American Bandstand'?
Speaker 2: Right or no, yeah but--no, but for the tours in these clubs.
Speaker 1: But you played that 'American Bandstand' theme song ["Bandstand Boogie"] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly. Exactly. So just 'cause I sang "Just Once" on Quincy's [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] album, my life hadn't changed. Didn't no residuals come or nothing like that right, you know what I'm saying? So I'm just still doing what I was doing. So we were in Reno and I remember Larry Klein who was Dick Clark's manager. They both walked out to me on the stage with Quincy's album, 'The Dude.' And they said, "Tell me this is not you?" And I said, "Yeah, that's me." "Oh my god, why didn't you tell us?" I said, "Man, you needed a keyboard player. You didn't--I'm doing what you--." They couldn't believe it. And Dick, bless his heart, he supported me all the way. Had me on the 'Bandstand' and did all kind of favors for me. We loved working with Dick.
Speaker 1: Tell me about Dick Clark. Now what year is this by the way?
Speaker 2: This was in 19--1977 through 1980.
Speaker 1: And so tell me about Dick Clark?
Speaker 2: Well he was just always friendly, you know what I'm saying and always had stories to tell us and certain things. And he was always just, he was just personable.
Speaker 1: Can you think of any specific moments with him?
Speaker 2: The only specific moment was when we were catching a flight and they had closed the door and Dick is sitting in first class and they opened up the door and here I am late. And I'm looking at Dick and it's like--he put his head down and is like (gesture) (laughter)--
Speaker 1: What can you do?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he was a good guy?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had fun. You know and what really impressed me when one of The Coasters, Bobby Nunn, when he died, Dick was right there at the funeral, just supporting you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: So race was a non-issue for Dick Clark?
Speaker 2: No. Dick Clark? No. No, matter of fact he probably broke some of the first black acts on his show. I never sat down and talked to him, you know about it, like that, but I remember watching some of the shows you know.
Story_ID: 464816
Speaker 1: And so "Just Once" was a breakthrough moment for you?
Speaker 2: It started my whole career with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, and you know through Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil who wrote the song, a man and wife team. And that song became the epic, what do you call, epic--apex, apex song for the universities of a pop--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so "Just Once," tell me why that was so significant in your life? And again tell me the year.
Speaker 1: In 1980, that started my career with Quincy Jones. Matter of fact, I was at the house writing a song with Howard Hewett, 'cause see Howard used to come, in Akron, Ohio, he would come and listen to our band [Revelation Funk]. But it was mainly because of Bernard Lawson, our lead singer, right? And all those high notes you hear me and Howard sing, we got it from Bernard. So I was writing a song with Howard Hewett at my house in my little studio that my wife, I told you hooked up with the four track and all that stuff, right? And we were writing this song for Shalamar in which we eventually produced, me and Howard produced the record on Shalamar. So Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram] comes, 'cause she knows when we're in there working and writing, Debbie, don't bother me because you may break a thought, right? She knocked on the door, she said, "James [HistoryMaker James Ingram]?" "Debbie what?" "You're gonna want this phone call." "Who is it?" "It's Quincy Jones." "Quincy Jones? (Gesture) Yes." "James?" "Yeah, yeah." "Yeah, I like your rendition of 'Just Once,' such and such and such." I said, "You want me to come play on it?" 'Cause that wasn't me playing on the song, right? He said, "I want you to come sing on it." "You want me to sing on your album ['The Dude'], 'Just Once'?" I couldn't believe it. Howard was looking at me like, what? 'Cause I could sing background and that stuff. I was never a singer. But when I got with Quincy, I realized why I didn't think I was a singer. Because I would be singing along with the radio and I couldn't hit all the notes. I didn't realize that singers had keys they could sing in and keys they couldn't sing in 'cause I wasn't trying to be no singer.
Speaker 2: And so Quincy Jones discovered you?
Speaker 1: Exactly. No doubt about it.
Speaker 2: What was the first moment like together collaborating?
Speaker 1: In a studio? It's like this, I'm in a studio and I'm singing and I keep stopping the tape, right? And he said, "Why are you stopping?" 'Cause I'm thinking I'm in front of Quincy Jones. I got to be professional like I know what that is right? And I said, "Well I'm trying to clean up the, you know gruff in my voice." He said, "All that whiskey or whatever's in your voice, he said that's why you're in here. That's your sound." When he said that, my confidence level went up a little more and it's like oh I can just do what I do. I'm trying to act like a, you know I'm trying to act professional in front of Quincy, which I don't even know what that is as a singer but I was so insecure and he just made me feel comfortable. And then when he got the takes that he wanted you know what I'm saying and they put it together and everything it's like, oh man, this is real (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's wild.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what was the next step?
Speaker 1: Well the next step we started--like I said just 'cause the album was out, my life didn't change. I was still playing with the band. Then Quincy started traveling but he couldn't stay on the road 'cause he was making his money in the studio. So he's basically going out every now on the weekend to support his album, right, and we would go out with him. But I got so spoiled because being with Quincy, we went out not with just the band, we had horn section and the whole orchestra and the whole thing 'cause his music was orchestral, right? So I was spoiled. You had Louis Johnson on a bass, Greg Phillinganes on a, you know on a--and John Robinson from Rufus on the drums and you know we just had, we just had the cats. And it was like I was in heaven.
Story_ID: 464817
Speaker 1: What are some of the--did you, did you tour with other acts as well? Like there are other people we would know who--?
Speaker 2: Well we--by this time the next--Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] had, that ['The Dude'] was his last album with A&M [A&M Records], so he started Qwest Records. And Patti Austin was like his granddaughter or whatever you want to call it you know what I'm saying, he's--godfather. He's been in her life for years. He's known her since she was four years old so Patti was automatically on his Qwest label and then there was me. So he put us together with the "Baby Come to Me" and that was our first collaboration. And we started traveling with Quincy and Patti had songs that she would sing on the album.  You know, "A Little Bit of Razzamatazz" ["Razzamatazz"], and all that stuff, right?
Speaker 1: And "Baby Come to Me"--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for those viewing this a few years from now, can you give us a line or so?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "Spending every dime to keep you talking on the line, that's how it was. And all those walks together, out in any kind of weather, just because--." Now if you want more I got to have a quarter or a dollar or something.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You need the band section.
Speaker 2: I learned that from Quinc- Quincy.
Story_ID: 464818
Speaker 1: I'm gonna bring it back to the Oscars [Academy Awards] night, well actually the Grammys [Grammy Awards]. I know you won an Oscars--you were nominated for an Oscar as well later on. But for the Grammy night experience, what was that like?
Speaker 2: My ears started tingling and heat was coming--I've never experienced nothing to this day. It was like an out of a body experience because Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] had already told me, here I am nominated for Best Artist, Best R and B Vocal [Best R and B Vocal Performance, Male] and--
Speaker 1: Best New Artist.
Speaker 2: Best New Artist, right? I had, I was up for three things. I forgot exactly what it was, right? Quincy said well you can't win a Grammy you know without having your own album out. So I didn't care. Just being with Quincy Jones was enough, you know what I'm saying? And so here I am James Brown and Tina Turner come out and they--and Rick James was on the side because he had just performed right, and I'm out on the audience. And they said Rick James and I all heard was James and I'm clapping because I couldn't win right. And Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram] was nudging me and she said, "They called your name." And you see me on the TV, "What?" And they're pointing to me, right. So I walked up on the stage and I don't have a clue. But the first things out of my mouth was I said, "I'd like to thank God for the many blessings." Because I already knew this was something from a whole--you know what I'm saying, from a spiritual realm that you can't do this by yourself. You can't even dream this.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying? I'm not even a singer and here I am at, you know--Carl [Carl Carlton] was one of my best friends. I felt sorry for him 'cause I felt he should have won. You know here we're working hard on his album ['She's a Bad Mama Jama (She's Built, She's Stacked)'] and all that you know.
Speaker 1: So what did you do next that night? How did you celebrate?
Speaker 2: Well we all went to--I forgot the name of this famous restaurant but we all went with Quincy, the whole thing. And you know I had my--my parents were out and I thanked my mother [Alistine Wilson Ingram] and my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.], you know and my wife and everything and everybody. But we all went to this--it was called Chasen's [West Hollywood, California] or Chase [sic.] and we just partied with Quincy all night. But people drove out to Los Angeles, California to be with me, right? We were going to party for the whole week, right. I called Quincy the next day and I said, "Hey man, oh (makes sound), what's going on?" I said, "What you doing?" He said, "Man, I'm in the studio," 'cause they told me he was down there. I didn't know if he was just passing through there or something, right? He was in there working, cutting some stuff. You know what he told me on the phone? He said, "Little brother, stay hungry." I never forgot that. He's not part- we got--'cause my friends were there, but I never forgot what he told me.
Speaker 1: What do you think he meant by that?
Speaker 2: I know--he had won I think five Grammys that night, right? But he had Grammys before that. Just what it meant, stay hungry. When you're full you don't need no more food. When you're hungry you're going to stay on the hunt, that's what he meant. And it was clear when he said it. It was like oh my god. In other words this brother went from Quincy Jones the god, to a whole 'nother status that I couldn't even--in terms of the god of music, right?
Story_ID: 464819
Speaker 1: Shortly after this, did you have any other moments that seemed like spiritual moments that seemed like you were being guided from above?
Speaker 2: Just my relationship with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and all the things that we did together, it seemed like a dream. It didn't seem true.
Speaker 1: Give me some examples.
Speaker 2: Well just some of the places that we would go, some of the things that we would do. We would be, you know they started sending for me over there in Europe and certain places and Quincy--we would, me and my wife [Debbie Robinson Ingram] would get there right, and we had--because my record ['It's Your Night'] was on fire and all that stuff. This is once I had my first record out also. And so soon as we get there, less than fifteen minutes later, we were like in Saint-Tropez right, South of France. The phone rings, "(Makes sound) Yes, Eddie Barclay requesting your presence." We heard of him you know what I'm saying, Quincy's big friend and that you know and next thing we know we're being shuffled off to his peninsula with the helicopter and the thing. It's like some 007 [James Bond] stuff. And we was in a whole other environment. And he was talking to us and invited us to dinner and stuff and we was over there and stuff. And he said, "By the way, you need to come back tomorrow for your interviews." I said, "No, we're supposed to--we're scheduled to be in Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Records]." He said, "No, I had all that changed." So Quincy introduced us to a whole other level of people in terms of things that they were doing and life styles and the whole thing, other cultures.
Speaker 1: Was that exciting? Was it intimidating?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause Quincy had already set us up. We had met so many other people and everything, it wasn't intimidating, it was exciting.
Story_ID: 464820
Speaker 1: Tell me the experience of fame, your first experience with fame, being recognized on the street?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a little weird but the fame was from my background of coming up and knowing about scripture and everything. I knew emphasis that, "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth" [Genesis 1:1], that was the beginning of creation. But, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" [John 1:1], and you read down, "The Word was made of flesh" [John 1:14]. So when I came to California, ever heard of Merlin the magician?
Speaker 1: Heard of--?
Speaker 2: Merlin the magician?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well his magic wand when he was casting his magic spell was made out of holly wood and I was coming to a city that was called Lost Angels. Spiritually we knew where we were coming, okay? So Hollywood was basically you know the way we summed it up from being around, it was like name, rank, serial number, "Hi, my name is [HistoryMaker] James Ingram, 3 Grammys [Grammy Award], 7 Grammy nominations, 2 Oscar [Academy Award] nominations." I didn't even ask you for your last name. So the thing is, singing is what I do, it's not who I am. I knew who I was before I got to Los Angeles, California. So star is rats spelled backwards. It's the limelight, people wanting to be in the limelight, as close to God. You know it's just something you're supposed to have in your pocket. So I was never confused with who I was. So no matter how far you build me up, 'cause I was afraid to accept the credit for the gift. To this day, people give me too much accolades I can't take because that's his.  It's a gift. It ain't mine, it's a gift. It was given to me. I'm supposed to nurture and do something with it, but to act like it's mine and--no that's a lack of knowledge of self. I know who I am.
Speaker 1: And have you always maintained that humility and that sense of peace?
Speaker 2: It is in my upbringing. It came with my upbringing. I remember when Moses said to God, "Who shall I say sent me?" He said, "I Am that that I Am" [Exodus 3:13-14]. My whole thing is I know who I am. So you can't build me up no path than I am. When Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] took my gift to a whole other level that was the gift, it wasn't like I was telling with it like I'm a star.
Story_ID: 464821
Speaker 1: So at this point in the mid-'80s [1980s], describe your neighborhood. Take me around your neighborhood in Los Angeles [California] at this point, post-Grammy [Grammy Award].
Speaker 2: Post-Quincy Jones [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones], I was twenty-four years old. Me and my wife [Debbie Robinson Ingram], she was twenty-two at the time. We bought our first home just by me playing in nightclubs and her working a job. We bought this $30,000 home in which five years later the market had tripled, we sold $90,000, made the most money we had made in our life at that time in one sum of money, in which we had $60,000 and put $50,000 on one of the houses that we're in right now, that was at the time $268,000. It knocked off $50,000. And we went up on it and built it, it's a nice piece of property. We still have that and we have you know other places too. But we did that without the music industry. That was just from nightclubs and my wife working at Exxon [Exxon Corporation; Exxon Mobil Corporation].
Speaker 1: And what was your wife doing at the time? Was she also supporting you in your career?
Speaker 2: All the--always. Always behind me.
Speaker 1: When did you have your first child?
Speaker 2: Thirty-one years ago. She's thirty-one. We have six children.
Speaker 1: So you wanted to replicate your childhood experience?
Speaker 2: Well my father [Henry Ingram, Sr.] had four sons and two daughters. And I had the opposite, two sons and four daughters.
Speaker 1: What are your kids' names and when were they born roughly?
Speaker 2: Jasmine [Jasmine Ingram] was born September the 14th, Jennifer [Jennifer Ingram] was born December 31st. She's a tax baby. Was it the 31st or 30th?
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Thirtieth.
Speaker 2: Duh--(unclear) correct.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Jasmine was born, now I done forgot her--
Speaker 1: September 14th.
Speaker 2: Oh see, you're better than me. Jasmine was born December 14th, Jennifer was--
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: September 14th, right okay.
Speaker 1: September, all right. See, yeah Jasmine was born September the 14th. Jennifer was born December 30th. Jason [Jason Ingram] was born February 3rd. Jahnee [Jahnee Ingram] was born January the 27th and my baby, Jyah [ph.], who is fourteen years old, was born September the 12th.
Speaker 2: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Joshua [Joshua Ingram], James [HistoryMaker James Ingram].
Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot one of them.
Speaker 2: And Joshua, okay.
Speaker 1: Well, do I have to put them in order? Do I got to start all over again?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: All right then. Okay--
Speaker 2: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): You just forgot to say--
Speaker 1: Joshua. Okay.
Speaker 2: And my son Joshua was born May the 6th.
Story_ID: 464822
Speaker 1: So you are the father of six children. The first one was born in 1976. The last one was born in 1993. At the same time, you and your wife [Debbie Robinson Ingram] juggling this massive music career, right? Tell me about the big moment back in 1982 or so. You started to tell me a little bit about the collaboration with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones on "One Hundred Ways." How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well that--the collaboration was actually in 1980, but the record ['The Dude'] didn't come out until 1981. George Benson don't want to hear this, but George Benson had actually sang on that record but I don't think he liked it or something like that because he always tease me today because Rod Temperton came in and changed the bridge and it turned into what it was and it became the hit record that it is and I won my first Grammy [Grammy Award] for it.
Speaker 1: And what was that recording experience like? Describe that to me.
Speaker 2: Well see, that was still a part of the first thing--first time when I sang "Just Once." That was the other song that I sang on that album and Quincy also had me do "The Dude." I'm the voice of the Dude. (Cough) Excuse me. They ran my voice through a vocoder. So you talking about rapping, if you hear "The Dude," "Hey brother, it's a B-flat balloon (unclear)," I forgot all the words, right? But that was me rapping then through a vocoder.
Story_ID: 464823
Speaker 1: Was it a totally different experience performing than recording? What was it like when you finally went on tour as this Grammy [Grammy Award] winning artist?
Speaker 2: Well the thing is I went on tour with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] so I didn't--it wasn't, it was exciting because we had all the orchestra stuff but the weight wasn't on me as a performer. All I had to do was come out there and sing one song, back up into the background section, wait for my next song, right? You know Patti come out or whoever right? And so it wasn't a lot of pressure on me. My first tour is when I started in 1989. And I went out for six months with Patti LaBelle.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that? What were some of the highlights? What was Patti LaBelle like?
Speaker 2: Well see, we sang 'On My Own' together, the duet she had with Michael McDonald. I had horror stories that some of the stars would never let the upcoming, you know people that was coming out with them right, to use all the lights or whatever, right? Or they'd put them out and make them put their equipment out in front of the curtains and all that right? Patti gave me everything that I wanted. She was like my big sister. And so I loved Patti and I'll be forever grateful because we performed last night together and I reminded her of that. But she forgot that that was my first tour.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about that first tour being on stage? The response of the audience, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean you know just being out there with Patti, it was exciting because we had at that time one of the highest grossing tours cause it was six months. And just Patti being one of the best performers we've ever had, I learned so many things from Patti, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: What did you learn?
Speaker 2: Well just the way that she would treat the audience and stuff. I, you know it wasn't like I could imitate but I took a lot of that in and I grew as an artist, you know to be comfortable or more comfortable on stage.
Speaker 1: So interacting with the audience, making jokes, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Right, all of the above.
Story_ID: 464824
Speaker 1: What was the bes- the next big moment in your life after winning the Grammy [Grammy Award] and after the tour [with Patti LaBelle]?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it was some of the movie things that I got involved with even though (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was that before--the movie collaborations, was that before your work with Michael Jackson?
Speaker 2: No. No, matter of fact that's when I had a chance to write 'P.Y.T.' ['P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)'] with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] for Michael, in which Quincy--you know Quincy had the title 'P.Y.T.'
Speaker 1: He had what?
Speaker 2: He had the title, 'P.Y.T. T.L.C.,' which is pretty young thing, tender loving care. And he got that from some lingerie from Peggy [Peggy Lipton], 'cause Quincy would see something on a menu or something. If he thought it was a good, great title, he'd write it down. So the lingerie was called Pretty Young Things and Quincy thought it would be a great title. So Quincy sent a lot of us--at that same title, writing that song. And I came back with a demo that he heard and the lyrics weren't finished but the melody and the structure of the song was finished. And he said just like this, "We're cutting this tomorrow." Quincy, one thing I learned about Quincy, he didn't have time to--in other words the song, the music either hit him or it didn't. He could care less. He was ruthless you know what I'm saying? He would only listen to the verse and the chorus. "Next," 'cause he didn't need to hear the bridge 'cause most songs were verse and a chorus or another verse and a chorus and a bridge and a verse and a chorus. So it was like he was ruthless.  When he heard something that he loved it was like, boom, we cutting this automatically. He don't care about you know people--it wasn't about nobody's emotional thing 'cause you thought it was a great song. It may be a great song for you but it wasn't what he was looking for and that's how it is. Next, the next day we were in the studio and I was giving the musicians their parts.
Speaker 1: And so tell me, take me through the creative process though of 'P.Y.T.' Who wrote what?
Speaker 2: I wrote the music and I wrote the lyrics but Quincy came up with the hook, pretty young thing, tender loving care. So I had the hook, but when I came in for--to play it, when he heard it, he heard this, (Singing) "Where did you come from baby? Oh, won't you take me there, (humming)." But he heard a groove, the same groove, the piano parts, the drum parts and the whole bit, right? But when it came to, "P.Y.T., pretty--." I already had that from him. So we went in and cut the record that day and Quincy told me, now go finish the lyrics. So I go and I start writing. And so, (Singing) "Where did you come from baby? Oh, won't you take me there, right away won't you baby, dynamite and TNT." I called Quincy right? "No man, dynamite and TNT, that's too dated." I said, "Okay, I'll call you back." (Singing) "Where did you come from baby, oh won't you take me there, right away won't you baby, tendoroni you've got to be, spark my nature--." "Now you got it, that's it." So I would call him, you know what I'm saying, and then he had me come and do the demo for Michael so he can hear all the lyrics, right? And when we were in the studio, Quincy had already had people to write out the bars and everything and he told them to extend a part in there right, where they put the chant, (scatting).
Speaker 1: Wow. Is that the way it normally happens, that creative process?
Speaker 2: I've never worked with nobody in my life that has that kind of thing that Quincy has. It, it's like an alpha state that he works in sometimes as though you're so tired, right, that you're agitated by the wrong notes or the wrong melody or the wrong whatever it is. Quincy is another brother that is not from this planet. I mean I'm convinced from that, him and Ray [Ray Charles], they're not from here. I couldn't tell you which planet they're from.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But they have some spiritual thing going on?
Speaker 2: You can call it whatever you want to. See, the spiritual part is that we live in a twelve note system you know what I'm saying, and the twelve disciples and the twelve months in the year and twelve hours in a day. They were all tied into this thing 'cause all--every country is not on the twelve note system. But yes, they were tied in to this thing. And they were sent here to do what they did.
Speaker 1: Is this part of your destiny? Were you sent here to do this?
Speaker 2: Obviously because I didn't know I was going to be a singer. I mean it's obvious to me later on in my life you know what I'm saying? But I was happy--as far as I was concerned in the music business, I had already made it. It wasn't like I made millions of dollars at the time because--but to work with Ray Charles and be on his album and I wrote a song with Joe Webster called you twent- 'You 20th Century Fox' for Ray. I was already there. I had already made it. When Howard Hewett first came out to Los Angeles, California, first place I took him was by Ray Charles' studio so he could see what we was doing and meet Ray and everything and he was so excited.
Story_ID: 464825
Speaker 1: So the Michael Jack- Michael Jackson song, "P.Y.T." ["P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)"], what was the next phase? When did Michael get the song?
Speaker 2: You know soon as we did the demo, Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] told Michael, I got a hit, I want you to come hear it. Michael loved it. So I'm in the studio--now I got to tell you this 'cause this blew my mind, right? 'Cause I can't dance anyway to save my life. Michael Jackson is singing the song like this, (Singing) (gesture) "Where did you come from--." I mean he was dancing. When I'm singing I'm using all my breath to go straight into the microphone right? Michael was dancing and I couldn't believe it. He was in there sweating and dancing and singing at the same time. It was the most incredible thing I've ever seen in my life. And Michael would come out and say, "Am I singing it right?" I said, "Michael you can sing it however you want to," 'cause he was in there killing it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow. And so tell me more about Michael Jackson in the studio that day?
Speaker 2: His--you know him and Quincy they have the same kind of work ethics, you know what I'm saying? We're gonna do this. Ain't no, you know I'm tired, you know what I'm saying? They just get it. They just do it. Just do it, Nike [Nike, Inc.], just do it. They didn't try to do nothing, they did it. Matter of fact, by me not being a singer, I was getting hoarse a lot, right? And I didn't realize the process. And Michael Jackson turned me on to Seth Riggs who is a vocal coach who did a lot of us. Even Ray Charles went to Seth. And that's when I learned that proper thing and that was me, from me working in the studio with Michael. Because I hadn't done a tour then, right? So I would just sing on--I would sing with Quincy. He would go out for one show and then come back and I would be hoarse the next day. So it wasn't while I was on stage so I didn't really run into any deep problem until you know--I had the preparation before I went out on the tour for myself.
Speaker 1: And so this collaboration, I'm going to get down the year again. So this collaboration with Quincy Jones and Michael Jackson, "P.Y.T." was what year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't tell you. I don't know if that was around 1984 [sic. 1982]. I don't remember. Those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was for the 'Thriller' album.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you write any other songs for the 'Thriller' album?
Speaker 2: No, that was it.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like you were a part of history working with Michael Jackson?
Speaker 2: No, I knew it. It wasn't a feeling. It wasn't a feeling. Just Quincy and Michael there together in a room, it wasn't--it was more than a feeling. You know you're in the presence of some of the greatest entertainers, the music thing in the world, period. And I knew beyond a shadow of a doubt this was a blessing from God to me. I don't know why I deserved it or whatever, but I'm glad for the experience.
Speaker 1: What would you say about Michael Jackson's creative genius?
Speaker 2: That. That they're both geniuses. Geniuses. Michael would study films and all kind of stuff, you know what I'm saying, and other dancers back in the day or whatever, right? They would have--both of them, Quincy would, Quincy would have libraries of stuff, music from other countries and all kind of stuff that he would pull out things and have us listen to and stuff, right? And Michael had a similar type situation but with film and all kind of stuff, you know what I'm saying with the actors and all that and the dancers and everything. And they just had a library that they could just research and just gather information.
Speaker 1: All God given talent but the work ethic played a part?
Speaker 2: It was impeccable. I've never seen nobody work like they work. Quincy to this day does not drive. I don't know if he's ever told y'all that. His attention on music, he can explain it to you better than me, was he actually would be a dangerous driver to drive a car, 'cause his mind is somewhere else. And he'd kill too many people trying to drive. Quincy don't drive (laughter).
Speaker 1: Mind's always going, always perceiving.
Speaker 2: Always. Always. Quincy would be somewhere and he'd start writing down on a piece of napkin or whatever 'cause he heard a melody or an idea.
Speaker 1: Is he like a second father to you, an uncle?
Speaker 2: Musically. Musically, he was a second father 'cause I didn't need a second father. My second father was my birth father [Henry Ingram, Sr.]. My first father was my father who art in heaven. So my birth father was my second father. Quincy was my third.
Story_ID: 464826
Speaker 1: You mentioned the vocal coach. What were some of the exercises you learned?
Speaker 2: (Makes noise), and the tongue (makes noise), a whole lot of things, but these were the things, those two main right there were the ones that I learned to warm up properly. And when I put it with the sports it's like oh, duh it made sense because I'd run a 100-yard dash, I would stretch and warm up. But I never thought to sing because I was--you know what I'm saying? And I remember we were doing a thing for Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] at The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.] because he was being inaugurated into the honors of I forgot what you call it [Kennedy Center Honors], right? And so myself, Ray Charles and Stevie Wonder were doing his portion of that and you could hear Stevie, you could hear Ray and me all doing Seth's [Seth Riggs] program warming up.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you do diaphragm exercises too and--?
Speaker 2: It was just a series of--
Speaker 1: Scales.
Speaker 2: --of the scales, right for your tones and then you use these only to warm up.
Story_ID: 464827
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first album?
Speaker 2: 'It's Your Night'?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What do you want to know?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, tell me about some of the songs. What was the first song and how did it come about?
Speaker 2: Well the title song "It's Your Night," that was written by myself, Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, the same people that wrote "Just Once." You know 'cause we were writing anyway, whether the song was going to go on the album anyway, 'cause like I say Quincy's [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] ruthless. He either hears something that he loves or doesn't 'cause he can't like a song and put it on a record. He don't do it, he doesn't work like that. He either loves it or he doesn't. And so that became the title for the record.
Speaker 1: And did you write the music and the lyrics or was it all a collaboration?
Speaker 2: No, with Barry Mann and Cynthia, you would dare not write the lyrics. She is the goddess of lyrics, you know what I'm saying, so no, no, no. I was just, my participation was the music.
Speaker 1: How did the music come to you?
Speaker 2: Well it depends on who I was working with. But if I was working my- myself and if I'm working for, you know I'm working on something for Michael Jackson who was an incredible dancer right, and we got the thing, "P.Y.T." ["P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)"], well I'm looking for a dance thing. So I'm always thinking of tempo, right? "P.Y.T.," I'm trying to figure out how or what I could do with that hook 'cause I already had it right, the dah, dah, dah, so that already gave me the tempo. And so that would start me into where I would start from and where I would end up from just the title of the song. (Singing) "P.Y.T., pretty young thing, T.L.C., tender loving care." So it set the rhythm and I worked for that--from that and backed up into the verse and then come with the bridge section or C section [coda].
Speaker 1: And how did you put the harmonies in there? That just comes?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I had a four track machine so I would have--'cause back then we didn't have drum machines. So I had a microphone and we had a wooden floor in my studio. And so I'd have a microphone down here and I would have cellophane right here and I would make sure that this (makes rhythm sounds) that the needle would hit in the middle and I would adjust the mic [microphone] or--to like (makes rhythm sounds) or whatever the beat was. Then I'd get a spoon and fork and I'd say, "(Scatting)," right? And then I'd bounce all those down to one track. Then I'd put a bass guitar on--I'd put no, piano next and then a bass guitar and then I'd squash that down to one track. Then I would sing some background and squash it down, whatever I could do and sing just the lead. It's just enough to give me the idea, you know.
Speaker 1: How long would this process take?
Speaker 2: Well the creative process until--no, I would do it in one day in terms of the demo, but the process of creating a song, until it's finished, until it feels right, until I found the right pieces.
Story_ID: 464828
Speaker 1: Were you finding your musical influences coming through your music, Ray Charles--?
Speaker 2: Oh no doubt about that. No doubt about that and everybody else that I loved, the Ohio Players and everybody else.
Speaker 1: How would the Ohio Players come through?
Speaker 2: Well because for you know certain songs like 'P.Y.T.' ['P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)'] and some of the things that I've done, it's funk. So my funk background from those other groups, I'd already performed those songs and stuff so I already know tempo and fields and what the drum thing would feel like you know doing it this way or that way opposed to that. Because it's like a menu, I could pick.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the funk artists you were influenced by, Parliament, who else?
Speaker 2: Oh, no doubt about it. No doubt about it. The Bar-Kays, on and on, I mean even though--The Commodores when they were doing the funk, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: George Clinton at all, James Brown?
Speaker 2: Well George Clinton was a part of Parliament.
Speaker 1: And James--?
Speaker 2: Oh, James Brown was the godfather of funk. You can't even say the word funk without James Brown. He brought the African rhythm roots to the forefront of America, James Brown. You can't be funky without touching James Brown. It doesn't exist as far as I'm concerned.
Speaker 1: Did you meet James Brown?
Speaker 2: James Brown and Tina Turner presented me with my first Grammy [Grammy Award].
Speaker 1: What was that like meeting them in that way?
Speaker 2: Like I say my ears started burning. I never felt that kind of sensation in my life. To this day even though I've had great things happen, nothing 'cause I wasn't supposed to win anyway. And now you have the queen of R and B and the king of soul, rhythm and blues. These were the African rhythms coming from Africa and the blues that we were suffering from in this country as second class citizens. Yes, and he made it like oh.
Speaker 1: Do you feel that when you're composing, that you're transforming these African American art forms, these you know the blues, jazz, slave narratives?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know spirituals?
Speaker 2: Once again, in terms of music to me, jazz is the god of music. The rest of the music is Jesus and the angels.
Speaker 1: Does it feel revolutionary to you, the idea of transforming these forms? You're taking sort of standard forms or forms of, as you mentioned suffering and you're turning them into something, a device of empowerment for the people who listen?
Speaker 2: Well you know evolution yes, but at the same time evolving to what? And is it better or worse or whatever, you know what I'm saying? So I really can't answer that really clear for you.
Story_ID: 464829
Speaker 1: Was your first album ['It's Your Night'] a success?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it went Gold.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the key songs on that album?
Speaker 2: "It's Your Night," "There's No Easy Way," "Yah Mo B There" was a big smash. That was a smash for me.
Speaker 1: Okay. What was the next big moment for you?
Speaker 2: The big moment? Can anything get bigger than that?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well tell me about "We Are the World."
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Huge.
Speaker 2: Huge. Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] had Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie to write a song. I think it was at the American Awards [American Music Awards] that--since they knew everybody was going to be together that they brought everybody over and it was a secret location. They didn't want nobody to know 'cause they didn't want the press and whole bunch of people in our way. And so that night when you came to the door Quincy had up there, you know check your ego at the door. And I remember one of the girls she was talking to us, from Africa, and how pleased she was about what we were doing for her country. And she broke down and started crying. I turned around--people were just, we broke down. Everybody in there, you could see them. We would turn away from the camera you know 'cause I don't want no--see me crying, you know what I mean? It was just heart wrenching.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people there?
Speaker 2: It was so many people. I mean you know we had Kenny Rogers, Tina Turner, Lionel Richie, Stevie [Stevie Wonder], Michael, I don't remember all the names. I could see--it was a whole bunch of us.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite memory from that recording experience?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't want to say it on tape.
Speaker 1: Is there a second favorite?
Speaker 2: Well just--oh, when Quincy brought me back in, not on that day, to put the adlibs on the end cause he wanted me to do the, you know the thing, you know (laughter). And they were filming all that and I was singing and I said something like a--I was hitting some kind of notes and I noticed something come out of my mouth. I said aw man, spit flying everywhere and they had that on--they left it in the video or the thing to do a showing around the world.
Speaker 1: Could you give me a sense of what you were singing?
Speaker 2: In terms of--?
Speaker 1: "We Are the World"? You were adding stuff and--
Speaker 2: Oh no, yeah, well these were things that I'd have to warm up to go reach in my voice.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: "We Are the World," was that, I mean was it an emotional moment? Was it a spiritual moment when all those voices came together?
Speaker 2: All of the above. All of the above. All of the above. You know [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, Harry Belafonte had a big part of that.
Story_ID: 464830
Speaker 1: Tell me about your connection with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte.
Speaker 2: Well Harry Belafonte, I knew Harry as a singer and he met me with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones]. That's basically what I knew about him until he came to Los Angeles, California I think in about the last five, six, maybe even before that. He came to meet with some of the ex-gang members that were helping turn the streets around and stuff, right? And they met at Jim Brown's house. So, Harry comes there and he sees me with them and he's wondering what my connection was. And so Bo Taylor [Darren "Bo" Taylor] who's been instrumental in--to the gang intervention program, I've been with him for over, it's been thirteen years now because I want to know how could I really give back in the community, you know what I'm saying? And so I was a part of that thing. And so when Harry learned that I was participating in this he had a whole other respect for me and we started talking on different levels and information. Matter of fact, at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Harry and Bo and Jim and them, they all came down to speak to the boys down there, the teenagers.
Speaker 1: About social issues?
Speaker 2: Yes, and just you know, preparing them to be men in this world in terms of what you're getting ready to be introduced into. And Harry (laughter), he is, he's one of my heroes. You know all the stuff that he's done as a singer, as an actor and now as an activist, he's incredible. I just love being in the presence of these kind of people because they're God sent. You can't do that on your own. You have to have a big heart.
Story_ID: 464831
Speaker 1: You did several duets throughout the years, and several songs for feature films. Can you take me through some of the feature films?
Speaker 2: Yeah. The first film project that we did was the movie 'Best Friends' with Goldie Hawn and Burt Reynolds. And myself and Patti Austin we sang 'How Do You Keep the Music Playing,' which in my repertoire of music it sticks out because it was Michel Legrand who wrote the music and it's a French melody.
Speaker 1: Can you give us a few bars of that one?
Speaker 2: (Singing) "How do you keep the music playing, how do you make it last." Fifty cent.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's right, got to collect. That's brilliant. So what was it like that process of singing a song, making music for a film? Is that different?
Speaker 2: Well, to be honest with you, this is what happened. We went over there to cut the record with the film people right, and I forgot the director or something. So I'm singing like I sing and this is my first time doing a film project. So the guy came over to me and said, the director, "Can you take the southern-ness out of your voice," right? When Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] heard the song he said, "Why are you singing it like that?" I said, "Well the director came and told me to take the southern-ness out of my voice," you know what I'm saying? So I was singing a little straight, right? He said, "Man, if they want Donald Duck, have them, tell them to call Donald Duck. But don't ever do that." But I didn't know, you know what I'm saying? 'Cause he sent us over there without Quincy. And I'm used to Quincy giving me my instructions and stuff and let me be and do my thing. So what Quincy did, the song was so beautiful, he cut it over.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: He cut it again. So the version that's on our records is Quincy's version. It's not the film version.
Speaker 1: Now this song again had widespread crossover appeal.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Alan [Alan Bergman] and Marilyn Bergman wrote the lyrics.
Story_ID: 464832
Speaker 1: What was it like being received so well by people of all different races?
Speaker 2: It was just a--I didn't even really look at it like that because R and B, pop, whatever, it was just music to me and people was liking the music and I didn't really understand that until I went over to France, Paris. And I told my wife, I said, "Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram], I'm more famous in--." "Oh boy, get out of here," right? So I took her over there with me until we got chased down the street. "[HistoryMaker] James Ingram, James Ingram." And we ran to the hotel and they had to shut the door, right? Then she got it. She understood it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So that was France?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Paris.
Speaker 1: Were there other countries where you were chased down like that?
Speaker 2: Well not so much as chased, but when we go to Manila [Philippines]--see a lot of countries I go to, I can get in a cab and go wherever I want to. When I go to the Philippines, I cannot leave the hotel without an escort of police, police cars and motorcycles.
Speaker 1: Why is that? Now what happens in the Philippines? They just love your music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't have a clue. But I'm going to tell you something that 'Just Once' is like their national anthem. And I remember singing that for the first time when I was down there and they started singing it so loud it blew me away 'cause I've done shows before and never had that kind of response. And it was so loud that I stopped and listened to them and couldn't get back in it. I couldn't--I was trying to find my way back into the song 'cause I was overwhelmed. The only place that I've been to, 'cause it's not I've been to every place in the world, but only kind of response I got close to that is when I go to Jamaica. They be singing every song, every song so loud that sometimes it makes me want to cry.
Speaker 1: For example, what songs do they sing?
Speaker 2: All the songs in my repertoire that I sing on, you know 'Just Once,' 'One Hundred Ways,' 'How Do You Keep the Music Playing,' 'Baby, Come to Me,' on and on and on, you know.
Speaker 1: And is it different having your songs sung to you with a Jamaican accent (laughter) or with that culture?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause you don't hear that. You just hear the melody and the words as a crowd.
Speaker 1: What's the impact on you when you travel around the world and people with different color skin, with different languages, different features, different socioeconomic backgrounds and they're all screaming and singing along with you?
Speaker 2: Well see one thing I learned from Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] is that music is a universal language. So wherever it's allowed into and it's appreciated, it's just appreciated. You know even though like we eat Chinese food, we eat Japanese food, you know what I'm saying? It's, you know, it's just something that either they like it or they don't. And part of Quincy's legacy is that. He is an international artist, producer, whatever you know and a human being too. So his music lends itself to that.
Story_ID: 464833
Speaker 1: Now are these masses of people, these audiences in places like Jamaica and Philippines? How many people are we talking, some of your biggest concerts?
Speaker 2: Well in Jamaica we'd have like thirty some thousand people. And in Manila [Philippines] we had you know we had--when we first went to Manila we had eight thousand and every time we went back we--they had to enlarge the place. And then last time we went they had to go outside.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what years you were in Jamaica, Philippines? Is this like a cyclical thing, keep going back?
Speaker 2: Yes. Jamaica, I usually go every, a couple of years or something like that. I was there, but I was there last year at the jazz festival [Air Jamaica Jazz and Blues Festival; Jamaica Jazz and Blues Festival, Montego Bay, Jamaica] with Patti LaBelle and a lot of other artists and I was there this year.
Speaker 1: So 2006 and 2007?
Speaker 2: Right, but I forgot you know exactly beyond that, you know.
Speaker 1: What other countries have drawn large audiences?
Speaker 2: Well besides Japan, I mean we were in Germany and had big audiences. We were in--
Speaker 1: Italy? Have you ever been to Spain, Italy, England?
Speaker 2: No. We went to, we were in like Monte Carlo [Monaco] and did like some private things. But mainly places like Indonesia; Jakarta, Indonesia; Malaysia; Singapore; Brunei.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of those Southeast Asian countries, Malaysia, Indonesia. What was, what was that like?
Speaker 2: They love African American music. You know one of the biggest exports for the United States is so-called black music. It's powerful.
Speaker 1: What are some of the images of Malaysia, Indonesia, countries like this? While you were there, what did you see in contrast to what you see here?
Speaker 2: Well I mean it's, it's more so of the culture of the people opposed to the place itself.
Speaker 1: What did you see with respect to the culture?
Speaker 2: Well just the food and the religions and you know a lot of things like that. The clothes, the tongue, the language.
Speaker 1: More poverty?
Speaker 2: Well some of the areas that I would go to, they wouldn't take me to those areas.
Speaker 1: Do you find your music has a spiritual impact on people all over the world? An emotional impact?
Speaker 2: More of an emotional impact 'cause like I said, 'Yah Mo B There,' most of the people didn't really know exactly what that was or what it meant.
Story_ID: 464834
Speaker 1: You were starting to tell me about some of the collaborations over the years. Tell me about more of those collaborations. Some of the collaborations were for film?
Speaker 2: Right. I had a chance to sing a duet with Dolly Parton, "The Day I Fall in Love," with 'Beethoven 2' [sic. 'Beethoven's 2nd']. And that was my relationship with Carole Bayer Sager who is an excellent writer. And I remember the day that she--we came over to her house and there was Clif Magness and she said, "What shall we write today?" And she called MCA [MCA Records] and she said, "Look, I have [HistoryMaker] James Ingram over here and Clif Magness and we want to know do you have a film that needs a theme song?" And they said, "Well we have a movie that we have coming out. We have a theme." And she said, "Well do you love it?" They said, "We like it but if you can beat it." And so Carole got on the phone, she called and she said well it's about the two dogs and they fell in love and stuff and then the young kids--and she draw up the scenario and here we come out with "The Day I Fall in Love."
Speaker 1: How did you come up with that, with the music for that?
Speaker 2: Well it's a collaboration with Carole and Clif Magness. I mean I don't know exactly how we started everything but Clif and myself, we're musicians and we participated in some of the lyrics. But Carole is a lyricist and she has the melody ideas and stuff so it's a collaboration. But she's more of the lyricist.
Speaker 1: And so do you remember any of those specific moments? Like were these late nights? Were you in the same location in the studio? Were you at home?
Speaker 2: No we were at her house. We were at her house 'cause she has a studio.
Speaker 1: And so what happens, you're sitting at the piano?
Speaker 2: At the piano, we got paper and pen and tape recorders and coming up with different melodies and ideas and stuff. When we get an idea we start putting melodies to it and forming it and it starts forming itself. I don't really know how it happens except for magic. It's just that you're with the right combination of people and you have an idea because we already had notes from the script. And then it just start--you're sitting around and ideas just start coming. You start forming, they start forming themselves. It's like a child even though a child is a nine month formulation. I don't know if that was a good example, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But it's like a child, it's like giving birth in a sense (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Right.
Speaker 1: And so the process of writing for a film, is it different than the process of writing for an album?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) To me it's the subject matter. We write towards the subject matter. Now how they want to present it or arrange it for the film is a whole other thing.
Speaker 1: And so you don't actually see the story boards or any aspect of the film first, they simply tell you the plot and you write?
Speaker 2: When she got off the phone with us and told us what the movie was about we already knew where to go.
Speaker 1: And there's a synergy in the room where all of you guys are working together--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --on the same page?
Speaker 2: Right. And when somebody comes up with an idea that's like, oh man. Somebody might come up with an idea that's like hm, maybe, right. But when the idea comes and it's like, that's it, we all know and we jump on it.
Speaker 1: How many hours did it take you to write that song?
Speaker 2: I don't know how many hours 'cause usually when we get together we would spend four or five hours on a song even though we have to come back and get together again. But it would be no more than maybe four to five hour sessions. So however long it takes to finish the song (gestures).
Speaker 1: And around what year is this?
Speaker 2: I don't have a--I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Within the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at least. Or was it '90s [1990s], I don't know.
Story_ID: 464835
Speaker 1: And what was the next film you worked on?
Speaker 2: Well you know by the way we were up for an Oscar [Academy Award] for writing 'Beethoven 2' [sic. 'Beethoven's 2nd'] and along with Carole Bayer [Carole Bayer Sager] and Clif Magness, we had a chance to write a song for Arnold Schwarzenegger's movie ['Junior'], I mean when he became pregnant or something. Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram], what was that song ["Look What Love Has Done"]? I can't remember everything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, even before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Well even before we go there, the collaboration with Dolly Parton, can you tell me more about that collaboration?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well I first met Dolly, she was just so warm and just so personable. It was easy working with her. It was fun. It was fun.
Speaker 1: What's she like?
Speaker 2: Dolly is just you know, she has that southern hospitality and she just had that open spirit and just somebody you can talk to. It's not like, even though all of her star and her fame and all that stuff, right, she's just very personable.
Speaker 1: And you were describing the Grammy [Grammy Award] experience. So how did that come about and when did you hear that you were nominated and what was that night like?
Speaker 2: The Grammys? Oh you--?
Speaker 1: I mean the Oscar experience.
Speaker 2: On yeah, well the Oscar experience was a whole new experience for me in terms for--you know we were standing up on the stage with Jodie Foster and them and all these other people getting our pictures taken 'cause we're all up for Oscars. And it's like you know I've written songs and stuff but I was never up for an Oscar until I got with Carole Bayer Sager. So I owe her a lot and I'm very grateful and thankful to her for that.
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about that night and do you remember when this was?
Speaker 2: Oh. I don't remember when it was but what happened was they had a dog on stage at the Oscars in which we performed ["The Day I Fall in Love"]. And the dog was supposed to do a certain thing but the night of the Oscars at the end the dog started doing some other things and I started adlibbing to him trying to tell the dog to come back and they kept it on TV.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So that went actually--so the collaboration with Dolly Parton, that was in 1994 when you were nominated actually for the Oscar--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --around then.
Story_ID: 464836
Speaker 1: Before this though you had a collaboration with Linda Ronstadt that was huge as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't, but I didn't write the song so we weren't up for an Oscar [Academy Award].
Speaker 1: Right, no but you had a really popular song with her.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. It was a huge success with that song.
Speaker 1: What song was that?
Speaker 2: "Somewhere Out There."
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): The song was nominated. You and Natalie Cole performed it on the Oscars remember.
Speaker 2: Well cause Linda Ronstadt couldn't make it. But "Somewhere Out There," it was nominated for the best song of that year or something like that, the Song of the Year.
Speaker 1: Right, uh-huh. And so tell me about that song. How did that whole--how were you chosen for "Somewhere Out There"?
Speaker 2: Well see, she, Linda Ronstadt was on MCA [MCA Records] and I was on Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Records]. So the songwriters once again Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, and--in which I've had the success with them with 'Just Once,' they wrote the song. And so they were trying to get me to be on the song and it was a company thing you know between MCA and Warner Brothers. So it wasn't like an easy thing for me just to go over there. But finally they allowed it to happen.
Speaker 1: And when you first, when you first heard that song, did you know this was going to be a hit?
Speaker 2: When I first heard that song, a friend of mine Steve Tyrell, which is also a collaborator on the song with Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, he's extremely talented. And when I heard the song, I loved the song. It's a beautiful melody. And when they started talking about the mice and the whole bit, very interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is it? So help me to understand this collaborative process and this creative process. Was it similar to the subsequent experience when they tell you this is the film, here is the plot. Now you know someone else wrote the song, but do they explain it to you before you actually interpreted the song?
Speaker 2: Yeah. They explain the song in terms of where it came from and these songs that I've have done were all theme songs of the film. They weren't just songs in the movie but they were the theme songs. And so when they explained it to me and I heard and I heard the melody, I loved it. So I came and laid my vocals down and Linda Ronstadt had already laid her vocals down. And then when I laid it down, Warner Brothers wasn't going to let me do it. So then they said well who do you think could do this? I said well my friend Peabo Bryson, you should get him. And Peabo came out and he sang the song and he thanked me for you know bringing his name up. And then what happened was, finally Warner Brothers gave in and they allowed it to go back so they kept me.
Speaker 1: So this is "Somewhere Out There," this song was for the film, 'An American Tail,' another animated film.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Nominated for both a Grammy [Grammy Award] and an Oscar [Academy Award].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Sold more than five hundred thousand copies, huge. And you and Linda Ronstadt, I mean you guys, I remember you guys singing everywhere. You were constantly singing this song 'cause it was so popular.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How were you received around the world when the two of you sang this song?
Speaker 2: They loved that song because of the film. You know 'cause films are bigger than records you know cause you have a huge video (laughter) to capture you know the theme songs capture the theme for the whole film, which is what two hours or so. So we have this big, expensive, millions and millions of dollars, not a video but a movie that your song has this kind of promotion in.
Speaker 1: And it, you know it's not only targeting adults but it's targeting kids any time you're dealing with an animated film.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So now you have a following of children as well with these animated films.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any experiences with your young fans?
Speaker 2: Well my young fans were usually my children and they want the paraphernalia from you know the mice and all them, Fievel [Fievel Mousekewitz] and them and all that stuff. "Daddy can we get these," you know.
Speaker 1: And was it different? I know when you guys performed as well they often played the animation part of the film, they played a portion of the film as you sang as well. So was that an unusual experience?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That never had happened before because they incorporated us with some of the cartoon characters in the video so all of that was new to me.
Speaker 1: Did it change your creative process at all when you sang?
Speaker 2: No, not the writing or the singing process, no. It was just, that was visuals that I was just learning to be a part of anyway.
Story_ID: 464837
Speaker 1: What was Linda Ronstadt like?
Speaker 2: Just coming in there and singing with a smile on her face. And she was just always happy, you know what I'm saying with a smile on her face. Every time we, you know she loved the song ['Somewhere Out There'] and loved our collaboration with it, right? And every time we would see each other, we'd go back to that moment.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite memory in that collaboration with Linda Ronstadt?
Speaker 2: Well the most favorite--well see the thing was, we didn't get a chance to see it on the Oscars [Academy Awards] because she was out of the country. So Natalie Cole actually sang it live. And we never had a chance (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram], what was that thing that we sang for the--
Speaker 1: All right. So you were talking about the collaboration this time around with Natalie Cole. Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well Linda Ronstadt couldn't make the Oscars this time. So they asked me would I perform with Natalie Cole and I said, I love Natalie Cole. So we had a great time performing that at the Oscars.
Speaker 1: Was it a different experience singing the song with Natalie Cole?
Speaker 2: Well it was a different experience in terms of me ever, my first time ever singing with Natalie. But I never sang with Linda Ronstadt because her vocal was already on the track before I came to the studio. So we really never had a chance to sing together like that.
Speaker 1: And what do you remember from the night singing with Natalie Cole? Do you remember the audience at all? Do you remember how you were feeling, butterflies?
Speaker 2: The song was such a huge song and it was just my first time 'cause I was such a big fan of Natalie and not only her, but her father, Nat [Nat King Cole], you know what I'm saying? So just being around all that legacy, it was, it just, I was just overwhelmed with these people.
Speaker 1: What was Natalie Cole like?
Speaker 2: Just gracious and home girl (laughter), my sister.
Story_ID: 464838
Speaker 1: You mentioned Nat King Cole was an influencing figure. In what way?
Speaker 2: The way he would sing and play the piano. He would play the piano like this (gesture) and be looking over here and just playing, one of the greatest artists that ever existed. Nat King Cole, King, proper, one of the greatest musicians, singers we've ever had.
Speaker 1: Did you incorporate any of Nat King Cole into your own sound?
Speaker 2: Well you know I can't really tell you 'cause I didn't incorporate anybody on purpose. But at the same time you can hear a little bit of everybody in me.
Speaker 1: Who can you hear?
Speaker 2: Well you can definitely hear Marvin, Donny.
Speaker 1: Marvin Gaye?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sorry. Yeah, Marvin Gaye, Donny Hathaway, Stevie [Stevie Wonder], some of Aretha [Aretha Franklin], some of the things she would do, you know the runs and stuff. I mean those are things that I'm conscious of. I mean those are the people that I'm conscious of.
Story_ID: 464839
Speaker 1: Soon after the collaboration with Linda Ronstadt [on "Somewhere Out There"], that huge success, you released your third album ['It's Real'] right? So the second album was before the collaboration with Linda Ronstadt and then following, your third album. So tell me about those two.
Speaker 2: Those two albums?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Never Felt So Good,' yeah well I had--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-six [1986]. Yeah, I had a chance to collaborate with Keith Diamond 'cause Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] was on the films then. And so Keith produced my second album.
Speaker 1: What are some of the songs we might know from that album?
Speaker 2: "Never Felt So Good," "Say Hey," blank.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the inspiration for that one?
Speaker 2: Just music. Just music. What were you going to say Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram]?
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Well that was the time when you said Quincy couldn't do the film but Keith Diamond was coming on (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He couldn't do the album.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Huh? Keith Diamond was coming off of the biggest, one of the biggest records (unclear)--
Speaker 2: "Caribbean Queen."
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): --"Caribbean Queen" with Billy Ocean.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's from Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago].
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): And Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Records] really, that was not something they even really released.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Albums like he (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, that's why I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay. So if you could repeat that on camera with Keith Diamond, that same story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't want to put that negativity out there on them.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): No, talking about Keith coming off of the (unclear).
Speaker 2: The great success.
Speaker 1: Oh. Okay yeah but not Warner Brothers (unclear) oh yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So tell me about Keith Diamond and his role?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well Keith Diamond, he's from the Caribbean and he had the big hit with Billy Ocean, "Caribbean Queen" 'cause they were both from the islands. And so I had a--you know a great time with him because they had a different perspective of some of the grooves you know from the islands and stuff so some of the rhythms would be a little different. And somebody who captured that was Lionel [Lionel Richie] with "All Night Long" ["All Night Long (All Night)"]. That was brilliant. That was brilliant 'cause he captured the Caribbean feeling with the American--
Speaker 2: Real hybrid.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So can you give me an example of how this Caribbean influence affected this album?
Speaker 1: In terms of Keith?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the songs that may--?
Speaker 1: Well, all of the songs that he produced with the rhythm and stuff 'cause he programmed a lot of (background noise)--
Story_ID: 464840
Speaker 1: So we're talking about your second album, 'Never Felt So Good,' and one of the really beautiful songs on that album, "In the Wings of My Heart" [sic. "Wings of My Heart"], can you tell me a little bit about that song?
Speaker 2: Well if you're going to get married it's definitely a wedding song.
Speaker 1: Can you help, help me remember what song that is? How does that song go?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it goes, (Singing) "I remember the day you went out of your way, I remember the day you went out of your way to see me I do, I still feel butterflies when I look in your eyes, that old magic is still there." I want a dollar for that one.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You got the dollar, it was worth it. So you had that album and then you did the collaboration with Linda Ronstadt [on "Somewhere Out There"]. Album number three ['It's Real'], tell me about that whole process.
Speaker 2: Well before album number three, should I bring up the quartet?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Or should I bring up the trio that I did?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: With Kenny Rogers and Kim Carnes.
Speaker 1: Oh yes.
Speaker 2: Should I bring that up?
Speaker 1: Yes, tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well you don't want to really hear about it.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: You don't want to hear about the racism in that song or shall I leave that out?
Speaker 1: Leave it in.
Speaker 2: Okay. We talked about the duets with Patti Austin, "How Do You Keep the Music Playing" and "Baby, Come to Me" and Linda Ronstadt. And I did a trio with Kenny Rogers and Kim Carnes called, "What About Me?". And the interesting song, interesting thing about that song, when I was sitting at Quincy's [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] house and Kenny Rogers called Quincy and said, "Quincy, we can forget about that song in the South." He said, "Why?" He said because Kenny and Kim Carnes start off singing the song and then I come in and I say, "You were my love before and I need so much more." In other words I've been with you right? The South with the racism couldn't take that. So they let Kenny know, we're not playing this.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. My only trio, it is a beautiful song.
Speaker 1: And what was your reaction?
Speaker 2: Well I grew up in a racist society so it's nothing new. (Singing) "What's new pussycat, oh" ["What's New Pussycat"]. (Laughter) It's not new.
Speaker 1: But life in Los Angeles [California] is a little bit removed from life in the South. They're more progressive racially?
Speaker 2: Yeah, more than the rest of the United States is, because see the South is where we as slaves come from. We lived in the South we didn't live in the North. We migrated north for better living conditions and got tricked.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about this collaboration?
Speaker 2: I remember when we sang the song and all three of us was in the studio, it was just like magic happening. And I remember when Kenny Rogers, he was on 'Johnny Carson' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], right? And he turned the album cover back around and there was me, Kenny Rogers and Kim Carnes. Johnny Carson, he put it on his album. Kenny is one of the best people that I know, I mean you know what I'm saying? His heart is like gold. He's such a talented brother. But he's a good human being.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a story about Kenny Rogers?
Speaker 2: Well you know Kenny and Lionel [Lionel Richie] had a big relationship in terms of the musical thing and stuff. He would go down there and write and all that. So my relationship with Kenny was only in the studio. But just me knowing him in the industry in terms of people talking about him and stuff right, he's just a beautiful human being.
Speaker 1: And you were describing that moment in the studio, Kim Carnes, Kenny Rogers and yourself. So tell, take me through that rhythm.
Speaker 2: Well see that was like, more like a movie to me in terms of a script because it wasn't a duet where I'm the man and you're the female, you know what I'm saying? This was a three way and it was the first time it ever happened, right? So it's like the perspective of the song was different and I've never had nothing like before or after that.
Speaker 1: And so how--what was the process? Who was writing the melody?
Speaker 2: Well see I didn't write the song so right now offhand I don't remember exactly who the writers were [Kenny Rogers, David Foster and Richard Marx].
Speaker 1: But performing it, there was just instant, instant synergy between you?
Speaker 2: Right, between the three of us.
Story_ID: 464841
Speaker 1: Album number three?
Speaker 2: Album number three, what was the name of that album?
Speaker 1: 'It's Real.'
Speaker 2: Oh right, right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: What are some of the songs on that album?
Speaker 1: "Someday We'll All Be Free" by Donny Hathaway, I covered that, "It's Real," I also covered, I covered "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Man," and I had a huge hit with "I Don't Have the Heart." I had the number one pop hit.
Speaker 2: I don't have, yeah that's--"I Don't Have the Heart" was a big one.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Now that collaboration right there, it was produced, the album was produced, most of the album was produced by Thom Bell in which he produced "I Don't Have the Heart," who Thom Bell had the--
Speaker 2: Tell me more about that song.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well Thom Bell's connection with the Mighty Three publishing [Mighty Three Music Group], Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gamble] and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff], you know Philadelphia International [Philadelphia International Records]. The difference between Thom Bell and a lot of producers is that he was an orchestrator like [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. And so he actually wrote out the string parts, the horn parts and all of that. And it was his idea not to bring the drums in, until the outro of the song as he was going out. I thought that was genius. There's no drums in that song until the end and that's all Thom Bell. So working with Thom Bell was a whole other pleasure in terms of working with an orchestrator/producer where they're not just hearing the songs and the music but they can actually hear the flutes, the harps, the violins and all this stuff, you know what I'm saying? He's another one of those geniuses.
Story_ID: 464842
Speaker 1: What is it about these geniuses, Thom Bell, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, Michael Jackson? What do they have in common?
Speaker 2: They do things that other people can't do, most people cannot do. Most people as a producer cannot orchestrate. Most people that sing like Michael Jackson cannot dance and do the things that he can do. Harry Belafonte not only as a singer and an actor, activist. See, like I said before Harry and Sidney Poitier to me, they have a different sense of themselves because they come from the Caribbean and the people on their money are black. Their presidents are black so their sense of second class is only financial in the Caribbean. It's no such thing as seg- what because of my skin color? They run into that over here.
Speaker 1: And it sounds like you're saying that genius in part is defined by some divine intervention?
Speaker 2: No doubt about it. No doubt about it.
Speaker 1: Have you experienced that as well? I mean it seems like the door kind of swung open for you and you've moved through this amazing career with a degree of ease?
Speaker 2: Well I don't call myself a genius but I was blessed to be around them and participate with them and I go down in history with them. But I don't consider myself a genius.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I just don't.
Speaker 1: Is that humility?
Speaker 2: Like I say the gift of God is his. I don't really take claim for none of that.
Speaker 1: Do you feel you are gifted?
Speaker 2: Oh no, doubt about it, I have a gift. But it was given to me and I either use it or lose it.
Story_ID: 464843
Speaker 1: You mentioned the mentors along the way, these role models, have record companies been helpful through the journey? We always hear you know music, the music industry is a business.
Speaker 2: It's a big business, yes. It's a big business.
Speaker 1: How have you been able to navigate your way through?
Speaker 2: Well see my faith is not in record companies. My faith is in God. That's how I navigate. That's how I navigate my way through life. And record companies and music businesses is just a part of my life. It's not my life.
Speaker 1: Who have your managers been over the years? Who--which people have helped to navigate your way through the industry?
Speaker 2: Well I've had managers but the managers that made, the managers that have had the biggest impact on me, that had the biggest impact on me was Dick Scott who had the New Kids on the Block 'cause he was a part of the Motown [Motown Records] regime in terms of working with them in different aspects and stuff. And he knew about the grooming for artists and certain things they needed. So he knew about the music business but he also knew about the stage and certain things that an artist should have as a manager.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a story about Dick Scott that would exemplify this?
Speaker 2: Well Dick Scott flew to Japan because he was so busy and stuff right, to catch one of my shows, right? And he'd tell me, he would give me advice. He said, "James [HistoryMaker James Ingram], they called your name. You took too long to come out. You got to come out," you--just a lot of little things that he would give me. I said, "Okay I'll work on it Dick."
Speaker 1: That was in Japan?
Speaker 2: Right. He flew to Japan from Hawaii to come see the show.
Speaker 1: So you described earlier a concert in Japan before you were a huge success and now this is the time when you are hugely successful. What's the difference?
Speaker 2: Well see the first time I went over there with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones]. We had huge success with those songs but I was like a--like I said I sang in the background section and we would come out and do a song and then step back. And then somebody would come, you see what I'm saying? So I was a part of a thing opposed to all of the focal attention was on me at this time.
Speaker 1: And so how big were the crowds in Japan?
Speaker 2: We would play some of the theaters, three, four thousand people.
Speaker 1: And you would go multiple times. You went in the '80s [1980s], you went again in the '90s [1990s] back, back to Japan?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 464844
Speaker 1: Any other highlights on your third album, 'It's Real'?
Speaker 2: Gerald Levert in whom I come up in Akron, Ohio and his father [HistoryMaker Eddie Levert] was in Cleveland [Ohio], which was thirty miles away from us. He produced a song for me. He wrote it, sang all the backgrounds and that was the first time we had a collaboration together. But he brought up the point that his father told him a story about me when I was a teenager in Akron, Ohio when The O'Jays performed at the Inferno [Akron, Ohio]. And it was this guy playing the organ and they wanted to take me on the road but my parents [Alistine Wilson Ingram and Henry Ingram, Sr.] wouldn't allow me to go and it laid him out that I go back that far with his father.
Speaker 1: So you knew Gerald Levert's dad back in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew The O'Jays you know what I'm saying? I didn't know their individual names at the time and all that but I opened up for them just playing the organ and they wanted to take me on the road and my parents wouldn't let me go. I was sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: And he remembered you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he remembered his father saying it to him when he told me he was going to write a song and produce it for me.
Speaker 1: At that time?
Speaker 2: Right, once we did it, when his father knew he was working with me he told him the story.
Speaker 1: Oh, so everything came full circle?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We recently lost Gerald Levert.
Speaker 2: I was with him two weeks before that. We taped Jeff Majors' show ['The Gospel of Music with Jeff Majors'], his gospel program. And matter of fact, Jeff Majors has an album coming out and Gerald is being featured on one of the songs. That's one of the lost--last songs he sang.
Speaker 1: Was he a brilliant artist as well?
Speaker 2: Gerald, he knew all the tricks because of his father. He come up in the music business, you know what I'm saying? He was a great producer, great songwriter, a great singer, a great performer. Matter of fact we did a thing down here for some kind of thing in which Gerald was on the show. And we'd always mess with each other, right? So he went out there and he got a standing ovation. So he came off stage. He said, "Yeah, now who gonna follow that? Yeah, what, what right?" And he's looking at me, right? I said, "Man I hope I don't have to go out there behind you," right? So they did put somebody else in between us and stuff right. And when I came out I said yeah, see I don't have to go behind that. So I came out and I got my standing ovation too so we was like--we would always do things like that.
Speaker 1: Was he, he's a funny guy, jokester?
Speaker 2: Yeah. He's the most down to per- down to earth person I've ever met in my life. He was another person that wasn't with that star thing. It wasn't about the star thing, it was about the music. It wasn't about the limelight it was about the music. And you could hear it in his voice. You could hear it in his productions. I'm gonna miss him.
Story_ID: 464845
Speaker 1: In 1990, another collaboration with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.
Speaker 2: 'Secret Garden' ['The Secret Garden (Sweet Seduction Suite)']?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was my first, what do you call it, foursome would you call it, a quartet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, Al B. Sure!, El DeBarge and Barry White. That song has got me so much attention with Barry White and them and everybody on that song. It was very powerful, very powerful.
Speaker 1: Well tell me about the song.
Speaker 2: 'Secret Garden'? Like you don't know.
Speaker 1: Why was it--(laughter) well for the kids--
Speaker 2: But you tell me, you know more than I do.
Speaker 1: No, no, no. For the children who will be watching this tape years and years from now, what would you like them to know about the song, about the story, of the lyrics, about--?
Speaker 2: I'm not going to do that on tape (laughter). That's for grown folks.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's over their head.
Speaker 2: That's what you call an X rated song kind of, sort of or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay. Working with El DeBarge and Al B. Sure! and Barry White, people like this, what were they like?
Speaker 2: Well Barry White, all those big hits he had and all that stuff right, and he had that big following. El DeBarge, I remember El DeBarge when my brother [Phillip Ingram] was in the group Switch because his brother [Bobby DeBarge] was in the group Switch, the lead singer. And I remember going to a church in Los Angeles, California and El DeBarge was playing behind his uncle and his mother [Etterlene Abney DeBarge] and they was out in front. And that's when I realized where their family got all their musical talent from 'cause their uncle and their mother was fierce with the music, you know what I'm saying? And I didn't know much about Al B. Sure!, but it was my connection with Barry over the years 'cause I've known Barry, you know what I'm saying? And then El DeBarge, we had a chance to hook up on some of the shows and stuff together.
Speaker 1: What about Barry White? He's known as the most romantic singer, aside from yourself in R and B.
Speaker 2: Right, but you know he was another one of those who had orchestral music, you know what I'm saying, all those strings and stuff behind his music and stuff. He wasn't just a funk and some synthesizers and stuff but he came up in that realm of all real music in terms of real instrumentation, not synthesizers.
Speaker 1: Can you think of a story about Barry White?
Speaker 2: Well Barry told me one time, we had a long discussion how he had went to the Dead Sea to--'cause he was searching a certain kind of knowledge. And he had found out the Dead Sea wasn't as dead as he thought to--'cause people--it was a hotel with people--it was packed for them to go and just walk out in that Dead Sea cause it had healing powers and principles in it. And I don't remember word for word but I remember us talking about that. He was a deep brother, very deep brother. He was saying some things that I ain't going to repeat.
Speaker 1: Another one who will be missed.
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Story_ID: 464846
Speaker 1: Tell me about 'The Power of Great Music' ['The Greatest Hits: The Power of Great Music'].
Speaker 2: What happened to 'The Power of Great Music,' I remember being in Dick Scott's camp. Barry Arms [ph.] was my liaison as we traveled and we were coming from Europe and I had, "I Don't Have the Heart" out. And so people said, "Oh, I love your music, oh the--." But a lot of the people on the plane didn't connect "Just Once" and all, some of the older music because it was scattered 'cause a lot of my music was scattered over there right. So it was Barry's idea to come up with a greatest hits record in terms of 'The Power of Great Music' so that was his idea. And it wasn't like Warner Brothers [Warner Brothers Records] wanted it at the time but it's still selling to this day.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the singles?
Speaker 2: "One Hundred Ways," "Just Once," "Baby, Come to Me," "How Do You Keep the Music Playing," "Yah Mo B There," the theme song that we did for BET [Black Entertainment Television], "Remember the Dream," "Whatever We Imagine," I think some of the duets, "Somewhere Out There" was out there, yeah a lot of stuff was on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So all the hits?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All your hits, well that had to be quite a success as well.
Story_ID: 464847
Speaker 1: You mentioned BET [Black Entertainment Television], you also mentioned 'The Tonight Show,' you mentioned Dick Clark. What was your experience like doing the talk show tour, circuit?
Speaker 2: Talk show?
Speaker 1: Talk shows?
Speaker 2: Like oh--
Speaker 1: 'Tonight Show with Johnny Carson' ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'], you mentioned that. That was a--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I had a chance before he left the air to do 'I Don't Have the Heart' on his show. And to be sitting there that with legendary Johnny Carson and it was one of the last shows right, and I had to apologize to my school [East High School; East Community Learning Center] in Akron, Ohio because they had like you know the homecoming thing or something you know they have for alumni right, and I said well you know I have to apologize. I was on the show and I said, "I have to apologize to my class students but I think will understand that I had a chance to be here with Johnny Carson." So--
Speaker 1: And he was gracious?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they were--you know a lot of those guys are so professional, they just know how to make you feel at home. So it was like you sitting at somebody's couch like even though you have the audience, but a lot of those guys really know how to make you feel like you're at home and there's nobody there but you and them. And he had that magic. Johnny Carson was brilliant, 'The Tonight Show.'
Speaker 1: Are there other pivotal moments in the talk show history, 'Arsenio' ['The Arsenio Hall Show'] or 'Oprah' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] or 'Merv Griffin' ['The Merv Griffin Show'] or 'The Today Show,' ['Today'] anything that stands out in your mind, appearances on shows?
Speaker 2: Not like 'Johnny Carson.' I mean I don't want to put nobody down and stuff, so y'all gonna erase that, boom, boom, boom.
Speaker 1: That's okay. But 'Johnny Carson' was the big moment?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for me.
Story_ID: 464848
Speaker 1: What would you identify as a big moment, in the mid-1990s you released the greatest hits CD ['The Greatest Hits: The Power of Great Music'] in 1991. As you progressed what were you up to in the mid-1990s?
Speaker 2: The mid-1990s--
Speaker 1: Touring?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was doing some touring but at the same time being with my family and--because see my first tour with Patti LaBelle was six months. I made a lot of money but it put so much stress on the family I vowed to never in my life ever do that again. And so at the most I may go out for two weeks now. You know I've been out for maybe six weeks after that. But I'll never be out there for months like that.
Speaker 1: And you have six children.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I know there was a moment we were going to go back and talk about a moment but you had a child who was born--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. My second child Jennifer [Jennifer Ingram], she was born at four o'clock in the morning. And by the way, I've seen all of my kids come into the world. I was there with every birth. But after she came into the world at four o'clock, I went home and laid down for maybe three hours and I was in the studio at ten o'clock in the morning singing "One Hundred Ways" with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones.
Speaker 1: So that's a demonstration of your commitment to family and your commitment to music.
Speaker 2: Well the thing is my children are some of the biggest highlights of my life, you know what I'm saying? Quincy and them was the highlights of my career, not my life. And so it was a different thing, but they were running simultaneously. And so I was just so high on, you know my second daughter being born, you know what I'm saying and then being with Quincy Jones. So that, I wasn't tired in the studio even though I only laid down for maybe two or three hours.
Speaker 1: That would be a pivotal moment. That would be a giant moment in anyone's life. How were you able along the, over the years to juggle both family life and family responsibilities and maintaining those relationships and specifically of course with your wife [Debbie Robinson Ingram] and balancing this growing major music career?
Speaker 2: Well the only thing that put stress was the six months tour, you know what I'm saying, where I couldn't see them enough that I you know when I want to see them, you know what I'm saying? That was the only time that I had stress like that 'cause I couldn't just uproot the whole family and fly everybody out because we were moving and doing a lot of one-niters.
Speaker 1: Other big moments that you want to identify with the family life?
Speaker 2: In terms of--?
Speaker 1: Well you mentioned the birth, other big birthdays, family vacations?
Speaker 2: Well we always go back to our hometown, Akron, Ohio every year. That's a shoo-in. We'd have chances to travel other places and a lot of times they'll go with me, when I go to Jamaica they all want to go 'cause they love it in Jamaica you know some of the little islands like that.
Speaker 1: So you've been able to give them a sense of their roots as well in Ohio?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no doubt about it. No doubt about it.
Story_ID: 464849
Speaker 1: As you look back on your life, what would you identify as the biggest moments in your career?
Speaker 2: The biggest moments in my career was when I got with Ray Charles. When I was working on Carl Carlton's record, "She's a Bad Mama Jama" ["She's a Bad Mama Jama (She's Built, She's Stacked)"] and knowing it was a hit in terms of what I felt in my heart. And the things that I've done you know with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and from that day on, they're all big moments to me. And now I'm about to release my first inspirational record that the single should come out February 3rd of 19--I mean 2008 and the album will be coming out the day before Mother's Day. It's called 'Stand (In the Light).'
Speaker 1: And how is this album different than the others?
Speaker 2: Well on my first album ['It's Your Night'] I had "Yah Mo B There," which was an inspirational record. This is just a continuation of that but it's a whole album of inspirational music.
Speaker 1: We didn't talk a lot about 'Always You.'
Speaker 2: With Keith Diamond [sic.].
Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: Right, that was the name of that project.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, so 'Always You' in 1993 around there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that album didn't even exist. I don't--you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I loved working with Keith Thomas but the company [Warner Brothers Records] wasn't behind me anymore, you see what I'm saying? So that album didn't even exist and that was very painful. But I went back to get Keith Thomas 'cause he's such an incredible producer with Bebe [HistoryMaker Bebe Winans] and CeCe Winans and them and Vanessa Williams and all that stuff, right? Well he's the biggest producer on my new inspirational record 'cause I love his talent and his gift.
Story_ID: 464850
Speaker 1: I wanted to learn about your collaborations with Debbie Allen, the great dancer. She has other talents huh?
Speaker 2: Yes. Debbie is an excellent songwriter. Matter of fact what Debbie Allen did, was she took me to, me and my wife [Debbie Robinson Ingram] and her husband, Norm Nixon, we went to a play called 'The Phantom of the Opera.' And we went to go see this play and so Debbie looked at me, she said, "We can do this," 'cause that's her world anyway right, theater and all that. I said, "Debbie, I can't do that. No, get somebody else." "You can--." I said, "Debbie, I don't--unh-uh, that ain't for me," I--you know what I'm saying? So when we left there, my wife said, "Look, James [HistoryMaker James Ingram] just try one thing. Just write one thing with her and if you don't like it then you can back up." To make a long story short, I got into that stuff with Debbie and we've been writing plays for The Kennedy Center [The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.]. We've--I think we're on like our seventh or eighth one. And matter of fact, they even talked me into being in one of the plays called 'Brothers of the Knight' [Debbie Allen] in which I was the minister of the play. So Debbie Allen is extremely talented and matter of fact we co-wrote the theme for my new album, my inspirational album called 'Stand (In the Light)' and we also co-wrote a song called "Mercy" on my inspirational record.
Speaker 1: So speaking of those, of the plays you co-wrote, what was that creative process like with Debbie Allen?
Speaker 2: Debbie would sit down and she would tell me the story line you know what I'm saying? And she would dance or animate herself and describe it right? And she'd have like melody ideas or some ideas and we would take them and go to the piano and start working on them and then I would take them home and start beating them up and putting tracks together and coming back and saying, "Well Debbie, is this it?" And she'd say, "I like this part but we need to do something with this and that," you know what I'm saying? And it's a collaboration. And some of the stuff I would never even dreamed of doing because it doesn't fit into the realm of commerciality, you know what I'm saying? And I didn't even know these things were in me that she drew out of me because it's a different kind of freedom in the theater than you have in terms of coming on the radio doing popular music.
Speaker 1: Give me an example of one of those plays. What was the story line?
Speaker 2: What--the story line? Well, it's not so much the story line as it is the music for me, 'cause I didn't write in the story lines.
Speaker 1: So what was the, tell me the story of the music.
Speaker 2: Well, I've done some orchestrational pieces with synthetic you know violins and violas and whatever right, that when I hear them back it's like I can't believe that I did it. But it came out of Debbie creating this thing and I need something like this and I need something like that, you know what I'm saying? And it's--we did a play years ago called, the 'Brothers of the Knight.' I think it was the 'Brothers of the Knight.' (Directs speech off camera) Debbie, what was the play that they just did, was that the 'Brothers of the Knight' that they're just getting ready to put back out?
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): 'The Legend.'
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, 'The Legend,' okay edit, boom, boom, boom.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: We did a play called 'The Legend' years ago and Debbie put it back up this past winter. And when I heard that stuff, when I came to the rehearsals and stuff 'cause she has her own dance studio and the whole thing. And some of the stuff I couldn't believe that I was even a part of because it was so many years ago and we've done other plays and stuff, right? But this one you know thing, 'The Bayou Legend' [Debbie Allen, Owen Dodson and Jeff Stetson], some of that stuff I could just not believe that I did this stuff or it came out of me.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the scores were so complex?
Speaker 2: Right, it's something I would never do in me making records to appeal to my audience.
Speaker 1: What do you think influenced you in that way?
Speaker 2: Debbie Allen, period. Debbie Allen, 'cause she would say I need something like this, you know orchestral piece, something like this like a Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart] or--you know what I'm saying? And I would go listen to different things to just try to get a clue right and come back with my mammy made version of whatever you know I'm thinking she wants and the collaboration just worked. But when I heard it back I still couldn't believe it came out of me.
Story_ID: 464851
Speaker 1: And she [Debbie Allen] collaborated with you on songs for your upcoming album ['Stand (In the Light)']?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my inspirational record.
Speaker 1: So tell me about those songs.
Speaker 2: Well, "Mercy" was actually one of the songs from the play ['Brothers of the Knight,' Debbie Allen]. "Stand (In the Light)" came from actually--the inspirational work behind that was Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]. "Stand (In the Light)," we're talking about standing in the light of God. But the lyrics were like, "In a time--." There are so many lyrics on my mind just skip--wait a minute.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): "In a time when the truth is--."
Speaker 2: Oh, the lyrics goes, (Singing) "In a time when the truth of the words are not spoken, there's a war, there is hatred tearing us apart, and the sea reaches high to horizons now broken," talking about Katrina. You know what I'm saying? You keep on going, but the thing is to stay in the light, the light of God. We are in a country where we look at our country and say, refugees? Unh-uh, no, you have to answer to God for that. You're going to have to answer for that. But we're the United States? United are we, or divided? What's the proper title for where we live? (Directs speech to the camera) You as an artist, you tell me. Huh? So that's inspiration in terms of the theme for that.
Story_ID: 464852
Speaker 1: Over the years have you been affected by various tragedies, 9/11 [September 11, 2001], you mentioned Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: Has it made its way into your creative product?
Speaker 2: Well, not that I would write about it. But what happened, when the Katrina thing came out we all collaborated and got together for this record that never really came out so we could donate the funds to Katrina. And I don't want to go into it in detail, but it never came out.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Touch, touch on the gang violence. People you've mentioned are no longer--you know that they're dead now, but you used to mentor them.
Speaker 2: And you were talking about [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and his role with the gangs and gang prevention and leadership. Did you play a part in that same cause, gangs?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I still am. I still am.
Speaker 2: What are you doing? What have you done?
Speaker 1: Well we go to a workshop with a curriculum and we go through the curriculum you know to life management skills and to help them. But at the same time on the side it's certain stories about where they came from, you know talking about OG, original gangsters and all that stuff, right? How are you the original gangsters when you didn't have your father in the house? Nine times out of the ten that was part of the problem. Well I said did you ever see 'The Godfather' movie? Well, when you went to the Godfather for a favor, he said how much time you spend with your family and your kids, which is mafia. (Speaking Italian) Ma familia, my family. So how are you the original gangsters? You know there's little things like that and just some of my life experience and stuff and understand why they are in this condition, you know that would be off on the side of the curriculum because a lot of them see me as a celebrity and it's like why would you even take the time?
Speaker 2: And so you see your role on this earth not only as a musician but also as a social activist?
Speaker 1: I don't know what the title is because I didn't even know I was a singer. But I want to know a way that I can give back and I found it. Matter of fact, we were at a [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones thing--well with Brotherhood Crusade [Los Angeles, California] and they were honoring Quincy Jones and I was performing there. And this guy, Bo Taylor [Darren "Bo" Taylor], he came up to me and said, "Well you know I got this thing you know, gang intervention," such and such and such and such and I said, "This is my number." I said, "Give me a call." And when we got together, it might have been seven o'clock at night, he didn't leave my house until two or three in the morning. And I thought I knew about some of the gangs and stuff, I didn't have a clue to that degree. And so the information that I had about life ran into him. Bo always give me and Debbie [Debbie Robinson Ingram] credit for, if it wasn't for us that he wouldn't have been ready for a Jim Brown or a Harry Belafonte. He always accredit us for that. But I saw what he was doing in the neighborhood and I saw his passion for what he was doing. He had a storefront thing that he could barely manage to keep it open by his self. And I was locked into him ever since and I'll be locked into him and his movement and what he's doing 'cause it changes people's lives, changing people's lives. And they're receiving information where they're not receiving it nowhere else on that level about where the gangs really came from.
Story_ID: 464853
Speaker 1: Now as you look back on your life, you've named many people in the music industry who have influenced you in powerful ways. Who would you name on that list, perhaps there are people like Nat King Cole who influenced you, people maybe you never had the opportunity to meet and then there are those whose lives touched you directly. Who would you put on that list?
Speaker 2: Donny Hathaway in which I had a chance to meet him before he passed: Stevie Wonder, we were good friends: Marvin Gaye came up to me when I won the Grammy [Grammy Award] for 'One Hundred Ways' and he said, "Aw man, I love your voice." I said, "Marvin, why wouldn't you? All I'm doing is imitating you." And he fell out laughing. So artists like that you know there's artists you know--
Speaker 1: Stevie Wonder you mentioned. How did he touch you?
Speaker 2: You know Stevie Wonder, Little Stevie Wonder when he was twelve years old coming up and just how he came up as this artist and then this great producer and some of the music he just had out, it just touched me.
Speaker 1: Miles Davis?
Speaker 2: Well see, all the jazz musicians touched me because I started out on my way to being a jazz musician. Jimmy McGriff you know playing the organ, Jimmy Smith. And I got caught up into playing behind groups that were singing The Temptations' music and da- you know what I'm saying? And I realize why I had to do that because I was going to be in the industry later on in my life where I had to learn how to write those kind of songs and do what I'm doing today.
Story_ID: 464854
Speaker 1: For the children and the adults who review this tape throughout the years, what do you want them to know about you?
Speaker 2: Is that, I'm a man who was blessed to take care of my family and to bring the world and touch the world with the collaboration of the great people that I've been surrounded with like [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, to the world. It is a blessed scene in that sense of the word.
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy?
Speaker 1: In the world of music, what are you leaving behind?
Speaker 2: Never even thought of it.
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Song that will outlive you.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a good one honey. I'm going to act like this is a--
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): Say it on camera.
Speaker 2: --it came from me.
Speaker 1: What would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy along with Quincy Jones and the people that have participated in my life, we have come up with songs that will outlive all of us.
Speaker 1: Why? Why are these songs that will live--?
Speaker 2: Because they were written by great people, great musicians, great producers and they're just songs that, I mean even today, I'm singing songs with, that have a lifespan that people will come, to come see, where a lot of artists don't have those particular songs and weren't blessed to have those songs. And it spans since 1980s, over twenty some years, almost thirty years. And Quincy know--I told, Quincy, we talked about this. We know that those songs will outlive us.
Story_ID: 464855
Speaker 1: What are your favorite songs on your own repertoire?
Speaker 2: My favorite song is 'Just Once' and because--not only is it a great song written by Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, but it was my connection to Quincy that opened up the doors of the music business to me on another level that I will never have had that kind of opportunity if it wasn't for [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones growing up, being who he became. Nobody else ever had that particular key to open up the door.
Speaker 1: How would you define the [HistoryMaker] James Ingram sound? What is your signature?
Speaker 2: My signature sound? I can't hit it. Your microphone can't take it, it's too little. It will distort. But it's that high thing that I do, yeah when people hear that, they laugh.
Story_ID: 464856
Speaker 1: What would you like to say to [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, your mentor?
Speaker 2: Quincy, I love you. I thank you for believing in me as a talent and giving me these songs that will outlive the both of us. I appreciate you brother, and I want to see you in the next world.
Speaker 1: To close, is there just one bar from one of your favorite songs you can sing for the future generations?
Speaker 2: No, you want me to sing something. They don't want to hear me sing. I've been singing all through the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, what did--I said what did you like your legacy to be? You'd want to be remembered as what?
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): A man that was blessed to take care of his family?
Speaker 2: Yeah I said that. You didn't hear that?
Speaker 1: (DEBBIE ROBINSON INGRAM): No, I was--must have dozed off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you must have dozed off.
Speaker 1: So for posterity, you'd like folks to remember you as a talented musician, as a man who fought for the people?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't really care to be honest with you if I'm remembered.
Story_ID: 464857
Speaker 1: What's your final word to the children? They're going to watch this tape and this is your last chance to touch their minds and their hearts and their souls. [HistoryMaker] James Ingram, a legend in his own time.
Speaker 2: (Directs speech to the camera) Don't do crack [crack cocaine] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Bring something else? What do you want me to say? What do you all want me to say?
Speaker 1: Is there a message you have to them about--you've achieved so much in your lifetime and you're still very young.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That ain't young.
Speaker 1: And there are children out there who see your life and they see you as a role model and they want to learn how to do it, how to be great.
Speaker 2: Well, this is what I was taught and it worked for me. Faith in God and confidence in yourself and here's nothing that you cannot do. And I believed it and it works. Faith is the substance of things that are hoped for but the evidence of things that are unseen. You have to have faith.
Speaker 1: James Ingram, you are a legend and a hero to me. Thank you for this wonderful interview today.
Speaker 2: Thank you for having me.
