Story_ID: 372293
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden and the videographer is Scott Stearns.  The location of this interview is 6120 Oregon Avenue Northwest, Washington, D.C., and the date is November 8th, 2006.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Today is the 9th?  Okay, October 9th [sic. November 9, 2006].  Madam HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: My name is Mary, M-A-R-Y, Edith, E-D-I-T-H, Ivey, I-V-E-Y [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mary Ivey].
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And would you give your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born February 9th, 1937 in Vian, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell Vian?
Speaker 2: V-I-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what big city is that near?  By--
Speaker 2: That's very near Tulsa [Oklahoma], like an hour and fifteen minutes away.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's also near Fort Smith, Arkansas, like thirty minutes away.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  What is your occupation, your profession, and what titles do you presently hold and with what organizations?  What is your occupation?  What do you do?
Speaker 2: Currently, I'm a pastor of the Church of God's Love [Washington, D.C.].  I founded the church five years ago.  It's a nondenomination church--nondenominational church--and I also am president and chief executive of Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.], which the church falls under.  I started the ministry when I was in seminary [Wesley Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C.] prior to the beginning of the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had a career before you entered the ministry?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was in education and then I worked for the government, but my career started out as an educator.  I taught elementary education.  I taught adult education.  I was an assistant principal.  I was a home school coordinator and a school principal.  At the time that I left Kansas City, Missouri, I was the youngest school principal in the City of Kansas City, of any race or gender.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And you had some career experiences in the Washington, D.C., federal government?
Speaker 2: Yes, I came to Washington on leave from the Kansas City, Missouri, school district to stay two years and I met my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] about a month after I had arrived and I ended up being in Washington; this is like my thirty-fifth year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I worked for the government for twenty-six and a half years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 372294
Speaker 1: Well, we have kind of a, a foreword or a slate.  Before we get into the formal part of the interview, we have some warm-up questions, we call People magazine type questions to give the viewers of your interview over time another slant on your personality, and so I'd like to ask you, Reverend Dr. [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mary Ivey], what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably collard greens.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay.  And do you have a favorite time of year, season?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Powder blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I love to travel.  And so I--I've been so many places that I've enjoyed so much.  And so I don't have any one place, but I've just been to so many marvelous and beautiful places.
Speaker 1: I'm sure you have a number of answers to the next question but I just need one.  What is your favorite phrase or saying, philosophical statements that you like to use from time to time with your colleagues, friends, relatives?  You have a favorite saying that you like to--
Speaker 2: I always tell people, "I love you"--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Good.  Good.
Speaker 2: --because that's the greatest gift that you can give someone and it's the most deep concern that you can have for a person.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 372295
Speaker 1: We start by discussing your family roots because we want the people who look at your interview to know something about your background, your antecedents, your family, and all the things that nurtured you as you grew up which brought you to where you are today and the things you've done in the past.  So we're going to start with your mother and I wanna ask you to give me her name and when she was born and where.
Speaker 2: My mother was Lucy Anne Ballard [Lucy Ballard Lacy], and when she married my father [Boyd Henry], she became Lucy Henry.  She was born in Vian, Oklahoma, in 1910, October the 19th, 1910.
Speaker 1: Where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: In Vian, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever share with you stories or anecdotes about her growing years as a child in Vian?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did and they were scary things that she shared with me.  They were always talking about haints, ghosts, spirits, whatever you call them that people had told them as they were growing up and there would be things that would make me afraid to go to bed at night (laughter).  And then she would tell us about the importance of growing up to wanna do something and to work because that was something that my grandmother [Johanna Ballard] had instilled within her.
Speaker 1: Any other stories that you told you about her growing up years?
Speaker 2: No, she just would talk about her friends and pretty much the things that they did.  You know, that was back when there wasn't a lot of money around, so they played a lot of cards, Bid Whist, and Pinochle, and they did a lot of quilting.  And she used to share that with me, the kinds of quilts they made.  In fact, she made some for me.
Speaker 1: Do you still have them?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I don't have but one left.  But I still do have one, yes.
Story_ID: 372296
Speaker 1: What do you know about her educational opportunities and background?
Speaker 2: At the time that my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] grew up, the eighth grade was as far as you could go at the school that she attended, and so she completed that and that was it.  She always said she wished she could have gone further but she was so smart anyhow, it--if she had gone to school and finished, she would've have been something really outstanding.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you have, let me see, one, two--two brothers [Charles Henry and Sammie Henry] and two sisters [Mildred Henry MacDonald (ph.) and Thelma Louise Henry Johnson], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So she had a family.  But in addition to raising you and your brothers and sisters, was she employed?  Did she have any jobs or occupations?
Speaker 2: My mother did domestic work.  She worked, I guess you would call it now a maid in other people's homes, um-hm (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --and everybody in town [Vian, Oklahoma] wanted her to work for them.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And when we had her birthday parties later in life, the president of the bank whom she worked for and the people who ran the largest stores and everybody always came to her birthday parties. And that was very important to her because she always said they were always like family.
Story_ID: 372297
Speaker 1: How do you remember your mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] in terms of her personality?  What kind of person was she?
Speaker 2: Funny.  Serious.  She used to scare my friends to death by saying, "Girl, I'm going to kill you if you don't get in here," and they would think that she really was gonna whip me or beat me up, but I don't think she ever whipped me but one time in my life.  But, she would--she had a stern way about her.  If she spoke to you, she meant it.  But, she had a real--a real yen for having fun and for laughing.  And, and she was--she was really funny.  I--she was like a sister to me really, like a best friend.  I felt like I could talk to her about anything.
Story_ID: 372298
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's [Lucy Ballard Lacy] parents, her mother and father?  Can you give me their names, your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Johanna [Johanna Ballard] and she married my mother's father, Henry Ballard, and then subsequently she was married to Mr. Irving [ph.] when she died.  But I was still a little girl, a young girl, when she died, but she lived out in the country on thirty-five acres of land and she was what we called an entrepreneur at that time because I didn't know anyone else who sold health products from their home.  And she sold what they called cubo [ph.] and liniment and all of those kinds of things.  And everybody in the town [Vian, Oklahoma] purchased from her.  She sold all kinds of lotion and hair pomade and everything back then.
Speaker 1: When was she born?  You mother was born in 1910.  When was your grand--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, I'm not really sure.  And that's something that I'm going to research because I should know it and we should all know it, but I don't know when either of my grandmothers were born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did she get these products from?  Did she--
Speaker 2: Well, somebody mailed them to her.  And I don't know where they came from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --I just remember seeing the little brown boxes and even after she died, my mother started doing it and had some.  But I don't know where they came from.  But they were sent in the mail--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --to the post office.
Speaker 1: Did you ever help her with her work?
Speaker 2: No, I never did help with that.  Sometime I would go with her, but she pretty much would already have the orders taken and so all she needed to do was just to deliver them to the people.  And sometimes they would come to her home and get them.
Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you about her growing up years?
Speaker 2: No, she just--well, yeah, she just said that they had to work in the fields all the--all the time and they, you know, lived on farms where they chopped cotton and picked cotton--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --all the things that they do on farms.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 372299
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father, his name, and when and where he was born.
Speaker 2: My father's name was Boyd Henry.  He was quite an interesting person.  He was born in Vian, Oklahoma, and he cut hair.  Everybody almost in town came to our house and he cut their hair for twenty-five cents.
Speaker 1: Twenty-five cents.
Speaker 2: I remember that.  And he also did construction work later on to supplement his income.  So he did those two things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was he born in?  Do you recall?
Speaker 2: And I don't recall that either.  And that's something I need to research as well.
Speaker 1: Was he older or younger than your mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy]?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: He was just maybe a couple years older than my mother, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe say 1908 roughly?
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 372300
Speaker 1: Did he [Ivey's father, Boyd Henry] share with you stories about his growing up years?  What do you know about his childhood and--
Speaker 2: No, all he talked about was my grandmother going to do her work delivering babies, everybody in town [Vian, Oklahoma], and he always thought it was ridiculous that she didn't get much money for what she did.  But then people didn't have a lot of money back in those days either, so--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Mary [Mary Henry].  I'm named after her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her name was Mary and she delivered all of us and almost everybody in town.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.
Speaker 2: She was a midwife.
Speaker 1: What else do you remember about her?  What was she like?
Speaker 2: Well, she had stern--she was pretty stern.  She had blue eyes and straight, long white hair almost down to the middle of her waist.  And she didn't do a lot of playing around with us the way my other grandmother [Johanna Ballard] would do it and the way my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] did, but she used to carry me sometimes in the little wagon or buggy when she went to deliver a baby because sometimes I used to spend the night with her on the weekends.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, uh-huh. What about your father's father [Charlie Henry]?
Speaker 2: I didn't know him.  He was dead when I was born.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did he do?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I think he was just--he was a laborer because back during that time, unless you had some money or some way to go to school or a way to finish high school, there really wasn't too much else to do but that type of work around there, especially in a small town.
Story_ID: 372301
Speaker 1: Your father [Boyd Henry], you said--we'll come back to your father, you said he did some construction work also.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Building houses or what would he--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he worked for other people when they were doing that, uh-huh, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Was he a carpenter or all-around handyman or do you remember?
Speaker 2: I am not really sure.  I'm not really sure.  He probably was an all-around handyman because he did some of everything.  Yeah, I remember around the house and all of that.
Speaker 1: What was he like, personality wise?  How do you remember your father?
Speaker 2: I remember that my father was a very good-looking man.  And I remember he was very jealous of my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy], which I could never figure out because I thought most people thought he was a better-looking man than she was a woman, although my mother was probably more gregarious than my father.  But I just always remember that he always wanted to know where she was all the time.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Do you know how they met and where they met?
Speaker 2: I don't know that.  Now, all of those things really I wish now that I did know.  And probably my oldest sisters [Mildred Henry MacDonald (ph.) and Thelma Louise Henry Johnson] and brothers [Charles Henry and Sammie Henry] probably did know, but I didn't know.
Story_ID: 372302
Speaker 1: Well, you mentioned brothers and sisters.  Would you give me their names and their birth order?  And they're not living today, but tell me about your, your siblings from the oldest to the youngest.
Speaker 2: My oldest sister's name was Mildred [Mildred Henry MacDonald (ph.)] and Mildred--I think Mildred quit school when she was in the eleventh grade and she wanted to make some money so she left home and went to Fort Sm--Fort Smith, Arkansas, to work and the next thing we knew she had met Willie MacDonald [ph.] and she had gone to Wichita, Kansas, with him.  And then after they hooked up together and everything, Mildred had, I believe--I believe she had eight children, six boys and two girls, uh-huh.  And she pretty much had her hands full taking care of them, but she also did some domestic work also on the side after then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your next sibling?
Speaker 2: Louise [Thelma Louise Henry Johnson] was her name and Louise had one child.  Her daughter still lives in Wichita; that's where she was living at the time.  She had gone to Wichita because Mildred was in Wichita making some money and they wanted to go and work and make money and I believe Louise quit school when she was a senior in high school.  Ju- I, I could never figure that out, but she wanted to go to Wichita and I suppose Mildred had come home and she went back with her and she never finished high school--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --just a few months left and so she ended up doing domestic work also.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And your first brother?
Speaker 2: Charles [Charles Henry].  Charles, I believe he left school when he was in the 10th--11th grade, 10th grade.  He was very bright.  He could add up the numbers in your--in his head before you could get them out on--always until his death, he could do that.  And he was--he loved mathematics and numbers like that, but he left high school and went to the [U.S.] Army.  That was the big thing back then, the guys going to the Army.  And so he went to--he was in the Korean conflict [Korean War] also.  And he came back, he got married to my good friend and they moved to Kansas City, Missouri, and that's where he spent all of his working career in Kansas City, working for Carter-Waters construction company [Carter-Waters LLC].  All of--that's the only job I ever remember him having.  And he worked there until he was disabled and retired.  But he was a worker.  He was a worker's worker.  Yeah, he would--did everything faster than anybody else and all of that.  And he was a lot of fun.  Everybody just loved him and had the best heart in the world.  He would give you his last dime and you didn't even have to know him.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. And you had one more brother, right?
Speaker 2: Sammie [Sammie Henry].  Sammie was my youngest brother and he also left school and went to the Army, but I don't think that he enjoyed the Army as well as Charles did, and so he came back home and he got married, was subsequently divorced.  And then--unlike Charles, he didn't stay married.  But anyway, Sammie kind of liked the bottle a little bit too much.  I can't say that he was really an alcoholic, but he drank too much.  Let's put it that way.
Speaker 1: You were born in '37 [1937].  When was Mildred born?  Was she--do you recall roughly?
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about Sammie?  Was he younger or older? Was he--
Speaker 2: All of them were older than me.
Speaker 1: They were all older, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest of five (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.  So, they were all born in the '30s [1930s] roughly.
Story_ID: 372303
Speaker 1: What are your earliest, farthest back memories as a child?  How far back can you remember as a child?  What incidents and situations do you remember?
Speaker 2: I remember going to school [Douglas School, Vian, Oklahoma] when I was about three years old.  My [paternal] grandmother, Mary [Mary Henry], also kept teachers who were--single teachers who were boarding and she had one teacher named Edith Jenkins and my middle name is for her.  And Ms. Jenkins was unmarried and so she made her--I was like her little toy girl.  So, she taught me to read--to read by the time I was three years old.  And she made reading fun to me, and I bless the Lord for her to this day because, because of her, I've always enjoyed reading.  It is my passion now.  If I could get rid of some of the books I have, I could (laughter)--yeah, but anyway, I remember that.  And I always--and I used to like to dance when I got older.  And I just like fun and people.  I'm very outgoing and very gregarious and so if it was fun--and then when I was a little girl, I used to go--I wanted to go to the fields and work and make some money.  And I was perhaps the only girl my age or the youngest in town catching the trucks going to the fields to pick tomatoes, pick strawberries, cut spinach and all of that.  And my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] would say, "Now, don't you get up there on that truck and get hurt and fall off."  And everybody in town were saying, "Why do they let her go?"  But I would cry to go.  I would beg to go because I was always independent, always wanted my money, always liked shoes and my mother would let me buy a pair of shoes with my money (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You still like shoes?
Speaker 2: --and go to the fair.  Yes, I still like them.  I have far too many.
Story_ID: 372304
Speaker 1: Tell me about your home, the house itself and the neighborhood [in Vian, Oklahoma].  What street did you live on or did it have a name?  What was the neighborhood like where you grew up as a young child with your brothers [Charles Henry and Sammie Henry] and sisters [Mildred Henry MacDonald (ph.) and Thelma Louise Henry Johnson]?
Speaker 2: It has a name now but at the time, it didn't have a name.  And I can't remember what the name is now, but it does have a name now.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 2: But we grew up in a bungalow-type house, three bedrooms, a living room, dining room, kitchen.  And at that time that we were growing up, I suppose because my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] did domestic work in other people's homes and she always wanted the best, and so I remember that we had an electric cook stove before anybody else in our community, professional or whatever, the teachers, we had one.  We had a bathroom, a full bathroom before anybody else in our community had one and people used to want to come--ask my mother could they come to our house to take a bath?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I remember that (laughter).  But my mother was very meticulous.  No one could sit on her bed once she made it up.  That, that, you got in trouble about if you did that and she always--people loved coming to our house.
Story_ID: 372305
Speaker 1: You said that your family, your mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] and father [Boyd Henry] in the home that you lived in, the bungalow, were the first to have indoor plumbing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that everybody came and--
Speaker 2: Wanted to--
Speaker 1: --to see it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Wanted to come and use it, to actually to take a bath and my mother would actually allow people to take a bath.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. It happened often or?
Speaker 2: Not real often and they were people that, you know, she liked or knew well, uh-huh, neighbors, uh-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighbors in your immediate neighborhood.  Were there a lot of neighbors or was there a lot of distances between where people lived?  What was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: No.  The neighborhood was--there was a pretty good--people lived maybe a half a block from each other or something like that or maybe not quite that much.  There were a lot of people in our hometown during those years and--
Speaker 1: How many--how large was the population, would you say?
Speaker 2: Oh, the population.  Oh, well--I--I'm not going ever say it was over five thousand people, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a lot of the people left as they matured because they went to Michigan to work in the--a lot of people went to Flint, Michigan, to work in the car industry, a lot of people when to California, a lot of people went to Missouri, and so because there was nothing there to do but farm or labor-type, you know, work.  And so--
Speaker 1: Well, did farming decline in some way and that's why people left?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  They had cotton pickers by then and, and people who used to pick cotton and chop cotton and all of those kinds of things were kind of out of a job, I guess you might say, and so they had to seek employment elsewhere.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. But the houses were fairly close to each other, so it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --they were--it was--
Speaker 2: We weren't like off some place by ourselves, no.  There--yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were there different sections of Vian [Oklahoma] like north, south or one side or did they have sections within the town that had names to them or?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  Most of the black people lived across the track, though, and like in most times back during, you know, the segregated years--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and what have you.  But Vian has always been a pretty harmonious town.  The races have gotten along well there.  Right now, today, I have very good friends there.  In fact, a, a white physician, his wife and I, Suzanne [ph.], we're very good friends and I just love her dearly. And--
Speaker 1: Well, how do you explain those good relations because, you know, Tulsa [Oklahoma]--
Speaker 2: Had the riot, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) had a lot of problems, you know, and Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], but how do--how do you explain the--
Speaker 2: I really don't know how to explain it except I can tell you this.  I, I re- I mentioned the fact that my paternal grandmother [Mary Henry] was a midwife and that she delivered actually most of the people in town including white children as well, and that's kind of of Indian Territory, Cherokee, so a lot of Indians [Native Americans] are there.  I don't know how the relationships developed but rarely did I ever hear of any kind of unpleasantness or anything going on between the races, although it would be years later that we actually attended school together.  And I don't know--it's still like that today.  It's like that to this day and that's one thing that I like about it.
Story_ID: 372306
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you and your brothers and sisters do together outside of school?  You may have gone to the same school, but what kinds of things did you do as children with each other?
Speaker 2: I didn't do too much with them because remember I was the youngest--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so by the time I got large enough or old enough where I could go places, most of them had gone.  Sammie [Sammie Henry] was the last to leave.  But in terms of really doing things together, that would've been like Mildred [Mildred Henry MacDonald (ph.)] and Louise [Thelma Louise Henry Johnson].  They were a couple of years apart and then Charles [Charles Henry].  They were all closer together than I was, so, just that they all were very nice to me and, and, and they-then when they went away, they would send me back a dollar or five dollars and--you know, and all of that.  But, I really didn't do a lot with them because of the age differences and that they had gone.
Story_ID: 372307
Speaker 1: Tell me about church life.  Did your family participate actively in a church?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My grandmother [Johanna Ballard] on my mother's side was staunch Baptist.  In fact, where she lived and owned land, where she built her home, she ended up giving the church some land to build the house on.  The church, Mt. Olive Baptist Church [Vian, Oklahoma] still stands today and still, still is a church ongoing to this day.  And the pastor there is a friend of mine, T.D. Drew [Thomas D. Drew].  So--and his mother is still living.  When my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] became ill, his mother went and spent nights with her because I was here and my mother didn't want to come to live in Washington [D.C.] because she was afraid that she wouldn't get back to Oklahoma to be buried if she came here.  But I was going to see to that.  But, anyway, my grandmother went to church all of the time, religiously, and so I--when I would go spend the night with her, I would go with her.  On my father's [Boyd Henry] side, my grandmother, Mary [Mary Henry], was Pentecostal and I used go with her to church--with her to church.  Now, that's what they called fun because people would get happy and shout and fall out, and all of those kinds of things.  And so--but, they were truly churchgoers, they really were.  And then my mother also was a real churchgoer.  She served in almost every capacity in church, superintendent of Sunday school and treasurer of this, that, and always was raising some money for the church and cooking dinner for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which church did she go?
Speaker 2: Baptist.  That church still stands today.  In fact, the current pastor has been one of the honorees here [Church of God's Love, Washington, D.C.] on my ministry year--for my ministry, year before last, but--
Speaker 1: So that's the third church in the family then?  You have Mt. Olive, you had the Pentecostal--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was there another church?
Speaker 2: Yes, and--yes, uh-huh.  And they had a Methodist church there also at the time, but it's not--I don't think they have services there anymore.  It's been a long time since I recall that they had church.  And then there was a fifth church--five or six.  They had about six churches as I recall there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that primarily were black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 372308
Speaker 1: Which of these churches did your father [Boyd Henry] attend?
Speaker 2: Really unless somebody forced him almost to go, and when I say that, I'd say my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] or my grandmother [Mary Henry], he wasn't a big churchgoer.  In fact, my father kind of complained about the pastors and, and, and about putting his money in church, and so he was not a big churchgoer.  The women were primarily the churchgoers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which church did you attend or churches?
Speaker 2: The one that my mother attended and, and we had a rule at our house for my mother.  If we did not get up and go to church, we couldn't go to the Sunday matinee or any place else.  And so church was the thing and then we had BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America] for the young people at night, Baptist youth service or something like that and we had to go to that, and so that's where I attended church.
Speaker 1: Now that you are an ordained minister with a divinity degree and an important church person in, in Washington [D.C.], did those early experiences catch up with you later or not?  I mean, was there any kind of long term influence that you think the church may have had on you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I was very surprised actually myself when I was called to the ministry and some people had asked me why I did not go into the ministry in the very beginning because as I said, I had been in education and then with the government subsequent to that.  But I was called to the ministry later in life during a time when both my mother was ill in Oklahoma and my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] was ill in Washington.  And so I was doing a lot of praying and I became closer to God.  And I can't really recall that there was anything earlier in my life that would have made me think I would go into ministry.  I was--I think everybody was surprised, but I was surprised more than anybody.  And I fought it.  I didn't really, really want to do it, but that's what happened.
Story_ID: 372309
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds, and smells remind you of your growing up in Vian [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Sights--
Speaker 1: Sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Sights, when I'm passing any place and I see a lot of vegetables and I guess produce and things. I think about all of the things, the--cutting the spinach, picking the strawberries, picking the tomatoes, and I love tomatoes and strawberries today, but just seeing things that are grown naturally, things with a root.  That reminds me of the kind of roots that we came from.  And the smells of good cooking when I really, really smell something that smells like you've just gotta have a bite of it.  My mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] was an excellent cook.  Everybody wanted to eat some of her food.  And she could make barbecue sauce where everybody in town wanted to--in fact, she ended up selling it because people wanted to come and taste her barbecue sauce.  But--and the sounds, I guess when I hear the wind blowing.  I remember that my mother was--that's tornado country sort of, and my mother was afraid of tornadoes and so we had a cellar.  And when the wind would start blowing really, really hard, she would tell us to get ready to go to the cellar, and I hated it because it was down under the ground.  But that--the sound, that's the sound that I remember is when the wind blows real hard.
Story_ID: 372310
Speaker 1: You've already told us how industrious your mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] and father [Boyd Henry] were and you've talked about attending church and how important that was.  Tell me more, a little bit more about your family life and family traditions and holidays that you remember.  What do you do as a family and what traditions do you remember that happened every year?
Speaker 2: Well, the family had to work from sun up to sun down.  I remember that when you're working in the fields and working for other people.  But I, I do remember that we had music at our house, what did they call them, Victor--Victrolas or something like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That--we had one of those and played music and, as I said before, on the weekends, our house was just always filled up.  That's where people came and, and there were always card games going.  People loved to play Bid Whist and have cards.  And my mother often made spaghetti and meat sauce on the weekend or a pot of chili and I remember that quite well.  And that was all fun to us and it was a good way to keep us at home, too, because we wanted to be there.  But those were the primary things.  Of course, I had a bicycle and I used to like to ride my bicycle.  I think at the time I had one, I might've been the only little girl in town [Vian, Oklahoma] that had--the first one, anyway, to have a bicycle.  And I told you I was very independent and I made my own money a lot of the times and helped to buy those things.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. Okay--
Speaker 2: But we celebrated Christmas and all of the holidays and Easter.  That was a big time when we got our new little dress and new shoes at Easter and things like that.
Speaker 1: Any other memories from your growing up years that we haven't talked about, any other flashbacks?
Speaker 2: Not really because, like I said, when you live in a small town, there's not a lot to do other than school and church and working and those kinds of things.  But it was always fun.  I never knew it was anything else to do because we didn't have television back then--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And so it was just about going to visit somebody and having conversations, talking about who did what, when, and where, and who was out of town and coming home, and what they had to wear, and what kind of car they had gotten, all that kind of things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you mother and father have an automobile?
Speaker 2: We had one car.  I think it was a Ford and I really don't know what happened to that car.  My mother couldn't drive, but--and I don't know what happened to that car, but somehow it got away.  But, my daddy used to love to ride the horses.  He had two horses and one was called Bald Face [ph.].  He had a streak right in the center.  And he used to like to ride that horse and make him stand up on his hind legs and everybody used to just love to see him do it.  It was kind of a show-off thing.  And I remember one time, he almost injured himself pretty badly, his back or something because the horse ran up and threw him back, and I think he had a hammer in his back pocket.
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you couldn't go to the movie house if you didn't go to church?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you did have movies, a theater?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was segregated though.  The, the black people had to sit upstairs in the balcony, and the other people sat downstairs, but there was a movie, only one in town.
Speaker 1: What kind of movies did they show?  What--do you remember what you used--
Speaker 2: Roy Rogers and Trigger, and all of those.  They were mostly cowboy movies.
Speaker 1: I remember.
Speaker 2: Not too many love stories--
Speaker 1: I--
Speaker 2: --as I recall.
Speaker 1: I remember.  That's all I remember.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 372311
Speaker 1: When did you start school?  What elementary school did you first attend?  Tell us about your entering school and what that was like, and how you remember that.
Speaker 2: The school's name was Douglas [Douglas School, Vian, Oklahoma] and later, it became Douglas High School, but I think I remembered all the time being Douglas, but then it later, it like I said, became the--because the whole school, the entire school was one building and, well, then--so back then, we had what, the kindergarten and then the--I think the first grade and second and like that.  And so I always did well in school because I told you, Ms. Jenkins [Edith Jenkins] had taught me to read and went--I went to school early even before it was time for me to officially be enrolled in school, and so I enjoyed that.  And I enjoyed the games they played at school too, hopscotch and all the little, you know, tag, all the little games that we played.  I always had fun playing the games.  And we had--at first when I started school, there were no lunch programs and we had to carry our lunch, and I remember sometimes we had--carried biscuits that were made up, and maybe it would be bacon or something cooked in it.  You know, at that time, they sliced their own bacon--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --pretty thick and that kind of thing and maybe an egg, and I guess we probably ate cold eggs and bacon then, but we didn't think anything of it.  We didn't know that there was any other way to do it.  But later on, we did have a hot lunch program.  And then there was a lady named Ms. Graham [ph.] across the street from the school, and she sold hamburgers on light bread, and you could buy a hamburger for 10 cents or if you went in with somebody and didn't have but a nickel, she would cut it in half for you. And--
Speaker 1: This was at her house?  You'd go to her house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right across the street.  Yes, right across the street from the school.  And she, she was a pretty good cook.  Her food tasted really good.  She sold some cookies sometimes and other things, but primarily hamburgers, primarily hamburgers.
Story_ID: 372312
Speaker 1: So you were a good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And were there any teachers in the elementary school years [at Douglas School, Vian, Oklahoma] that you remember particularly today that influenced you in any way or?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Ms. Jenkins [Edith Jenkins] was one of the them, the one I told you about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She probably was my favorite teacher.  And my next favorite teacher was Gussy Foreman Drew and she is dead.  But I always liked the spirit in which she taught school.  She had a real love for sports and so she always had us out playing baseball or something, some kind of little ball, touch ball.  But she always had spelling matches and spelling bees and I was a good speller.  But she just had a style of teaching that made it easy to learn, I thought.  A lot of people thought that she was a very stern person because she was a matter-of-fact type person, but I always, I always enjoyed her teaching.  So, those are the two people that I enjoyed the most when I was in elementary school growing up.
Story_ID: 372313
Speaker 1: What kind of child were you?  You talked about being a good student and obviously you liked school, but what kind of child were you?  What were you like as a child?
Speaker 2: I was a good child (laughter) I did things pretty nice.  A couple of times, I stayed out too late out at night with my friends.  And I remember one time, I stayed out and my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] had given us--given me a little curfew to be in.  I think I was the only one left at home by then, and I didn't make it in by the time I should've gotten home, and so I pulled my shoes off on the porch to tip into the house, and the room that I was staying--sleeping in then was the front bedroom and my mother slept in the one next to it.  So I eased into the bedroom and I sat down on the bed, but I sat on her.  She was in the bed waiting for me (laughter).  And so she says, "Oh, you finally made--."  Oh, I was so afraid.  I just knew she was just gonna really whip (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --me and kill me that time.
Speaker 1: It was dark and you didn't even see her?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I--no, I, I didn't wanna see.  I just--it never occurred to me that she might be in my bed waiting for me, but it was a little late.  But anyway, she just had a little talk with me and I didn't do that anymore.
Story_ID: 372314
Speaker 1: How many years did you spend in the elementary school [Douglas School, Vian, Oklahoma]?  Did you go through grade eight at this school or did you have a middle school or?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't--
Speaker 1: Because you said it was all one building (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was all one building.
Speaker 1: So you stayed for how many years in this school then?
Speaker 2: We went to the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth.
Speaker 1: All in the same building?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. But I wasn't at that school during the total of my education because my family left Oklahoma and moved to Kansas City, Missouri, for a time, and I went to I think the ninth and tenth grade at R.T. Coles [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School] in Kansas City, Missouri.  And then my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] divorced my father [Boyd Henry] and went back to Oklahoma and so subse- subsequent to that, she always lived in Oklahoma and he lived in Kansas City, Missouri.
Story_ID: 372315
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did they move to Kansas City [Missouri] in the first place?  Why did they move (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To work.  Remember, I told you the farming and everything was--
Speaker 1: Oh, so they were one of the families that left too, your parents--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --because of the farming--
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and it was better pay and everything.
Speaker 1: So what kind of work did they get in Kansas City that was--
Speaker 2: My mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] worked in a friend's restaurant, and that was the hang out of the town's people.  Let me tell you, her name was Urabelle Walters [ph.] and it was on 24th Street, I believe.  And we lived on Forest [Avenue].  And so, that's where my mother worked when she went to Kansas City.  And they had the best food in there.  I'm telling you they could all cook.  Like, my mother--and in fact, one of her--her best girlfriend is living here in Washington [D.C.] now with her daughter in Southwest [Washington, D.C.] and they are--and her best girlfriend's older sister owned the restaurant--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: --and so they all worked for her.  And I can't remember the name of it.  But, anyway, everybody in town, professional and nonprofessional--everybody came to that restaurant and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of work did your father [Boyd Henry] find in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: He was doing construction work.
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: He worked all the time.
Speaker 1: No barbering (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was just--no, no barbering wasn't paying.  He was--construction work was paying better money by then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 372316
Speaker 1: So, you spent a couple of years in school [R.T. Coles Vocational and Junior High School] in Kansas City [Missouri]--
Speaker 2: And I went back home to Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: --and then you were back and you graduated from what high school?
Speaker 2: Douglas [Douglas School] in Vian [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay, in Vian.  Okay.  Were there any special subjects in high school that you liked more than others?  What was your favorite or did you kind of lean towards anything particular?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, what did I really like?  I just--I don't think I had any, any special subjects, to tell you the truth.
Speaker 1: Any special teachers that you remember who influenced you or motivated you in any way in high school, either in Kansas City or back in--at Douglas?
Speaker 2: Well, in Kansas City, I took dressmaking under a teacher named Ms. Merritt [ph.], and I liked her manner of professionalism in the classroom, the way she taught you to hem a dress or to do this, and she wouldn't accept sloppy work.  If you did it wrong, you had to take it loose and do it over and at first, I didn't like that, but I came to appreciate her because in a sense, she was telling us to always do our very best.  And I remembered my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] always said, "Don't keep a dirty house, always keep yourself clean and neat, always look nice when you go out," all that kind of thing, so Ms. Merritt.  That was one of the things that stood out from her.  She was always very neat and she taught dressmaking.  And some of the teachers were not always as, you know, well-kept as others were back during that time, but I remember that about her.  And then when I went back to Oklahoma, I liked Ms. Bradford [ph.], too.  She was fun.  She was--taught I think social studies classes, but she also was the music teacher.  And--although, I never was good in music and couldn't play the piano very well, just kind of peck at it, and my mother actually sent me to take music lessons, but I didn't take it seriously, and now I wish that I had.  You can tell by the piano over there.  But anyway, I liked Ms. Bradford because you could go and talk to her, uh-huh, so I liked her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you were in high school in Kansas City and back in Vian, did you work during the summers or after school? Did you have any jobs during high school?
Speaker 2: Not really, sometimes I might work during the summertime, you know, cleaning up a beauty shop or something like that, uh-huh, but not a job per se.
Speaker 1: What year did you finish high school?  You graduated (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 2: I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  From, from Douglas?
Speaker 2: I'm not real good with dates, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's okay.  That's, that's close, 1954.  When you went through high school and at the time you graduated, did you have any firm idea or notion about what you wanted to do for a career, job, occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, all the people who were my role models were school teachers.  And I--in fact, for the society that I grew up in and for the people around me and in our social life as well, there were very few things other than teaching and preaching that I knew people who did--who went into those professions, so I wanted to be like Ms. Jenkins [Edith Jenkins], and so I knew that I would be a, a school teacher.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 372317
Speaker 1: Where did you go after high school graduation [from Douglas School, Vian, Oklahoma]? What was the next step?
Speaker 2: I went to college.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to Oklahoma College for Women [University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma] in Chickasha, Oklahoma.  It's an all-women school at the time and subsequently it became Oklahoma College of Liberal Arts and Sciences [sic. University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma], I believe.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't want to give you the incorrect (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's all right.  What did you study there?  Were you preparing then to--
Speaker 2: I majored--I had--actually when I graduated, I had a double major in business and in elementary education, if you would believe that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And the reason for that was I had become friends with--well, one of my friends had a father-in-law, who would become her father-in-law, who was a principal of a school.  And so one time he asked me what did I plan to do when I finished college?  And I said, "Teach."  And he said, "Where?"  It hadn't occurred to me where I might teach school.  But anyway, so, he said, "Well, what are you majoring in?"  And I told him business.  And so he said, "Well, can I make a suggestion to you?"  And I said, "Yes."  And so he said, "If I were you, I would take some elementary classes also because you can always get a job teaching elementary education, but for the black race, there aren't that many business levels if you want to teach available," and he is the reason that I went and took--during electives in, in schools, some elementary classes, and I enjoyed them, and I ended up taking enough so that I could have a double major.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in what, two years, four years?  Was it a four (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, four.
Speaker 1: --four year--
Speaker 2: I graduated in four years for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 372318
Speaker 1: What was next?  Where did you begin to teach?
Speaker 2: My first teaching job was in Lawton [Oklahoma] for the same person that I was telling you about, Mr. Harkey [ph.], who is dead.  I taught at Dunbar School [Lawton, Oklahoma] in Oklahoma.  And I went to Kansas City [Missouri] to visit one of my girlfriends during the summer and she said, "You should move up here."  And I said, "Oh, girl, I already have a job," and by that time, I had a car.  And so, we were walking downtown one day, and she said to me, "Let's stop in the board of education and get some water because it's hot."  She was tricking me and, and I didn't know it.  And we got in there, it was during the lunch hour, and almost--well, a lot of the people were out of the building, but the director of personnel came out and said, "May I help you?"  And so Ruby Lee [ph.] said something to him about, "She might want an application."  I didn't know she was going to say that.  I wasn't really inter- I already had a contract for the next year actually in Oklahoma and we were in Kansas City.  And so he said, well, "We've just about done all of our hiring for this year, but I can give you an application to sub if you'd like to be a substitute teacher perhaps."  And then he said, "Where did you go to school anyway?"  And I told him I had just received my--recently received a master's degree from Oklahoma university [University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma].  And so he said, "OU [University of Oklahoma]?"  And I said, "Yes."  And he said, "I'm gonna hire you," just like that.  And I said, "You're gonna hire me?"  He said, "Yes, my son graduated from there, and that's one of the best schools that I know."  And so he said, "I told you we've just hired about hired everybody for this year," he said, "but give--fill out this application for me if you will and I'm going to flag this and I'm going to hire you next year in March."  Well, I filled the application out, but I thought--I didn't think he was gonna hire me the next year in March.  I thought he was just saying that.  What flagging meant that he was gonna go back to it next year, and sure enough, the next year, after I had taught I think two or three years at Oklahoma, I received, the very next March as he had promised, his name was Mr. Ward [ph.], I received a, a contract from him to come to Kansas City and teach school.  And it was just like that.  And everybody asked me how did you do that?  And it just happened.  He--it was a fluke.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 372319
Speaker 1: How many years did you teach in the classroom in Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I only taught in the classroom I guess about three years, or three or four.  And they were--they had--where I taught was a brand new school called Richardson School [Richardson Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri].  It was the first all-electric, circular building around.  Everybody wanted to come to Richardson School and teach.  And they had four third grade teachers there.  I taught third grade and all of the bad children who were having problems, well, I'll say challenged children; it seemed that the principal was putting them in my room.  And so one day, I went to his office and asked him why because I said, "This is a bit much."  And so he said, "Because you know how to handle them."  I didn't--(laughter)--so, anyway, that's how I got out of the classroom is because I had some children, one's mother was a prostitute, one of the boys had a prosthesis, one's brother was having a homosexual relationship with him, and I had a lot of children who had troubled lives at home, and so I went to the principal and I told him that something needed to be done to help those children.  And subsequently, I was called to the board of education again and we talked about the problems they were having, and so they began to send a substitute over to the school once every week or two for me to come out and go meet with a social worker, a psychiatrist or psychologist and a different team of people to better work with the students.  Subsequent to that, I was invited the next year to become a home school coordinator.  Again, I didn't even apply for it.  I was just called and asked.  And so that's how I left the classroom.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 372320
Speaker 1: Were the schools segregated at this time in Kansas City [Missouri] or had there been any deseg [desegregation] of the schools, 'cause we're talking about the 1960s now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the schools were still pretty much segregated as I recall, but subsequently, they began to change the system, and that's how I became an assistant principal, a head teacher.  They moved our--my principal, Mr. Byrd, Edwin Byrd, to a junior high school and they sent a white principal to Richardson [Richardson Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri] named Conrad Minor [ph.].  And so they asked me to be the assistant principal, or they call it head teacher and/or assistant principal, with Conrad Minor.  And that's, that's what I did.  And I enjoyed working with him, I really did.  I think we did a lot to help each other, and so I, I was--I grew a lot while in those--yeah, it was amazing how I just--I, I moved around fast and often, but I liked it because I was learning different things and I wanted to really help the children.  Today, when I look back and I hear many teachers say that they hate their jobs and they don't like it, and I tell them, "When I taught school, I loved it."  I really did.  I thought it was a lot of fun, but, at the same time, by the time I became a school principal over at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri], which was in the riot area, everybody told me I was gonna get run out over there, and a lot of people applied for that job.  I did apply for it when it became--
Speaker 1: So you became a principal of an elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was that, Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington, yes.
Speaker 1: What year was that you got your principalship now?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Probably '60s [1960s], in the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the '60s [1960], uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in the '60s [1960s], yes.
Speaker 1: That, that was your big last position in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How many years were you principal?
Speaker 2: I was actually a principal just two years before I was invited to come to Washington [D.C.].  And that was an invitation.  I didn't apply for the job I came to Washington for, I didn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--but a lot of people applied for the job at Booker T. Washington but I answered one question that they said that nobody else could answer.
Speaker 1: What was that?
Speaker 2: And the question was, "What do you consider a community school to be?"  And they said that I answered the question better than anybody else, and that was the deciding factor out of the applicants who would get the job.
Story_ID: 372424
Speaker 1: So you completed a principalship for several years in Kansas City, Missouri, public schools and then you came to Washington, D.C., where we are now.  When did you come here and why did you come to Washington?
Speaker 2: I came to Washington in January 1972.  I came because I was on the Opportunities Industrialization Center [OIC] board in Kansas City, Kansas.
Speaker 1: OIC?  OIC?
Speaker 2: OIC, started by Dr. Leon Sullivan (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sullivan.
Speaker 2: And I went to a meeting in Chicago [Illinois] and--at that OIC meeting, and at that meeting, the person who was--who was--had been in Kansas City working for Model Cities I believe or something was now in Washington, D.C., although I did not know him in Kansas City.  His name was James Threet [ph.].  He came up to me at the meeting and said, so, something about, "You're this little hot shot school principal out, you know, in Kansas City now or something," and we laughed, and I said, "If you wanna call it that," or something like that, we said.  But, so, anyway, we talked a little while and so he said, "Well, would you love to co- like to come to Washington, D.C., and work?"  And I thought he was just talking, again, like I did Mr. Ward [ph.]--I thought Mr. Ward was just talking.  I said, "Yeah, that would be fine (laughter)."  And so he said, "All right, when you get back home, send me a 171."  And--
Speaker 1: What was that?  What's a 171?
Speaker 2: It was the government's application to work in the government.  I had never heard of one before.  I didn't know what it was and what it looked like and had no intention of sending one, so I said, "Okay."  And so, I, I went back home to the meeting and I hadn't--he hadn't received it in a week or so, two weeks, so one day, we had a meeting at the board of education, and I had gone.  When I came back [to Booker T. Washington Elementary School, Kansas City, Missouri], the secretary said to me, "You had a long distance call from Washington, D.C., and they wanted to know if you had sent the 171 application," and so I said, "No."  She said, "Well, they want you to call collect before the end of the day by C-O-B."  So I did.  I called collect and so he said, "Well, do you have the 171?"  And I said, "No, I don't even know what a 171 is," and so he said, "Well, I'll tell you what (cough), if you're interested in coming, send a resume, sign the 171 and send the resume and--with the dates on it-- appropriate dates--and I will have it--my executive assistant or one of my assistants to fill in the information for you."  And so he told me where to go get it, at the federal building, and so I did that, and I sent it.  And then they were ready to hire me, but the board of education said the school year is right in the--it was--must've been like October or so, November, so they said that they would grant the request when the semester started, the new semester started, but they wanted to send someone over for me to train to be in my place while I was away for two years because I was asking to come to Washington for two years.  And so, anyway, I said, well, that's the end of that job.  So I called them and told them that I could not come until January and they said they would keep the job for me until January (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what was the job that he wanted you to take in Washington?
Speaker 2: Director of program evaluation for Model Cities, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: For Model Cities, okay.
Story_ID: 372425
Speaker 1: And that's what I came to Washington [D.C.] to do.  And a person who is my friend to this day, his name is Russell Simmons [ph.], was working there also in a similar capacity and he did his job and mine too until I arrived, and we've been friends ever since.  In fact, he's on my advisory board for my ministry [Maine Avenue Ministries, Washington, D.C.] to this day.
Speaker 2: Um-hm. What made you decide to, to make that big move?  You had been in Oklahoma and Kansas City [Missouri] and Missouri--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --and now come to the nation's capital, and I know a lot about Model Cities, so I think a lot of us wanted to work at Model Cities during those years.  But, what, what made you decide to make that big change in your life?
Speaker 1: Well, I had been to Washington, D.C., one time just for a weekend, like Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, and I thought the Washington Hilton hotel [Washington, D.C.] was the most impressive thing that I had ever seen in my house, plus the White House [Washington, D.C.] and all of that, the buildings.  And I still say to this day that all children should have an opportunity to come to Washington one time just to see the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] and the White House, and all of the monuments and everything.  I had been so impressed by that when I had come that I thought to spend two years in Washington would be excellent, plus I was going to be making ten thousand dollars more than I was making (laughter) and that was--ten thousand (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a lot, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--and that's how I--that's what prompted me to want to come when they told me what my salary would be (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How much were you making as a principal?
Speaker 1: I was making I think at that time, a little over $18,000.  And so, so, that was a big jump.
Speaker 2: Two good reasons for coming.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 372426
Speaker 1: Tell me about that Model Cities job.  How did it go?  How did it work out for you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, it didn't go as well as I had hoped that it would go because the budgets were changing and I believe President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was in office at that time and he cut the budget quite a bit.  And I came I think, what, to supervise, twenty-three people.  But, anyway, there was a lot of envy because people were unhappy, number one, that I had gotten the job, people who were working, you know, there--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --some felt that they should have gotten it.  So, that was in the beginning, but I--basically, we got along well, but everybody, when the budget started to be cut, we knew that, at first, I think there were three--six people who would have to go, three to six, and it went on down until there were about eight or ten people left.  And it was just--it wasn't a smooth ride because of the budgeting and the people being laid off and all of that.  And that caused me like not to enjoy the job as well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So I was ready to go back.
Speaker 1: Who was the mayor of Washington [D.C.]?  Do you remember when you came?
Speaker 2: Walter Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Walter Washington, uh-huh.  And so that's what happened there.
Speaker 1: Did you have any interaction with him at all in your position at Model Cities or?
Speaker 2: Well, I had met him a couple of times.  And, in fact, he was one of the honorees from my ministry [Maine Avenue Ministries, Washington, D.C.] before he died, and so I thought he was quite an interesting person, yes.
Story_ID: 372427
Speaker 1: So you went back to Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go back to Kansas City.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't.
Speaker 2: I was offered a job--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --in the Department of Human Services and so I went to work for them in planning and I became--
Speaker 1: --for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  And I became the director of long range planning and then subsequent to that of mental health planning and we wrote the first five-year mental health plan for the District of Columbia, which is still updated every five years.  And subsequent to that, I went--I think we had--we got a new mayor by then, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry, and he brought Dr. Arthur Hoyte from Georgetown University [Washington, D.C.], who was a physician, over to work as his special assistant for health.  And they wanted to coordinate the health committees and try to see how they could get the health system working more efficiently for the residents of D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  And so one day, I got a call from Dr. Hoyte asking me to come and work as the health coordinator of the committees and I think we ended up coordinating about twenty-three health committees and that's when I really started to learn about health, but I told him I couldn't come because I already had a boss and had a job.  And he said, "That's not a problem.  He said, the mayor is my boss and I want you.  I've heard that you would be an excellent person to do this."  And I didn't really know him, and so I went over to meet him and everything, and so it worked out well.  So, I did that for him and then the mayor appointed him commissioner of health and when he did that, he appointed me as his special assistant, and I went to work for him--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --as his special assistant.
Story_ID: 372428
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, when you arrived in Washington, D.C., and you took the Model Cities job, what church or churches did you become affiliated with?
Speaker 2: I've only been affiliated with one church in Washington, that's Shiloh Baptist Church at 9th [Street] and P Streets Northwest.  That's when Reverend Henry C. Gregory [Henry C. Gregory III] was the pastor when I went there.  Now, Reverend Wallace Charles Smith is the pastor.  After Reverend Gregory died, he came.  But my husband was a member of Shiloh, and I started to go there with him sometime and subsequently I joined Shiloh and I became active in the church and what have you.
Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: I met him two or three weeks after I, I came to Washington.
Speaker 1: That early on, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: Monteria Ivey, Sr.
Speaker 1: And where was he from?
Speaker 2: Roanoke Rapids, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And what was he doing in Washington when you met him?
Speaker 2: He was working for the housing department.  He was an economist by profession from college, but he spent most of his career--he worked for the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], the federal government and for HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], and then he came over somehow to work for the mayor, Walter Washington, and I believe Jim Banks [James G. Banks] was his boss at the time, and so he was director of the Housing--Wash -the D.C. Housing Authority [District of Columbia Housing Authority].
Speaker 1: So coming back to Shiloh, that's the church you first attended.  That's where you met your husband.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're still a member of Shiloh?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, even though I'm a pastor of a church that I started, you always have a home church.  So Shiloh is my home church, yes, and I often go there when--to funerals when people die and when they have various types of programs and what have you.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 372429
Speaker 1: So you moved up in the district [Washington, D.C.] government positions.  How long did you stay with the government?
Speaker 2: I stayed with the government, I think, twenty-six and a half years.  I took early retirement because my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] became ill with a stroke, which is hereditary in his family, and my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] was also sick at the time.  And so things were getting pretty hectic in my life, and so my--by that time, my sisters [Mildred Henry MacDonald and Thelma Louise Henry Johnson]--bo- I think one or both of my sisters had died, and so one time when I went to the doctor for my annual exam, my doctor said to me--said, you know, "Because you have so much stress in your life now with your husband and your mother," he said, "I don't know what your financial situation is," but he said, "because of the deaths of your sister so early and what"--he said, "If I were you, I would inquire about it and maybe think about taking an early out so that you, you know, won't just wear yourself out."  You know, my mother was in Oklahoma and she really did not want to come to live in Washington [D.C.].  She loved Vian [Oklahoma]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --truly loved Vian more than anybody I know.  And so one day I was sitting at my desk and I decided to do that.  And the first time I went to tell the commissioner that I wanted to--I wanted to take an early out, it was quite--and we had changed commissioners a couple of times by then, but anyway, I ended up in his office crying, whether--he told me about his father was sick some place and mine, too, and so I didn't--anyway, I didn't end up applying for--to resign at that time or to retire.  But, so the next time that I thought about it, I didn't tell him.  I just got the papers and decided to just go on and do it.
Speaker 1: So that year, what was that year you retired now?
Speaker 2: I think I retired in December '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Ninety-four [1994]--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you think, okay.
Speaker 2: I did because my mother died in April '97 [1997], yeah.
Story_ID: 372430
Speaker 1: You're known today and we want to begin to talk about the--your religious leadership and your ministries and a number of other organizations that you have founded and, and all related to human services and so on.  Tell us how you began to move into the field of ministry.  This happened after you retired or before or?
Speaker 2: Yes, after I retired, and I, I shared with you a little earlier that both my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] and my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] were ill, and I just didn't know which way to turn, and I would often times come right in this room, in the living room, and get on my knees before the sofa or in front of a chair and just pray.  And that's--was during the time that I felt that I was called to the ministry and that's during the time I was telling God, "I don't see how I can do this.  I just--," and then some things began to be revealed to me.  I went to a person's home who was on her death bed, so to speak, that I took my husband by to visit with her, and her name was Cirtie Mae Turner.  She ended up leaving Shiloh Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.], a lot of her property and the building that they use for the office building, and some units in the same block of the church as well.  But she said to me that day, she said, "The Lord wants you to speak for Him," and I had not mentioned to anybody but my mother, and my mother never knew her, and my mother was in Oklahoma and my husband about the ministry call.  They both had encouraged me to do it but I hadn't really done anything about it.  And so that was shocking to me.  I knew my husband had not spoken to her because by that time, he couldn't dial the phone by himself.  And I knew she was very sick, and I knew he had--so that shocked me.  And I told Reverend Smith [Wallace Charles Smith] when I went to here and he said that often happens in life (unclear).  So, different things began to happen to me, that I was asking God to show me some signs and what have you if--and I would say this, don't ask to be shown if you don't know what you're going to be shown because some of the things were frightening to me that happened, but I realized that God was doing what I had asked God to do.  And so when my mother died, I said to a minister in Oklahoma, another female minister, that I was called to the ministry but I had not acknowledged it and that I felt empty inside.  And, you know, it was a painful feeling and she said that, "You're going to always feel that way if you don't declare God publicly." Because she said, "I've been through it.  The same thing happened to me."  She said, "And once you declare it and begin, then you will feel different," and she was telling the truth.  That was true.  So I came back and actually we were at a Lott Carey [Landover, Maryland] meeting and I was co-chairing something for the Lott Carey for Reverend Smith and I just broke down--we were at the Shoreham Hotel and started crying.  And he thought someone had said something to me or done something, so he said, "Well, what's wrong?"  And we ended up going into a room talking, and I told him what had happened and he, he kids now and he says, publicly, he said, "I nearly fell out when Mary [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mary Ivey] told me (laughter)."  But, anyway, he told me to come to his office and talk, and I went to his office and talked.  And he was teaching a class or two at Wesley Theological Seminary [Washington, D.C.] at the time and so the first thing he said to me, he said, well, "We gotta get you before the board, gotta do a trial sermon, and then also we gotta get you in Wesley."  And that's how I happened to go to Wesley Seminary.  He just said, "Wesley," and I went to Wesley and I really enjoyed it, but I also was ordained in Oklahoma before I finished Wesley by the same woman's husband who told me that I would feel empty.  Her husband was the pastor of the church that my mother attended.  And he invited me to be ordained at that church since my mother had been one of his closest friends in there.  And he's dead now, but I went there and I was ordained, and then when I graduated from seminary, I was ordained here at Shiloh also.
Story_ID: 372431
Speaker 1: What's the process of ordination?  I mean, what--how had you prepared for that?  What had you been doing to prepare for that ordination?
Speaker 2: Well, ordination prepares you to serve as a minister and you just go through the things you learn about the communion process, you learn all about the things that you need to know to console a person and what types of service and, and the ways that a person becomes a member of a church, and the way that you go out of a church, and all of those different kinds of things.  And so--but more than that, it's when you have proven yourself and people see that biblical spiritual leadership in what you are doing and how you're living your life.  And then you also before you are ordained--well I had been before a deacon board and they had asked questions and then I went to school and got a Master of Divinity (laughter), and so--
Speaker 1: So you were ordained before you went to Wesley [Wesley Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C.] then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were?
Speaker 2: I think I was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Or either I--
Speaker 1: That's what I heard you say, I thought.
Speaker 2: I, I--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I--no, I think I was in Wesley or getting ready to go there when I was ordained in Oklahoma when the invitation came from Reverend Wright [ph.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I went.  I was so happy because that--my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] always said to me--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I hope I live to hear you preach your first sermon.  She didn't, and she died before I did and so I thought since she loved that church so much, I was, I thought, "This is it.  This is--this--I'll go there and preach."  That's where I preached my first sermon.
Speaker 1: And where was that again now?  At--
Speaker 2: In Vian, Oklahoma--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the church where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 372432
Speaker 1: What was your sermon about?  Do you remember that first sermon?
Speaker 2: David's hope for his calling.  And the reason I happen to preach on that was the night I was getting ready--well, my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] was ill, and so it was like about one or two o'clock in the morning and I said, "I've gotta choose a topic or something to preach about, and one that I can interpret and understand with clarity."  And so I was praying to God to give me the topic or, or, or the scripture or whatever.  But anyway, when I opened the Bible, I opened it to the Psalm where I, I started reading about David, and that's how I ended up--and so I made it "Mary's [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Mary Ivey] hope for her calling."
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Story_ID: 372433
Speaker 1: So you got a master's degree in divinity then from the Wesley Theological Seminary [Washington, D.C.].  When did you become the associate pastor, an associate pastor at Shiloh Baptist [Shiloh Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I guess it was during my time at Wesley and subsequent to that.  Associate pastors, we assist with the communion and things like that, but it was not a paid position.  It was a-um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  That was 2001 when you finished your divinity studies at--
Speaker 2: --Wesley.
Speaker 1: --at Wesley.  Where did you go next in terms of your preparation and your continuing preparation for ministry?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to Howard University School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.].  I had never been to an all-black college [HBCU] in my life.  I had always been in white schools.  And so I said, "This is gonna be my last round (Laughter)."  And so I decided to go to Howard, and that's where I went.  And I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: Tell me about those, what two years, three years?
Speaker 2: Actually, I finished in one.
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: But, you're--normally, it takes two or three, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was a full-time program then.
Speaker 2: It's full-time program.  In fact, my advisor told me he shouldn't let me do it, said I couldn't do it in fact, but I did.  They told me I couldn't finish Wesley in three, too, but I did because normally it takes six or seven, and--but I finished Wesley in three and then--well, see, at my age, you don't have a lot of time to fool around and play.  So, but, but I'm just like that.  If I start something, I have to go on and pursue it and go through with it, and so that was the case here.  I had to just say, well, you know, I made up my mind I was gonna go and do it.  Now, let's go do it and get it done.  So, that's what happened.
Story_ID: 372434
Speaker 1: Did you have to do a, a thesis for your doctorate of divinity [from Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] or?
Speaker 2: Yes, the book that I wrote, 'Care Giving and Love' ['Care Giving and Love: A Resource Guide for Churches,' Mary Ivey] came out of that.  And when my dissertation committee, my dissertation committee read it, somebody said, "That should be a book," when I started talking about what I was going to put in it.  And I always had the thought in mind that it would be a book anyway.  But my dissertation committee changed the name of what I'd had two or three times--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so my dissertation is not the same thing.  It's about caregiving and love.  But once the dissertation had been approved and turned in and I decided to write a book, then I did it a little different way--
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: --to write this book on caregiving and love.
Speaker 1: Tell us what is in this book.  Who is it for?  What's the audience and what's in this book?
Speaker 2: This book is actually for anybody because we all come into the world needing caregiving.  And on the front cover, we've put a young woman holding her baby because all babies have caregiving.  So we have, actually whether we realize it or not, caregiving, from the time that we come in until we go out.  Somebody has to care for us if we're ill.  And it's just that someone has to look out for you all of your life.  And most people don't think of caregiving as being that.  But also, most people think of caregiving as being something that only occurs when you get frail in older age or when you get sick.  But I put a page or two in here about love.  I think page eighty-three, it talks about the love attitude and what love is about, and anybody can sit down and read it.  I have one person who buys these books from me just for when somebody gets sick, gets married, or whatever.  And she's a young person in her thirties or forties, she and her husband bought it and discussed it around the table for dinner many times and it's only fifteen dollars, and so they said, well, this is an excellent gift.  But, it talks about what Medicare and Medicare does and does not do.  It talks about how to choose a long-term care facility.  It tells you about getting your will in order.  It talks about the different types of--it gives definitions of the different types of physicians and different types of diseases.  It gives a prayer for the person who does not know how to pray, and many people have told me that, and it's a generic prayer that you can change around any way you want to.  But it's a pra- it--it's a book that you can just throw in your purse or in your car or anywhere, and if you're going to a hospital or somewhere and you don't know what to say or what to do, it's a good little reference guide.  It's for churches, it's for schools, it's for seminaries, it's for home use, just for anybody.
Story_ID: 372435
Speaker 1: You have been the founder of at least two major spiritual ministry activities.  I don't know which one came first, but you were the founder and you're the pastor of the Church of God's Love [Washington, D.C.].  Did that come before the Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Maine Avenue Ministries started when I was in seminary at Wesley [Wesley Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Maine Avenue Ministries happened because my advisor at the time said to me--said to the class, "How many of you plan to preach?"  Well, that's a, a Methodist school primarily, but all denominations attend there because it's--it, it--you know, it's, it's not taught as, as just a Methodist school, but it was founded by John Wesley; John Wesley, the founder, was.  But, anyway, he asked me if I planned to pastor a church, and I said, "No" because my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] was sick and my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] was sick and I didn't know what I was gonna do.  I was just gonna do what God led me to do next.  And so he said, "Well, most people carve out a ministry, something that they wanna do to help people spiritually," and what have you.  So I said, "Okay."  And so he said, "So, why don't you draft something? Get--you know, pray about it and get something."  So, I did and I came up with Maine Avenue Ministries.  And it doesn't have a biblical title, but I always thought of it this way: wherever you go in a small town, in a big city, a middle-size city or wherever, if you're looking for directions and you ask someone, where is downtown, where is uptown, where is south, where is north or west, every time, almost, they will tell you to get on the main street or main avenue.
Story_ID: 372436
Speaker 1: Why don't you continue?
Speaker 2: So Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.] was what I came up with and I wrote, what I thought Maine Avenue Ministries should be about--that it should be spiritually based.  It should address people in a holistic manner, health.  I see it all coming together, poverty, and all of it comes together as being one whole person in Christ.  And so that's the way I sought to do my ministry or to teach people, how to become spiritual so that they would feel better about what they wanted to do in their lives.  And so I got it written up and I wanted to honor people to u- who had used their spiritual lives to enhance that of another person, their community or the world, and that's what my advisors liked about it.  And I said, but--I said, "But I don't have to have an advisory board or something like that," so everybody said--my advisors, they became the advisors and all of my teachers over at Wesley [Wesley Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C.], they were on the board and everything.  So then I said, well, "We'll give scholarships for--you know, with the proceeds," and I named one of the scholarships the Lucy Ann Ballard Lacy Scholarship [ph.] after my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] and the other one, the Monteria Ivey Scholarship [ph.] after my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.].  And so we give a scholarship to a male and a female each year who is one who is going off to college and so far, we have not lost any who went away to school, thank God.  And, so I thought, that I just love.  I just love doing that.  This year, we gave two young ladies a scholarship, though, because they came and performed on our program with a liturgical dance and I wanted to do something for them.  And we started--but I wanted to tell you, we started Maine Avenue Ministries at Shi- we did it--Shiloh [Shiloh Baptist Church, Washington, D.C.] is our venue, but it's not connected to Shiloh Baptist Church.  It's just that they have a nice family life center and the facility accommodates it well, although we're about to outgrow it now.  We've just--people are leaning against the wall now.  But we started out with, I think, about three tables including our--my teachers from Wesley who came and we had a program.  We do workshops, community workshops.  We've done such things on the organ-donor tr- Dr. Clive Callender [HistoryMaker Clive Callender], from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] who is renowned, has come to do these--those for us.  He has also been an honoree and he's a very spiritual man.  So, I consider him to be one of my good friends now.  I've gotten him to do it for my Links [The Links, Incorporated] chapter.  And so, he is just an excellent person.  Also, we have honored people like [HistoryMaker] Reverend Walter Fauntroy and he has shared with us that--he said, "Tell me about Maine Avenue Ministries," and I told him how the idea of the thought was conceived that people could point you in the right direction from wherever you are in life.  And he said, "I love it."  He said, "Don't ever let anybody tell the story but you when you get up to introduce your program because," he said, "you tell it and say it with meaning and vision, and a lot of love in it," and I always remember what he said about that.  And so now, we went from having those three or so tables to the place being packed out and full.  So, God has blessed us to move the program ahead, and now year before last, we launched a program called LOVE.  The acronym is LOVE, capital L, capital O, capital V, and capital E.  It means Let's Overcome Violence Everywhere.
Story_ID: 372437
Speaker 1: Let's Overcome Violence Everywhere [LOVE].  And so we are now getting ready to hopefully be able to go into the schools.  We can't take the spiritual part of it into the schools because of church and state and religious, but we're trying to work out a way so that we can get sororities and fraternities, social groups like the Links [The Links, Incorporated], the Continentals [Continental Societies, Inc.], and the Alphas [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] and the, the, the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], and the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and all of those people in Corporate America to join in as well as seminaries and people, and see how we can use those little--those words as an acronym.  We're not talking about intimate, romantic love.  We're talking about a love of human people, of humankind all over because there's too much violence in the world.  Too many of our young people are killing each other for no reason, simply because they have not been taught what love is, even in a family.  And I've had a number of young people to tell me that no one, including their parents, ha- no one has ever told them that they love them.  And so I'm determined.  I went to a, a congressman over and talked with him about it and--Elijah Cummings, and he agreed to be an honorary chairperson and Congresswoman Eddie Bernice Johnson [HistoryMaker Eddie Bernice Johnson] from Texas, I talked to her about it, and so I'm hoping that they will continue with us as we go.  I've talked to a number of people about it and they all say, "Go on and continue to do what you're doing to develop it and to build it."  And so, that is one of our excitements.  I think that we can do a lot in this ministry just by doing that program itself.  I think it will carry us forever and it will make the world so much better.  And I want to involve a lot of young people in it.  So I'm hoping we will get some good sponsors for it to do it.
Speaker 2: Good.
Story_ID: 372438
Speaker 1: You've also founded (cough) and have been the pastor of another major religious, spiritual human services organization.  What is the second one?
Speaker 2: The Church of God's Love [Washington, D.C.].  It's nondenominational, although I had--once upon a time, I belonged to a Methodist church when I was in Kansas City [Missouri] and I belonged to Shiloh Baptist Church [Washington, D.C.] here.  My philosophy is that one religion is oftentimes no better than the other and perhaps none are better than the other.  It's just how we approach them.  There's one God and one heaven.  And being spiritual is me--to me, means to love God, and yourself, and your family and your whole community, and so that's why the love--everything that I do, the Church of God's Love, everything that I do primarily has the word love in it, like caregiving and love because I want that to be something that is sealed in the minds of everybody.  I think that when children are at their young age of vulnerability is when we need to begin to address them with the word love, talking about what it means to care about somebody and all of that.  I believe if that happens, that more students will grow up with respect and regard for other people no matter what their race, their religion, their gender or anything is.  I think that that's not important in life.  What is important is that we love the Lord, we love each other, we respect each other, we lend a helping hand when we can, and we reach out to pull those who are challenged in any way along with us, and that we try to make them--if we've attained any level of success in life, to attain that same level of success.  And I believe that the ministry is just an extension of what God wants all of us to do.
Speaker 1: What is your venue for the Church of God's Love?  I mean do you have a place that you--that you move from or do you move this around?  You're the pastor--
Speaker 2: No, we have service every Sunday--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --at the Alpha Kappa Alpha Center [XI Omega Alpha Kappa Alpha Center, Washington, D.C.], 4411 14th Street Northwest.  It was an old Safeway store years ago and the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] purchased it, refurbished it.  It's a very nice building with a parking lot.  It has a nice kitchen, conference room, his and her bathrooms, piano, podium, parlor.  Whatever you want, it's right there.  And so I'm a member of the sorority and that happens to be my chapter and so we lease it from them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which chapter?
Speaker 2: The chapter is XI Omega.  It's spelled X-I and then--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: --O-M-E-G-A.
Speaker 1: And where is it again?  Where is it located?
Speaker 2: 4411 14th Street Northwest.
Speaker 1: 4411--
Speaker 2: 14th Street Northwest in--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So, that came two or three years after Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.] was formed.
Story_ID: 372439
Speaker 1: You have I think initiated and certainly been a leader in several other important organizations in Washington [D.C.] since you've been here.  One that caught my attention was the National Association of Minority Political Women.  That was back in the '80s [1980s].  Tell me about that.  Is that still active and--
Speaker 2: Well, we haven't closed it out and I think we're getting ready to get back active now because everybody tells me that we should.  But when we first started, it was flourishing.  We had twenty-three chapters around the--in the United States.  And there was a little turmoil with--within the organization and so it disturbed me about--for the reasons that some people, what they were looking to get out of it.  Because when I conceived the idea to start it, it was to be about education and training of what we need to know about the political process, how to get a bill to become a law, how to understand the legislative process, and all of the things that help us to maneuver through our business life and the life of the community, and some people saw it a little bit different than that.  But, anyway, subsequently, we decided to change the name to include men as well, so we changed the name formally to the National Association of Minority Political Families [National Association of Minority Political Families USA].  We just changed one word, women to families because I was gonna close it out and I was told that the only reason--way that I could not close it out and still have it active would be to change the name, and so I decided to include men in it now.  And since I have been deeply involved in the, the ministry and spiritual aspect of it, I haven't done a lot with it.  But just over the past few years, we are still in business, we are still 501(c)(3), and so now I've been talking to some people and so with that in mind, we are going to see if we can't side from the spiritual aspect of our lives to be able to educate our community about the importance of what it means to have political knowledge as well.
Story_ID: 372440
Speaker 1: What other organizations have you been a leading developer of and, and, and have been of service to over the years?  There are several others that I'd like you to talk about that we haven't talked about.
Speaker 2: Well, I--the--most of the organizations--well, all of the organizations that I belong to are in some way doing something to help our community.  I--there's one organization I belong to, I think I shared an article with you, where we had on all the red, that's the Washington, D.C. Continental Societies [Continental Societies, Inc.].  I think I've been in that since 1987, but I stay in it and work with them because everything that we do other than producing the Ebony fashion show [Ebony Fashion Fair] that everybody likes to come to, is that we only work with at-risk youth, and all of the money goes for that and so, I serve as the chaplain for them.  And then I serve also as the chaplain of my Links [The Links, Incorporated] group also.  And we work with the community and with just trying to strengthen family life and do what we can both educationally and culturally to enhance people's lives, and so that's what I like to do.  I did serve as the president of the Metropolitan Democratic Women's Club [sic. Metropolitan Women's Democratic Club] for four years before I started the National Association of Minority Political Families [National Association of Minority Political Families USA] and when we did that, I went to some conventions myself, the national Democratic conventions, and, and went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] several times, and was invited to lunch by our former first lady, Rosalynn Carter.  And, as the president of the National Association of Minority Political Families, I was invited to the White House when President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was there when he invited the relatives of persons who had been in the--well, it was such a terrible health situation, the Tuskegee program [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male], where human beings were sort of used as guinea pigs, I guess you would say, unknowingly to them, and he invited their relatives to the White House to apologize to them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember that.
Speaker 2: And so I was one of the few people who was invited for that, and so I really appreciated being there and I, I was given the opportunity to meet some of the families, and so I really did appreciate that.  But I've just enjoyed knowing--I tell everybody that everybody should consider themselves political because politicians control our lives from the time we come into the world by having us sign a birth certificate and something until we go out with a death certificate and so--and including the price of our homes, healthcare, and everything, so it's incumbent upon each one of us to make ourselves knowledgeable about the political process.  And then I'm in a group called The Metropolitan Group [Washington, D.C.], where just this past Sunday, I had the opportunity to, on behalf of the president in the organization, we presented a, a place here called, My Sister's Place [Washington, D.C.] that is a shelter for battered women and their families.  We had the executive director and the fund development person there, and we gave them a check for a thousand dollars on Sunday to help enhance their program to move forward.  And so everything that we do, we try to do something for the good of the community and for the good of those who can really benefit from it.  And each one of my programs that I do from Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.], I never have a program where I don't include a child.  I never have a program where I don't include someone who is either mentally or physically challenged.  That is the way I see God, telling us to be inclusive in our relationships with our fellow men and women.
Story_ID: 372441
Speaker 1: I think that we have come down to what we call our wrap-up questions.  And the first question isn't going to wrap up necessarily, but the first question is this, is there anything else you would like to add to your HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] interview that I have not asked you about or you haven't had a chance to, to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to say something about The HistoryMakers.  I think that that is such a novel and needed program idea that the founder [Julieanna Richardson] came up with, because in doing the questionnaire that I received, I found that there were some things that I wish I knew about my family that I don't know and that I'm going to find out as a result of this.  And subsequently, I called two of my nieces, I called a cousin--these were long distance calls this morning, a sister-in-law, and people who are getting dates together.  Now, I have some obituaries in different places, but my house has been under renovation.  They're in boxes and different things and I, I can't readily put my hands on them, but just to have in one place information on family life, that we need to have a family reunion; some of our family members, I got them together a year before last and we went on a cruise with them.  And that's one thing that my ministry does also, is that we go on trips to learn about the cultural life of other people in foreign countries and places around the world.  For instance, we've been to Russia, we've been to China, we've been all over the Southeast.  We, we just go almost everywhere and next year, we're going to do a Mediterranean cruise where a lot of people are--I, myself, I'm--we're getting ready to go to Egypt next week.  But you can't appreciate people until you learn about their culture.  You can't really respect and appreciate their religions until you learn about their culture because our religious heritage just like our daily lives are all enmeshed in our culture.  And that's what life is about.  So whatever I've done, whatever life I've touched, I am just happy about that, and I try to use my life in a way that when other young people are around me, they will want to have some of the qualities that I call spiritual character qualities about them.  And it was so interesting.  I just came from a minister's conference in Los Angeles [California] last week and I met some young ladies.  Yesterday, I received a note from one, saying, "Thank you for your spiritual way of showing women how to be elegant in the ministry."  That was something that I was so surprised when--to receive that note from her, just had met her.  But, each of us, as people watch us and we don't even know, like some people in my hometown, some young ladies told me it's because of you that I went to college, and I never knew that until they told me a few years ago because they said they hadn't thought about college.  Nobody in their family had mentioned about going, but they saw me go.  And so they see me go back home and they see me--I have preached at, at--back home a few times and, you know, we do spiritual things wherever we go and so if I have not included anything, it would to culminate to say that we all who have been so blessed to have good careers and some of us don't call our careers good but still they are, because they help us to have a quality of life that they wouldn't--we wouldn't otherwise have.  Some of us have lived life a little more special because we're outgoing and we know and like to be involved with the community.  And I would say to everybody being involved with your community is something that everybody should aspire to do in some kind of way because that helps to connect you to what's going on, and it helps you to continue to grow in your own life in so many ways and all of it comes together.  As I said, the culture, the ministry, the education, all of it makes for a full life when you know how to blend it together so that it makes the perfect cake for The HistoryMakers' dessert.
Speaker 1: Beautiful, yeah.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 372442
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you have lived your life?
Speaker 2: I feel very good about my life.  I, as all--most people that I know have had some difficult spots in their lives, but I think that whatever we have to overcome in our lives, whether it's relationships within a family or, you know, sibling--you can have a lot of sibling rivalry in families, or whatever.  I'm not saying necessarily that I had that, but I do think I had a little bit of it with my youngest brother [Sammie Henry].  But, I think that you have to be happy with what you do and you have to look at life always as overcoming another hurdle because it's just like a house; as long as you live in it, something has to be done to it to keep it up to good standard.  And so that's the way your life is.  You have to keep moving.  I don't care when my husband [Monteria Ivey, Sr.] was sick and he was sick for ten years, and my mother [Lucy Ballard Lacy] was sick at the same time.  And I went to seminary [Wesley Theological Seminary, Washington, D.C.] also during that time, and people would ask me, "How can you do it?" And I say, "You figure out a way."  The Lord sent my niece to live with me at that time.  When you start out to do something, it ended up--it ends up so that if you're positive about it and you're prayerful about it, seriously prayerful, God will make a way for it to happen for you, I believe.  It may not happen when you want it to happen in exactly the way you want to, but it surely does.
Story_ID: 372443
Speaker 1: A couple more questions, is there anything that you have not done yet in your life that you would like to do?  You, obviously, have accomplished many of the things that you wanted to do.  Is there anything else that you still want to do?
Speaker 2: In my life, I wanna be on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']. (Laughter) That'd be fun.  But I just want to be able--and I think the Lord will make it possible for me, I think to share my ministry in a national or international way.  And I think that that is going to happen through Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.], the LOVE [Let's Overcome Violence Everywhere] program, and some other things that we are praying to God over that another vision that He has given us.  But I think that that's going to happen because it's going well and I'm, I'm blessed.  I know that I'm blessed.  It's not about how much money you have and the things that you have.  I do live in a nice house, in a nice community.  I do have a nice car.  Most people want a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] and I have one.  I do have nice clothes and nice jewelry.  But that's not what life and success is about.  It's about being pleased and happy with yourself and so that other people can glean some kind of, of, of real full notion of what you're about as a person.  It's about what you will leave as your legacy.  And so I am prayerful and hopeful if it's anything else that through the rest of my life, whatever it is, that God will bless me through my ministry to be able to share something that will forever be beneficial to all the world.
Story_ID: 372444
Speaker 1: I think that you have addressed the issue of legacy, which is in one of the questions here, but the very last question, which is somewhat related, how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as a spiritual person who loved the Lord.  I also want to be remembered as a person who enjoyed life and liked fun.  I want to be remembered as a person who loves people, because I do.  And I have so many friends everyplace I go, and I just enjoy them all.  I think that when you don't have good relationships with people, good friends that you can call on--many of the people that I was in elementary school [Douglas School, Vian, Oklahoma] with, we're still friends, the people I was in college [Oklahoma College for Women; University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma, Chickasha, Oklahoma] with or started out teaching with, we're still friends.  We still visit each other, go to, you know, to embrace each other when we need an embrace.  And so I was just visiting with one of my girlfriends in California.  We started out teaching school together, and now both of our husbands are dead.  We always keep in touch.  I was in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] at a wedding, Carol Johnson's [ph.] daughter's wedding, and she and I started teaching school together in Oklahoma.  I--in fact, I performed a wedding ceremony for her son this year here at Newton White Mansion [Mitchellville, Maryland] in--so I've enjoyed marrying some nice couples, and that's one thing I've enjoyed.  And all of the people that I've married are still married.  So I've had fun doing what I want to do in life, but I've had fun knowing, too, that I have good friends, and family, and people that I can call on that when I see them, there's a relationship.  Even if we don't talk to each other for a year or so, that relationship is still there, so if they need a helping hand or if I need one, likewise, we can exchange that, and we can touch each other across the miles with our love.
Story_ID: 370910
Speaker 1: That is a, a photograph of my paternal grandmother for whom I'm named.  Her name was Mary Henry and that is my cousin, Clara [ph.], who is now deceased also standing beside her.  It was taken in Vian, Oklahoma.  I'm not sure of the occasion.  It must have been back in--I would say in the '50s [1950s] probably.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's perfect.  That's, that's all you have to for each one.
Speaker 1: When was President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] president?
Speaker 2: Early seventy--I mean, early '80s [1980s], '82 [1982], eighty--
Speaker 1: That photograph shows me shaking hands with the late President Ronald Reagan.  The pastor of the church at that time, the--Reverend Henry C. Gregory [Henry C. Gregory III] is standing there looking and talking with--and in the background, we see Mrs. Gertie Mae Turner [ph.].  Out of all of the four persons on the photograph, only myself is living.  All of them are deceased.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: That's good.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 2: Next.  And tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: I am at Shiloh Baptist Church in Washington, D.C., being crowned Miss Shiloh, an award that I am still so very much proud of and that is Reverend Gregory crowning me.  As far as I know, no one else has been crowned Miss Shiloh.
Speaker 2: And when did this take place?
Speaker 1: That had to be in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's my oldest sister, Mildred [Mildred Henry MacDonald (ph.)].  Oh, Mildred must have been in her mid or late twenties at the time.  I thought she was so beautiful then.  She was very ill before she died and so she looked like a different person, but, but she was very beautiful then.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: My youngest brother, Sammie [Sammie Henry], when he was still in the [U.S.] military.  Sammie is also now deceased.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That is my sister Louise [Thelma Louise Henry Johnson], my second oldest sister holding her only child, Johnnie Mae [Johnnie Mae Johnson].  Louise is also now deceased.  They both died early, both of my sisters, but her daughter, Johnnie Mae, was just here last week.  She lives in Wichita, Kansas.
Speaker 1: When was this taken do you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was probably taken I guess in the '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Great.  Next one.
Speaker 2: That is my maternal grandmother, Johanna [Johanna Ballard], my mother's [Lucy Ballard Lacy] mother.  I don't know when that photograph was taken.  It probably was taken back in the '40s [1940s] or something, maybe in the '40s [1940s], I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How come there's no photos of you from the '50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I'm seeing the sisters, the mother--
Speaker 2: That's me in 2005 when I was being honored at a reception when I got my doctorate at Howard Uni--from Howard University School of Divinity [Washington, D.C.].  And that's my niece, Chastity [Chastity Johnson], to the right in the red jacket.  She is now--we've licensed her and she is in school also at Wesley Theological Seminary [Washington, D.C.].  She is in her thirties, and she is the manager of patient relations at All Providence Hospital [Providence Hospital, Washington, D.C.] here in Washington.  And that is, I believe, her mother, Johnnie Mae on the side when she was there.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: And that's me at work, at a reception at work when I was working for the commission of health [Department of Human Services] and we had a, a big meeting of the communi- a community meeting and other agencies came together.  We were at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] when that was--
Speaker 1: Do you have a timeframe for that?
Speaker 2: That had to be in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's a group of people at the Alpha Kappa Alpha Center [XI Omega Alpha Kappa Alpha Center, Washington, D.C.] Church of God's Love and that would have to be in the 2000s, in--last year or year before.
Speaker 1: Good.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's me addressing the crowd at the Church of God's Love, before the reception that we had in honor of my Doctor of Divinity.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Next.  What year on that?
Speaker 2: Two thousand four [2004].
Speaker 1: Oh, you just received that?
Speaker 2: Five--two thousand five [2005].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Actually, was--yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: That is myself and Dr. Clive Callender [HistoryMaker Clive Callender] who is a physician, world renowned physician, but he is at Howard University Hospital [Washington, D.C.].  And that was on the occasion of Maine Avenue Ministries [Washington, D.C.] when he did a workshop for us and he and I were taking a photo after the workshop was over.
Speaker 1: Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: That is me with my late husband, Monteria Ivey [Monteria Ivey, Sr.], following a formal affair.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Taken about when?
Speaker 1: I would say that was probably taken in the late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: And that's me at the National Association of Minority Political Women [National Association of Minority Political Families USA] pageant where we honoring politicians and so those are some of the awards that we were giving out there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me sitting at my desk at Booker T. Washington School [Booker T. Washington Elementary School] in the principal's office, Kansas City, Missouri--
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: --before I came to Washington.  So it had to be in 1971, I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two more to go, so--
Speaker 1: That's my mother.  She is sitting in the--and she has on the black and white, sitting on the front row there.  We were at the auditorium in Vian, Oklahoma, for some occasion and I really don't know why we were there.  It kind of looks like my mother's only brother in the background, sitting behind her.  So he's been dead a number of years, too, so that would've had to been perhaps in the early--in the '80s [1980s], the mid-'80s [1980s], uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Very good.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: And that is me.  That was and is my official photograph and it's a photograph that's on the back of my book, 'Care Giving and Love' ['Care Giving and Love: A Resource Guide for Churches,' Mary Ivey].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Going to the big one now.
Speaker 1: The big one, cool.
Speaker 2: That is the first day that I preached at the Church of God's Love.  It was a beautiful day five years ago.
Speaker 1: That would be about 19--2001?
Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002].
Speaker 1: Two thousand two [2002]?
Speaker 2: Oh, two thousand one [2001] (laughter) I guess, yeah.
