Story_ID: 523558
Speaker 1: --Start out by slating the interview and I want to have you state and spell your name including your middle name and, and also give your date of--date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, so my name is Sherrilyn Ann Ifill [HistoryMaker Sherrilyn Ifill], and that's spelled, S-H-E-R-R-I-L-Y-N, Ann is A-N-N, and my last name is I-F, like Frank, I-L-L.  And I was born on December 17, 1962, in Queens, New York.
Speaker 1: And can you give today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I can, is it the 30th (laughter)?
Speaker 1: It is the 29th, it's the 29th?
Speaker 2: I think it's the 30th.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh it is?  See, see no, no is the answer, I cannot (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Today is August 29, 2016.
Speaker 1: And our location is--
Speaker 2: And we are in New York, New York.
Speaker 1: Right, and your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am a civil rights lawyer.
Story_ID: 523559
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Just simple, just simple questions.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?  (Laughter) She's like--okay, don't just, okay just bear with me.
Speaker 2: My favorite food, well that's really, really hard, I'm gonna say, goodness it's so many.  Well, I love chicken, so I would say, you know, when it's really, when it's really prepared in the Caribbean way, when it's stewed down, that's real comfort food for me, so I don't have it very often but, it's probably one of my favorites.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Spain.
Speaker 1: A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well I have two, one is about the arc of the moral universe being long and bending towards justice, that's a hopeful phrase and also a phrase about patience and life and that, you know, it may not be in your lifetime.  And then the other one is biblical and it's from Psalms and in some ways a contrast to the one I just described and it's in Psalms 27, and it says, "I will see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, wait on the Lord, be of good courage and wait I say, on the Lord" [Psalm 27:13-14].
Speaker 1: Does that remind you of growing up, the second, in the church?  Now where is that, the second phrase?
Speaker 2: Psalms 27, right, right at the end.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's just one of my favorite, favorite psalms and we did read the Bible a lot growing up.  I'm not sure when that one became a favorite of mine, but I do love it.
Story_ID: 523560
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I know that she passed when you were very young--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but can you give her name and--?
Speaker 2: Yes my mother's name was, was Myrtle, Myrtle Ifill and, you know, it's interesting because my mother passed away when I was five, and I think for our family it was, you know, the great tragedy of, of our family.  I have nine brothers and sisters, I'm the youngest and, and it was shocking and, and it was very difficult for us as, as children to be perfectly honest, you know, we knew lots of people who had unusual parents, we knew people who had strange moms, but I, I didn't really know anybody who didn't have one, and so it was an odd thing to have happen to you when you were so young.  But I'm also, you know, it's interesting to me how much of a force she remained, you know, in our lives and, and how much of a force she still is in my life.  And what she managed to do, the kind of power she had, even as, now in retrospect, you know, I can realize how very ill she was, I felt like she was very much in control of our home, you know?  And, and that she was very influential in our lives, I talk all the time about my dad [Lester Ifill, Sr.] who was also very influential in my life and obviously I, you know, spent more time with him 'cause I grew up with him, he didn't pass away until I was in my forties.  But, I--it took me a while to realize how much influence really she was still having and, and had in my life and how much she was able to contribute in the, in the, the few short years that, that she and I had together.
Speaker 1: So how old are your siblings?  What is the--'cause you're the, the, the youngest of ten--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what, what is the age difference and what are the names?
Speaker 2: Well they would be very upset if I give away all their ages but, (laughter) there is a twenty year difference between me and my oldest brother [Antonio Ifill], one of my favorite memories, maybe my best memory, before my mom passed away was at my brother's wedding, we were all together as maybe the only time I can remember, you know, a festive occasion where we were all together and I lo- adored him and I was five and he was twenty-six, so twenty-one years I guess.  So, so that just gives you a sense of the span, he was getting married and I was five, you know?  So that's the span and it's mostly girls, eight girls and two boys, and so I, I grew up around a lot of women and I've always, therefore had lots of women friends and feel very comfortable around women.  But, you know, a big family, a big family that I thought was normal.
Speaker 1: So, what?  Can you tell me what you knew about your mother though and her side of the family? Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not very much.  It's really interesting, you know, it, it, it's--one of the things I used to do and, and haven't done in sometime was, you know, do the Race for the Cure [Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure] every year because my mom did die of breast cancer and one of the things I always loved was, you know, getting out there in the morning and stretching out and seeing all the women who had on the survivor hats, you know.  And I always thought that if my mom had lived at a different time, a later time, or maybe if she had been wealthy, you know, she might have been out there wearing one of those hats.  But that wasn't, you know, in the cards, it was a period of time where people didn't talk about cancer, and certainly didn't talk about breast cancer, I certainly felt the, the vibe I got was that, you know, it wasn't something that you talked about very much, so I think that must have been painful for her, but I think it was for many women during that period.  And so, you know, so I knew her mother, but I didn't know a whole lot about her as a person which of course, when you, when you get, when you become an adult you become most curious about your parents, not about what they did when you were a kid, but as, you know, as people, what they, what they dreamed, what they thought, what they, the mischief they got into when they were teenagers and the relationships in their lives.  And I think for those of us there is a kind of a community of people who've lost their parents very young, that's the part that we, that we miss is not kind of really knowing our parents as people.
Story_ID: 523561
Speaker 1: How many siblings were living in the household when you, when your mother [Myrtle Ifill] passed?
Speaker 2: Well when my mom passed, most of us, so there's ten kids, I would say eight of us were living at home and, and then, you know, in the years after she passed, I mean as I said there was a big age range and so people were moving on, you know?  They were moving on with their lives, they were grownups, some were going to college, I had a sister who went off to NYU [New York University, New York, New York], and so for the core of my life growing up, I was really with three other siblings for the most part, a sister who's a year older than me, a sister who's six or seven years older than me, who really took a lot of the responsibility before my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] remarried and even after, for kind of looking after the two little ones, and my brother, my, my second brother.  And so it was really the--I grew kind of in a family of four for most of my former years in the house rather than in a family of ten.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Goodness, all of them, all of my siblings?  Heavens, from the, from the oldest to the youngest is Antonio [Antonio Ifill] and Barbara [Barbara Ifill (ph.)], Alfreda [Alfreda Ifill (ph.)], Celia [Celia Ifill (ph.)], Olivia [Olivia Ifill (ph.)], Malita [Malita Ifill (ph.)], Lester [Lester Ifill, Jr.], Yolanda [Yolanda Ifill (ph.)], Darlene [Darlene Ifill Taylor] and me.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you, you have the mo- you have, you have a little more unique name, Sherrilyn [HistoryMaker Sherrilyn Ifill], is th- was there any meaning to that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: To your name?
Speaker 2: Well, when you have a really big family, you tend to have some double ups on the birthdays, so I have an older sister Freda, who, whose birthday I share, she's older than me obviously, but we, we were born on the same day.  So there's, the lure is that she was allowed to name me and so we don't really know what, where, where it came, came from but she was the person who was allowed to give me the name, Sherrilyn.
Story_ID: 523562
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what his name was and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --if you know his date of birth, I forgot that, and what you know about his background.
Speaker 2: My father's name is Lester Ifill, Sr., and he was born in 1924, and about him, I know a fair amount because I spent many years with him and he was really a fascinating man, you know, a very difficult man in many ways, very strict, very religious.  But the funniest human being you've ever met, or, you know, our sense of humor and we have a pretty robust sense of humor in my family, largely comes from him.  And he was brilliant, and extremely interested in politics and social justice, he, he was an electrician when he emigrated here from Panama, but in my life growing up he was a social worker in Harlem [New York, New York], and his concerns were about black people and about equality and he loved politics and we grew up as political junkies because of him.  We watched, we watched every political convention from the time I can remember. I can't remember 1968, that was the year my mother [Myrtle Ifill] died, but 1972, absolutely, and not like it was punishment, like we loved it, we, we, we enjoyed it.  We watched the news together every night.  And, you know, watching the news with my dad was, you know, he was talking to the TV, you know, there was commentary, he would, he was, he was developing in us a kind of critical faculty, we weren't just consumers of information.  And, you know, he just was a really truly brilliant man with an exceptional mind, and it's, you know, then you get older, I think by him as a person too of, of just what it mean to have made the journey that immigrants make, to have lost his wife, to have, you know, children and to raise children, he did remarry and then to remake yourself in terms of your career, just really a fascinating human being.
Speaker 1: Now how, how old, how old were you when he remarried?
Speaker 2: I wanna say, seven maybe, something like that.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about growing up?  What it was to grow up in Panama?  Did he talk about that and?--
Speaker 2: A little bit, mostly about, you know, how, how disciplined he was by his mom and how poor he was.
Speaker 1: So you know, this is interesting, 'cause I'm thinking about your, your story and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Gwen's [HistoryMaker Gwen Ifill] story, it's, it's like you came out of the same households, I know they were brothers--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but, it's just that she said political conventions were--
Speaker 2: Huge--
Speaker 1: --where people watched.
Speaker 2: They were very close.  The two brothers were very close, my father was the youngest of the two and he really revered his brother, obviously Gwen's dad [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.] was in the ministry and while my father was very religious, that was not his thing, he really enjoyed being in the, in the social justice world, that was, that was really his thing and of course we stayed in New York [New York] and I think and I think that created a certain kind of sensibility in the family also.  And one of the things I really liked about my father, always like about him was that he really loved black people and even though we were immigrants, he was very clear about us never making any separation between ourselves and people who were African American, you know, who were born and raised in the United States.  I was born and raised in the United States so it would probably have not worked very well for me in any case, but he was, he was very clear, "You are black, we, we don't go around making those kinds of distinctions."  And I think, you know, the country that my father was, was, was raised in, Panama, has a very unique relationship with the United States, so it's very interesting to me when people talk about the experi- their experience of their families in the American South, you know, my grandmother was a domestic in the, in the whites only segregated canal zone of Panama [Panama Canal Zone], you know, from which blacks were excluded.  And my grandmother, you know, my father would tell the story about her, you know, the kids waiting for her to come home with the scraps of, of food that she could get from that table as their dinner.  So I never felt like I, I came from a kind of a different background in the sense of understanding white supremacy and oppression in a very American way because it was practiced that way in the country that, that my parents grew up in.  So, it's a, it's a weird thing, an anomaly that, you know, it doesn't exist very many places, but for that reason I think that was also part of the, the sense of kind of integration into, into this culture maybe for him and, and the family.  I was, I was obviously born and raised here and so I didn't have the experience of Panama but, you know, when everybody hears the stories of their family, the stories I heard sounded just like the stories that my friends had about their grandparents and great-grandparents and so I didn't feel a sense of separation ever.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because there's sometimes, you know, when you hear in Caribbean households is that there was a separation you know--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: But, so that, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Um-hm--
Story_ID: 523563
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me also ask what is your earliest memory of growing up in the household?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know, I don't know.  I can say that which--I don't know which one is the earliest, but there're a few things I do remember, one is, you know, watching TV together was a thing, you know, and, and fun.  Whether, if we were watching 'Ed Sullivan' ['The Ed Sullivan Show'], if we were watching, you know, I now look back we were watching 'Alfred Hitchcock Presents' and I must have been four, I'm not sure that was entirely appropriate but we, we had fun, you know, watching TV together.  I can remember my mother [Myrtle Ifill] loving the theme song from 'Mission: Impossible' or, you know, so I, I do remember those times of watching television together.  I remember trips, one, one of the things I loved about being in New York [New York] in that people who were low income, you know, could do was to enjoy state parks and that was a big thing that my, my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] loved for many years.  And so we would on Memorial Day or Labor Day, or any of the holidays, we would, we would drive to Bear Mountain [Bear Mountain State Park, New York] or we would go to Sunken Meadow [Sunken Meadow State Park, New York] or, people who are from New York will rem- will know the names of these, of these state parks.  I can remember, these, this is in the day before seat belts, you know, my seat in the car was on the floor in the back, (laughter), you know, of the Buick, you know, 'cause you had to fit lots of people in the car and in those days there, there were no seatbelt laws so you could just kind of cram 'em in.  So it's interesting to me when, when people, you know, talk about families that they see where they see lots of kids, or they see immigrant families and they are derisive about them, I always have an interesting reaction to those people because we probably looked like that.  And it was our effort to, you know, to have good fun, to be a family to enjoy time together and we did and, and so those things I, are cherished memories of, of that time.
Speaker 1: So what was the address of where you grew up?  What's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I--
Speaker 1: Do you remember it?
Speaker 2: --actually don't want to give that information.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  Now give, anything you don't feel comfortable--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --don't worry about.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: In part because I use these things sometimes and you just worry about people--
Speaker 1: I understand--
Speaker 2: --taking numbers and--
Speaker 1: I understand that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: I gotcha.
Story_ID: 523564
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?  You know, you were starting to talk about the TV, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which brings back--
Speaker 2: Sights, smells and sounds of growing up?  Well there was a feeling in the summer, we didn't go to camp.  Summer just meant you were around, you know, the neighborhood.  And there was a feeling to it, you know?  It was, it, it, there was a feeling to the heat and the laziness of the days and--now I loved school, so there was the sight and sound of summer, there was a joy when summer began and then pretty soon, I couldn't wait to get back to school.  And the feeling of the fall which is interesting, I said it was my favorite season, it is, it's not quite the same now, it feels, seems pretty hot now, at least when my, when I was raising my kids and they were going back to school.  But when I what I recall is that it didn't seem that hot, I mean I remember we would get new shoes and they would be knee socks, you know, with the cable knit on them and there would be little skirt sets, very often plaid and sometimes culottes with the little pin on the side, and, oh my gosh, getting your new school clothes, it just didn't get better than that.  That was just the best, You didn't get that many but just those few outfits and getting those new shoes, you know, that to me was just the, the best part of the year.  And then Christmas, we were big Christmas freaks, you know?  Like we, and I, I still am to this day, you know, we go all out.  And lots of food and decorating the tree and Christmas carols, you know.  My father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] had an album of one of those boxed sets of Columbia, you know, Columbia Records, with all the, all the classics, sung by, you know, who were then the classic singers, you know, the Gene Autrys and the, oh goodness, the Nat King Coles and, and we loved it and, you know, when the season came and that album would go on, and you know you were in the Christmas season, oh it was it was a beautiful thing.
Speaker 1: What about smells?
Speaker 2: Well, that would probably be candy, there was a penny candy store not far from where we lived and in those days, I've talked to other people my age who grew up in New York [New York], and candy was like a thing, you know?  Candy cost a penny or it was seven cents and when you got a little money, you could get candy, you know, so, so like the smell of Now and Laters which was one of, you know, our favorite candies, you'd have to, you'd have to know it, you know, it's a very hard candy, or, or like Fire Stix, the, you know, those, the smells of the different candies was, you know, was something I would remember from being a kid.
Story_ID: 523565
Speaker 1: So, describe the neighborhood that you grew up in.
Speaker 2: So it's interesting, I, I've really thought a lot about it, you know, because I'm so interested now in how we all view the landscape where we live and where we grew up and, and particularly the racial dynamics of it.  I know, I remember my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] telling me that the pur- home we grew up in that we purchased in Queens [New York], he actually purchased from white woman, a German American woman, and the neighborhood was at, was really entirely black, although there actually was a white woman who lived with a, was married to a black man who lived on the corner.  But, but it was basically a black neighborhood, I would describe it as a middle class neighborhood.  We were not particularly middle class, I mean my father said we were middle class because we owned a home, but there were no other indicia of middle classness (laughter) and that we had no money and that we were, you know, often just scraping to get by and utilities would be turned off and, you know, there would, we were, we were struggling.  But we were in a house and that, and so it was very small, single family homes, very close to one another, lots of kids, lots of kids in the neighborhood and the parents were mostly just working class people.
Story_ID: 523566
Speaker 1: When I was in kindergarten, is when busing really started in that neighborhood, and so we were bused from that neighborhood.  So my, I was bused from kindergarten, but my older siblings went to school in the neighborhood.  And then we were bused beginning in the, in the late 1960s.
Speaker 2: So where were you bused then?  So where did you go to elementary?
Speaker 1: So were bused from, from South Ozone Park, Jamaica, from Jamaica, Queens [New York] to Flushing, Queens [New York].  Flushing, Queens was a predominantly, almost entirely white neighborhood at that time, white, mostly Jewish, and we were bused to school in that neighborhood.  And it's, and it's interesting, I tell people all the time about the work that I now do, you know, people think about Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] which was the case that litigated and won by the Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] in 1954.  But it was really after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 passed, that you began to get really serious busing in the North because the Civil Rights Act of 1964 included Title VI, which said that the federal government could not provide funds to any program that engaged in discrimination.  So now were talking about potentially withholding funds from school districts and that started really busing happening in the North in places like New York [New York] where I grew up, so we were bused to Flushing.  And, and so I went to integrated schools, I mean and truly integrated, it, it was maybe 50/50, frankly for, for K through twelve [kindergarten to twelfth grade].
Speaker 2: Now do you remember if--were your other siblings bused at the same time you were bused?
Speaker 1: So my--so they were, but now they were much older right?  So many of them had gone to the neighborhood elementary school and middle school, my oldest sister [Barbara Ifill (ph.)] went to an integrated school in Brooklyn [New York].  That was before we even moved to Queens, so they also had an integrated experience.  So som- so some of the--them had the experience of going to the segregated school in our neighborhood, the elementary school and the middle school, and then most of us had an experience of going to integrated high schools.
Speaker 2: Okay, so did you, well so did was--do you remember any discussion about that in the household, about the busing or integration or what to expect, or how to handle yourself?
Speaker 1: (Shakes head) (Laughter).
Speaker 2: None of that, none of that going?
Speaker 1: No, no we, no.  This is kind of came from the strictness of life you just, you do well in school, I mean we were, that was uncompromising and there was never a conversation about like what might--conditions might make you not do well.  You just had to do well, that was just the understanding.  We did talk about race, 'cause there would be incidents that would happen in school or things that would happen with teachers, and so I felt like we were always having a conversation about race in the home, when I was growing up, but I don't remember it like being a conversation about prepare yourself for entering this environment.  It was just understood that this is what, this is what you were gonna do.
Story_ID: 523567
Speaker 1: So what were some of the conversations around race?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, everything.  You know, things that we saw on television, you know, this was, you know.
Speaker 1: There's a lot happening?
Speaker 2: There's a lot happening and, and I, it grew up in a, we--you know, in a, in a bubble of a time, right?  My, my conscious memories are maybe from 1967 to, you know, in, in that period in, in the ear- through the early, early '70s [1970s], I tell people all the time, like I watched the entire Watergate hearings, that summer, you know, with my sisters.  So I grew up in this time where America was really reforming itself, and with a, the project of reforming America seemed like a possible thing that people could actually make change and make things happen.  But issues around race were incredibly volatile during this period and, you know, Shirley Chisholm's run for president was a big deal, things happening in our, in our own community around policing.  I mean I can remember a boy who was killed by the police during that period and I've talked about it recently, it only actually came to me recently to even remember that this happened.  But I remember it being a big issue that people talked about at the bus stop and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was surprised by that because, you know I, it was, you remembered the name of the police officer that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thomas--
Speaker 2: It was weird.
Speaker 1: Thomas Shea, I thought that was, you know and that you went back and looked and--
Speaker 2: I didn't go back.  So I went to, I went to, to St. Louis [Missouri] to give a speech right after Mike Brown [Michael Brown] was killed and when I was, I was interviewed on the radio about, and the question is the question many people ask, you know, is this a new issue or, you know, why are we suddenly seeing all these police involved killings?  And, you know, I was on NPR [National Public Radio], and I just said, "Well I can tell you my first memory of the issue of police officers and violence, maybe even my first memory of really thinking about the, the police and it involved the killing of, you know, a boy in Queens [New York]," and I said on the radio, "I remember the officer's name, it was Shea. I didn't remember his first name, I remembered the boy was killed and they said, the officer said he thought that he had a gun, I remember that he was acquitted and the reason it stuck with me, it was so powerful is because I was ten and the boy was ten.  And I remember the talking about it at the bus stop, and I remember what the front page of the Daily News [New York Daily News] looked like on my parents' coffee table, you know?"  So I remember that and I got back to the hotel room and someone on social media said to me, "I found the case you're talking about," and they sent me the Daily News article and the officer's name was Shea, it was Thomas Shea, the boy's name was Clifford Glover and there was the story.  And since then, The New York Times has done a story about it and so forth but, so it, it was interesting to me, I had, it wasn't that I had ev- had talked about Clifford Glover in the ensuing years.  It's just somebody asked me that question and there I sat and I thought, well what's my first memory?  And I had a memory that's forty years old of a ten year old boy being killed by an officer and being acquitted for this killing and he didn't have a gun, you know?  And he was with his father [Glover's stepfather, Add Armstead].  And so, so it was a really important moment to say, you know, when you say wha- what were the conversations like about?  It was happening, you know, and it was just a part of life that you dealt with and I think many of us have those very deeply embedded memories even if we're not in touch with them on a day to day basis, if pressed we discover that our memories are quite potent, and, and that unfortunately, they're quite connected to many of the things we see today.
Speaker 1: You know, and that's pretty--because what I'm hearing about you, 'cause a lot of times, you're, you and your household were very aware and maybe this is a lot of households around that time very, are very aware of what's happening on the outside--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: --world.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Every, you know, every weekend we watched Gil Noble's 'Like It Is,' there wou- that was a, you know, an amazing program and we were expected to know about history and every documentary, you know, ev- every year they would, they would air, you know, 'King: from Montgomery to Memphis' ['King: A Filmed Record, Montgomery to Memphis'] you now, it was a documentary, every year.  So we would watch it and it would close with that walk for his funeral and Nina Simone singing 'The King of Love is Dead' ['Why? (The King of Love Is Dead)'], like th- this is something I'm, you know, seeing when I'm nine, ten years old.  So there are, and it came on every year, so that there was a reinforcement about race, my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] talked about race all the time.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: He talked about the expectation that you had to be good and, and better and, you know, and he made clear what the expectations were of us dealing in that world.  So the idea that there was unfairness and there was inequality with something that we knew, my father, as I said, was a social worker in Harlem [New York, New York] and he worked in the organization he led, he was the director of an organization called, HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams, New York, New York], which was actually founded by Kenneth Clark, Dr. Kenneth Clark, who did the famous doll test in, that, that supported the work in Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  But he ran this organization HARYOU-ACT and it was focused on ha- it was Harlem Youth, that's where Harlem Youth came from.  So he was very connected into young people and their needs and, you know, we always thought it was funny 'cause he was so strict to us and seemed so mean, but he really liked young people (laughter), other young people who, who, you know, who were struggling, who were struggling and his, and his job was to advocate for what they needed.  So we would, you know, I don't ever recall feeling disconnected from the idea of, of race and racial inequality and I certainly don't recall feeling particularly disconnected from my own personal need to be engaged in it.  That came very early for me, the feeling that somehow I would be a part of this thing.
Story_ID: 523568
Speaker 1: I think it was hard for her.  It was really hard for us and, you know, I just think that was an adjustment that so--it's interesting to talk to so many families where that was a natural thing, you know, the dad remarried--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, you see, you used to see it on TV all the time and--but it, it's hard, it's really, really hard.  She was different than us in lots of ways, but she also had qualities that actually m- mattered, ended up mattering to me.  She was very intelligent, very well read, very educated, and I was a smart cookie and I liked, you know, that I, she was somebody I could say, you know, "I'm writing this paper and--," you know.  But she was also very much a woman of her time in that my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] ran the show, you know.  And so, yeah that, that, you know, in that sense she wasn't like a role model for me but she was, but interestingly, she was extremely smart, extremely educated, she was, she was a bookkeeper, she was an accountant, I mean she was very, very bright.  So, you know, she had really extraordinary qualities again in retrospect looking back at her as a person for a woman of that time period.  Why she would wanna take all this on, I don't know but, but, but she had these extraordinary qualities that were quite interesting.  She's also quite athletic, she was a big swimmer, I mean she was an, she was an interesting lady.
Speaker 2: And her name?  You don't want that either.
Speaker 1: (Shakes head).
Speaker 2: Okay. (Laughter) Okay, okay, okay, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 523569
Speaker 1: What other things--now what about religion?  Religion also was an (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big.
Speaker 1: --important thing--
Speaker 2: Big.
Speaker 1: --so, big in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church where you know 'cause--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  Yes, you know, it's really one of the things I think is quite fascinating is how you form, you know, your relationship to faith.  So, my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] was very religious and every Sunday evening we prayed together and we sang hymns, I mean that happened every Sunday growing up.  So it became a big part of our lives and, you know, there're, there're different collateral consequences of this.  One is, we all think we're singers, I'm really not a singer but like we loved music, right?  And you know, I, I now can look back and see what we grew up in, yeah, well sure we loved The Temptations, we were big pop music people too, and big R&B and soul music people but we also, you know, loved, loved hymns.  And so we, we are quite unselfconscious about singing (laughter) and singing, you know, with other people, 'cause we did it all the time.  Being, being well read, I mean I can remember--it, it's interesting, we--I didn't learn until I was an adult that it was actually my mother [Myrtle Ifill] who taught me to read, I don't remember ever not being able to read.  So, that means I was reading when I was four, and reading was maybe the most important thing in my life for a very many years as an adolescent, I just loved books, but what I can remember was, you know, reading the Bible was probably, you know, besides the, you know, 'See Jane Go' and, and the books you were reading at school, that's a pretty heavy text, you know, it was King James [King James Version], it wasn't all the newfangled ones.  But you, and, and you had to--we all read aloud from it, you know on Sunday nights, right?  So you had to know how to read aloud, so you now, now I can look back and see that those things were like quite formative in some ways and it wasn't just about your faith, it was about grappling with text and reading difficult words and knowing how to read aloud and sing.  I mean so there, there's a, there are other qualities to it that are really fascinating to think back, you know, now that I'm a parent and see what that was infusing.  But the sense of faith, I think was a, was a big deal and could really, my father really developed that from his mother who, you know, also was a deeply, deeply religious woman.  So it wasn't just from his brother [O. Urcille Ifill, Sr.]; his mother was a deeply religious woman and very active in the Salvation Army in, in Panama.  And her faith was what kept her going she was, she was a woman raising three kids as a domestic.  She was poor, and, you know, my, my father would say, how when they didn't have anything and when they couldn't understand where--how was this gonna happen, how my grandmother would say, "The Lord will provide, the Lord will provide."  The faith formed that function for her that it really formed for so many of our grandmothers and great-grandmothers and great-grandfathers, was the ability to hold on and to believe that things could be better and to believe that there was love out there in the universe that was caring for you no matter what your day to day condition was.  And I think of, you know, that kind of faith as being really critical to keeping you sane and alive and motivated to go on when, you know, the whole narrative is against you, the whole narrative of who you're supposed to be, who your children are supposed to be is against you.  So I find that very precious and in some ways quite poignant when I think about, you know, my own children and, and their children to be, you know, of what, what the faith of somebody can do, because the faith is really organizing your spirit around believing in the future and believing you have a future.  And if she didn't believe that, I wouldn't have one, you know, and they wouldn't have one.  So it's a powerful thing, very powerful thing.
Speaker 1: That's very well stated too and I, and I--because you think about how, I always say how did they know?  How did slaves, you know, how did they know?  What is this mother wit that you would pass on? Things like you have to be better, you know, almost this protective thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 523570
Speaker 1: What is the young [HistoryMaker] Sherrilyn Ifill like though?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All of--
Speaker 1: I mean I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) all of my teachers would say that I talked too much.  And always, you know, we'd get the report card, "Sherrilyn's very bright, you know, she talks too much in class."  So I'm actually quite mindful of what we tell girls who talk too much, or who are aggressive.  I was smart and I knew I was smart and I had something to say, and I wanted attention, you know, like many kids in big families do, and so I'm very conscious of that, now I think about like the narratives, what we tell girls about who they can be.  Funny, I was funny, still am, and, you know, and so I had a--I had fun, I had a lot of imagination, a lot of imagination, very, very, you know, a lot of it came from books, I would, I read a lot and that imagination of worlds that could be of what my life could be was a big impetus, you know, for me.
Speaker 1: So was reading a part, was it the culture of your family?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Every--everybody read and I, you know, we would, we--I had mentioned that, you know, our home was quite strict.  One thing that we were allowed to do, when I was an adolescent, is I was allowed to go to the library every Saturday, that I could do with, you know, I didn't need, it was no big deal, you couldn't sleep over at people's house but you could go to the library.  So every Saturday I went to the library and took out ten books, and I had the ten books for the week and then I would go back the next Saturday.  That was like a joy, that was, actually to be in the, the Baisley Park branch [Jamaica, New York] of the library, of the Queens Borough Library [Queens Library, Queens, New York], and to this day, I still love libraries, I served on the board of the Baltimore library [Enoch Pratt Free Library, Baltimore, Maryland] for many years and it was, you know, I, I maintained that that's my retirement job, is just volunteering in the library, love it.  That exposure to just being able to read and reading all these different, about these different worlds and, I just, I just loved it, I just loved it (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 523571
Speaker 1: What is the strictness, who you could be around, or--?
Speaker 2: Oh well, you couldn't go anywhere, you couldn't really, you know, I mean I think the theory was, we are this contained unit, you know, there were lots of people in it, I'm not sure why you would need to go anywhere else (laughter), you know.  You, my, my, I had a si- I have a sister who's a year older than I am, she was then and still is my best friend, you know, so you've got your best friend, you know, you've got all these people, and it was really about protection.   It really was about protection, protection not just, you know, from something nefarious but like getting hurt.  I mean there was a, there was a lot of concern just around the, around the poverty issue, you know, that we just can't afford for you to get hurt, you know, we can't, we can't afford for something to happen.  And it's interesting I think, you know, I cannot in my wildest dreams imagine having in my head thinking about the safety of ten children.
Speaker 1: Why I'm thinking about that, that's a lot.
Speaker 2: It's overwhelming, it's overwhelming and so, in a way I think, you know, and and we did make it, we didn't get hurt, you know?  I think if I were raising eight girls and two boys, I can't even imagine how you do so, you ask me how did they know?  They, they knew that this, this is how you have to do it.  And particularly at that time, you know, this is the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], where things were really loosening up, it was, you know, it was, it was really imposed upon you that these are the rules and you can't depart from them.  I think it was overboard naturally.  I tried to be a little more liberal with my children but I also understood the kind of sense of--
Speaker 1: Structure.
Speaker 2: --of structure, of structure, when you came home you knew what happened, you know?  Yes, you could watch a little TV and then you had to get to your homework, you know.  There were grades that you just could not bring in my house, you know, they'll do, you know.  Things, there were just things that you knew and, and you, you know, life was different then, children had a different relationship to their parents of course, but that structure was there.  And at the end of the day, it saved us, it saved, it saved, you know, ten, ten people who could have gone, you know, any which way, but didn't.
Story_ID: 523572
Speaker 1: So what, was the neighborhood changing?  Did it change during the time that you were there?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It was changing and you could kind of see the generations of kids growing up, you know, and leaving, my older siblings and their generations leaving, but the biggest changes really happened after my generation, you know, because now there really weren't kids anymore.  And I would say, we probably should recognize that the way in which busing was handled transformed these neighborhoods as well, because the way busing should have worked for integration purposes is that African American children should have gone to, to the white neighborhood and white children should have gone, some white children should have to the African American neighborhoods so that you were mixing the two.  It didn't happen they; the white children never came to our neighborhood.  And so what that means is that, it's not just that the African American community remained segregated, it's that the engine that runs the community, right?  When you take all the kids and they're gone for the day, then the candy store, that I was telling you about, can't really flourish and the, you know, the--when we stop to get pizza on the way home, it wasn't in our own neighborhood, you know, it was in another neighborhood, when we stopped to get knishes or beef patties or whatever, all the different things you got in New York [New York], gyros, you know, when I was in high school [Hillcrest High School, Queens, New York], it wasn't in our neighborhood.  So, so even the businesses that would, that that would be supported right, by having daytime traffic, by having people in the community, were being impoverished in our community and, and had greater opportunities in the communities that we were bused to.  I can remember we, we, we would go to my elementary school [P.S. 219, Paul Klapper School, Queens, New York] and you'd stop at the bagel store and for, you know, for fifteen cents you could get a really delicious warm bagel, but that's what you did on the way to school.  That wasn't in our neighborhood.  So I think, understanding that the tra- that transformation in some ways began when the focus of infrastructure, of bus routes, of everything you needed was out of our neighborhood and into these other neighborhoods.  The support for small businesses and so forth and that began it.  And then when you got to my generation, you know, where the kids now were, this was kind of the last generation of those families that had purchased these homes, you really didn't have much to keep the neighborhood going certainly in its existing incarnation.  Our parents grew old, they stayed in those homes, they didn't have options, they were not gonna retire to Myrtle Beach [South Carolina] or retire to Florida.  Their one bet was on that home that they purchased in the 1960s and most of them died in those homes.  And so, you, you then had a neighborhood of elderly people and without the vibrancy in the community you knew--you had people who preyed on the community and crime and so forth, because you didn't really have foot traffic and people walking around and kids out.  When I was, you know, when I was a kid, my goodness, kids were out all the time.  We played all the time in front of our home.  And so, it really transformed and, and interestingly now, it's, you know, I've, I've, I've been back one or two times just to see the neighborhood, first of all, the house looks ten times smaller than when I was growing up, I don't understand what happened.  I, I keep, kept saying to my children, who I was showing this home: "It's not the same house, it can't be the same house, it can't be the same--."  The front yard was an actual front yard.  No it wasn't.  The--walking to the corner seemed really--you would ask for permission, "Can I walk up to the corner" 'cause it seemed really far away.  It was like three steps, I just was (laughter).  So besides the fact that clearly my perspective had been off, you know, it, it, many of these neighborhoods look like a ghost town, you know, they, they, they're not teeming with life and children and hope and possibility as they were, you know, when I was a kid and then of course the foreclosure crisis hit all of these communities really hard and left many of them, you know, abandoned.
Story_ID: 523573
Speaker 1: You had said also during your youth that you were--two women, well I don't know if it was just two women but, two black women you were influenced by.  You talked about the Watergate hearings, and that's Barbara Jordan, and you also talked about Shirley Chisholm, you know who you've talked about it so, can you talk about their, you know, what seeing them meant to you or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm. Well when I was a girl, black women on television were largely entertainers, right.  So, you know, I grew up watching [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll as Julia, right?  And everyone knows that Diahann Carroll is absolutely beautiful, maybe you were even named for Julia because it was so, such an amazing show right, and since she was lovely.  I can remember there was the Barbara McNair special ['The Barbara McNair Show'], she had, used to have like a variety show and sometimes you saw Leslie Uggams, but they were entertainers and they were, and they were pretty, they were very beautiful.  So, to see Shirley Chisholm in 1972, and to see Barbara Jordan in 1974, was something quite different.  They weren't decorative, you know, at best you'd say handsome, you might, attractive, but not, but not beautiful by any traditional standards certainly of that day.  And, but they were powerful, and the power came from their voice, so I didn't think I was decorative, I wasn't a, I wasn't by the standards of the day one of the decorative little girls, you know, who got all the attention and people said was darling and sweet.  I was the girl who talked a lot and who was really smart.  So, to see, I mean I can remember the Barbara Jordan, you know, moment during the Watergate hearings and to see a black woman hold the room by her voice, you know, not by her looks, was, was very powerful for me, it was, was very much a kind of co- affirmation of, of, of what I could, I already thought I could be, you know, of, of the possibility of what you could be that you could be a leader.  And it didn't rely on you, you know, being beautifully coiffed, but you, but it just came, it came out, people would hear your power and they would be, and they would be influenced by hearing your power.  So that, I think, you know, and not just for me, I think there were many black girls who were and talk about being moved by those two women.  For me that was the significance, the significance of them is that they, they had power and influence and you could feel it and you couldn't take your eyes off them and it wasn't because they were the most beautiful women in the room or because they were singing.
Speaker 1: Well, they commanded power, they commanded power.
Speaker 2: The commanded it.  They, they commanded it by their strength and smarts and a kind of a moral authority, it was fascinating.
Story_ID: 523574
Speaker 1: So now, you went, give me your elementary school was what?  The school you went to?
Speaker 2: So I went to, to both elementary school and middle school in Flushing [Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: In Flushing.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: What were the name of the schools?
Speaker 2: P.S. 219 [Paul Klapper School, Queens, New York] was the elementary school, and then P.S. 123, Campbell Junior High School [sic. J.H.S. 218, Campbell Junior High School, Queens, New York], which is in the same building, I guess it's a new building but where CUNY law school currently is [sic.], that was my middle school.  And then my high school was Hillcrest High School [Queens, New York] and I always say that, you know, I had a lot of fun when I was a young kid, largely because my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] developed this sense of humor, you know, and, and so we laughed about things even very difficult things, even about being poor, even about teased 'cause we'd never had the right sneakers or the right clothes or the right book bags, even the pain or the loneliness of having lost our mom [Myrtle Ifill], or, you know, these were not happy things.  But I've look back and we seem like we were having a good time a lot of the time (laughter) because we knew how to laugh about things and we knew how to, we found humor in things that we saw on television or things that we read.  But I will say that my own personal happiness, I always say really began when I walked into Hillcrest High School and I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: So why is that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I loved it.  Well first of all I always loved school so that was, you know, middle school was a little dicey, I have to admit, but elementary school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well why was that?
Speaker 2: I just didn't like it, it was in, it wasn't a great school and middle school I think is just a tough age for kids and so, which is not fun.  High school I loved, and I loved it because--so this was the most, to this day diverse environment that I have ever been.  So it was racially mixed, it was ethnically mixed, you know, the, the students were Greek American, and Arab American, and every kind you--lots of Latino students, lots of black students, lots of white students, lots of Jewish students, lots of--I mean it was just a full mix of all of us.  And, you could kind of find your people, you know, in this and you could find the things you were interested in, big theater program which I loved and which my sister loved, and so we were in every play every year, every musical every year, which we, which we adored.  You know, I loved writing and, and there was something, there was writing for me. I had been the editor in chief of my junior high school newspaper, The Campbell Courier [ph.], and, and so I wanted to write and so writing for the school literary magazine and editing the yearbook, these were things I loved, these were things I, enjoyed tremendously, you know.  And so I loved my classes.  My sister and I were in the same homeroom and we always had a ball because we were best friends, we had crushes on boys and--
Speaker 1: You were in the same homeroom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the homeroom was--so sh- I--we--the--
Speaker 1: Is she a year older?
Speaker 2: She's a year older, yeah and, and the homeroom was not one grade, the homeroom in high school was lo- people in different grades.  So we were in the same homeroom and so we could talk about our crushes on different boys and we always had so--at least one crush happening at, at, you know, at one time which was always fun.  And I had great best friends who were, girls who were just fun and it was, it was, it was great, you know, it was really, really great and I, I cherish it because it shows me what it could be, you know.  There, and then maybe just a small time period, but at that time period, this particular high school in New York City [New York, New York], big high school, bigger than my college [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York].
Speaker 1: How large was it?
Speaker 2: Goodness there must have been, well see there were six hundred students in my graduating class, so it was like twenty-five hundred kids or so in a, in a high school which seemed--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --that seemed normal to me.
Speaker 1: Now, now when you, did you go in ninth grade?
Speaker 2: I went in tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Oh, tenth grade?
Speaker 2: I went in tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was 1977 you entered?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you graduated--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in 1980?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.  So it was just, it was, it wa- that feeling of a big environment, lots of--that seemed like a, the--you know, and I think for some New Yorkers of a certain age seemed like the normal way you would interact, it just seemed, that seemed right.  And I, and I really loved that and even going back for my high school reunion which I did a few years ago, my thirtieth reunion, it was great, it was fantastic.  Like every, you know, it was, it was, the, the friends that I'd had, they would still, they--I totally got why I had a great time with them, you know, what I mean?  It was just, it was just like a--so when people look back and, and have these terrible high school experiences, I always say, oh my god no, I had, I went to what was I thought then the best high school in New York City--
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) and I had a ball.
Story_ID: 523575
Speaker 1: Now Sherrilyn [HistoryMaker Sherrilyn Ifill], was, was this, you talk about it being more diverse.  So are you saying when you were in Flushing [Queens, New York], were those, was it more black and white?  You know, or--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was more--
Speaker 2: It was really just black and white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I got to high school [Hillcrest High School, Queens, New York] it was black, white, Latino, a lot of Asian Americans, the neighborhood actually interesting, the neighborhood where Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] grew up, Jamaica Estates [Queens, New York] was very close to this school so you had the children of diplomats, it was class, it was class diverse also.  So you had those ones who came from South Ozone Park [Queens, New York], you had the white students who we'd gone to with before, came from Flushing, you had students from Jamaica Estates who were children of diplomats who were Indonesian and Greek and, I mean it was, it was amazing.  And I mean I can just remember what seemed normal to me was on our way home, you would stop to get something to eat, and your choices were beef patty, gyro, a pizza from Frank's Pizza, the real Italian pizza parlor, you know, ICEEs, natural, you know, bean sprout pitas from Smile of the Beyond [Jamaica, New York], I mean you, you know, it was a very New York [New York] thing that to other people probably seems unusual but to us seemed like that was like the normal thing, maybe you would get a knish, if that's what you wanted, you know?  So I enjoyed that period of my life very, very much and academically, I did really well and I loved, I loved my subjects, I loved social studies, you know, I loved history, I loved, I loved English.  English was my thing and every English teacher I loved.  I fell in love with Greek tragedy that was my thing.
Speaker 1: I was wondering who introduced you to--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --Greek tragedy--
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: --'cause I read about your interest in--
Speaker 2: I can tell you exactly who it was, it was a teacher named Lenore Vanora [ph.], who passed away not long after I went to college, a few, maybe a year or two after I went to college.  And I remember it because, when I went to col- when I went to Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], one of the early things they after you was to write an essay about the teach- the high school teacher who most influenced you and they sent it to the teacher.  I wrote about Lenore Vanora, and, but I'd nev- I didn't think anything about it after I wrote, but later, when I visited my high school years later, I learned what it meant to her.  She was dying she was, she had cancer, and she was stunned to get this, this letter, but she was amazing.  There, there was a period there in that high school, those teachers, particularly my English teachers could have taught at any college, they could have taught at any college, they were that good.  They, you know, they went to Queens College [Queens, New York], they had, some of them had master's degrees, they were very serious about teaching, and they were, they could meet you wherever you were.  Lenore Vanora, I remember, I had her first for Modern Novel, and then she was my Great Books teacher, which was our AP English class, we called, we decided on our own to call it Great Books.  But I loved Greek tragedy, I fell in love with it and I loved it through college and I still, u- usually, maybe every other summer, I will read my entire collection of Greek tragedy, and it di- you know it takes a minute.  But like the 'Medea' [Euripides], it's just one of my favorites and, the 'Orestes' [Euripides], yeah and it was, and it was her who, because she really allowed us to take the time to figure out what's going, what was going on here to be, to really get in touch with our own humanity and to, to see the, the, you know, eternal human challenge.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of lessons in those tragedies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my goodness, oh, oh there really are, yeah and--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --to me tho- those were the most compelling stories and I, I remember, you know, how much I now look back and can see her concern, how much I resonated with these, with the women who did, some of them did terrible things, Clytemnestra killed her husband Agamemnon and, you know, she's been plotting this revenge since he, you know, had her send her daughter Iphigenia, and her sacrificed, you know, and, and she thought she was sending her daughter to marry a great hero of the war and, and sent her with all her bridal clothes.  But no, no, no, he needed a sacrifice, he needed a virgin sacrifice because the gods were angry and wouldn't give them the win they needed for the ships to, you know, to go on in the battle.  And, you know, she sends her daughter and Iphigenia is killed and, and, and he's a great war--he's a great war hero, 'cause he, you know, he's winning and he comes home triumphant, and she's been having an affair with his brother and she plans this whole thing and she kills him.  Or Medea who kills her children after Jason, you know, she finds out that Jason is involved with someone else.  Now I did not, I did not connect with these women because I was a latent murderer, (laughter) I connected with these women because in the context of Greek tragedy, they were like men, they, they experienced themselves like men.  They had a sense of honor, which women we're not supposed to have.  Men had honor; women were supposed to just take whatever was left.  But these women had honor and honor for men meant that they had to avenge certain things, and they and right, and they had to--and these women felt that way too.  So I was fascinated by these women and, that was a big part of like my loving Greek tragedy, you know.  And I was allowed in that classroom to love it the way I loved it and, and that was lovely for me because, you know, in any other circumstance you would have seen me just wanting to go to this party on Saturday night, and I was just a normal black girl, you know, in Queens [New York].  But I also had this other very deep relationship to literature and text and, and, and I was allowed to have that, you know, as a, as a sixteen or seventeen year old.
Story_ID: 523576
Speaker 1: So what other things? So I know theater was a big thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: English was a big thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You, you know, you say you're doing the normal, I'm just trying to also figure out, what else is forming you doing that period of time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sports, I have a lifelong love of sports, not, never could play any sports but my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] was a huge sports fan and, and the sport that he loved was baseball.  So baseball, when you talked about smells and sights and sounds was the b- was the sound in the background of my life growing up, there was always a game on, it's either the Mets [New York Mets] or the Yankees [New York Yankees].  Sunday afternoon sounds like 'Kiner's Korner,' if you, if you know baseball, you would remember the show hosted by Ralph Kiner, it was the show that came on before the Mets game, or maybe it was after the Mets game, but 'Kiner's Korner' would be on and the game would be on and that sound of a baseball game in the background, is my house.  And I hated it, I had no interest in baseball whatsoever, until I got to high school [Hillcrest High School, Queens, New York], my sister and I, and, you know, in those days you didn't have a ha- you know, TVs everywhere so, you know, if you wanted to watch TV in the living room, and my father was watching baseball, you'd sit down there and you'd watch it.  And we were just, you know, we were adolescent girls and we started to notice that these guys were kind of cute, and so we kind of started to watch it, you know, and then we got into it, like we got so into it.  We were baseball Yankees fanatics, fanatics.  We just loved it, we watched every game, we would weep if they lost, we would, you know, it was just, we just loved 'em.  So we, so I developed this incredible love for baseball and particularly for the Yankees, and just the fun of sports.  And I still, I still, you know, now it's, now it's the Ravens [Baltimore Ravens] and, you know, and it's tennis and I, I love watching sports which is great, a great outlet.
Story_ID: 523577
Speaker 1: And music, wow, so I--you--when you're me and you have, or you're a young kid and you have all these older siblings, your musical tastes are their musical tastes, right?  So I don't ever recall listening to (singing) "Da-da-da-da-da," little kids songs, no.  I listened to The Temptations, and Aretha [Aretha Franklin] and The Delfonics, and the Five Stairsteps, and The Main Ingredient, to this day, if you pulled out my iPod, that's who you're gonna find, you're gonna find Main Ingredient, and The Stylistics and The O'Jays and the like, 'cause that's what my siblings were into.  And, you know, my brother had a very, he had great taste in music, not only he, you know, at the first disco albums he had and jazz and, he was just really discerning.  And then my, my sister, the one who was six or seven years older than me, Yolanda [Yolando Ifill (ph.)] who was the teenager right.  So she was really, she was, she was actually buying 45s [45 rpm record], you know, so this was--so music was happening all the time.  In those days, you know, it was your actual radio, and one of the, the stock gifts in our family, when you graduated from sixth grade you got a transistor radio, so you had your transistor radio that you could listen to in the morning and, you know, in those days radio stations were playing great music, certainly great R&B music and we loved it and we, and we had our groups and we knew everything about them and so when you mentioned Chaka Khan, I had the first, you know, Rufus and Chaka Khan album, like, you know.  I mean so, I think they were just Rufus at that point, you know?  We loved music, and that's a, that's a lifelong love.  We loved music, we love dancing, we danced in our house, you know, we were very, very comfortable with music and whatever were the latest dances, my sister Yolanda knew them and she would bring them in and, you know, and teach us whatever the latest dances were and whatever James Brown was doing and, and that was a big part of the time we spent together in the house, especially as, as siblings.
Story_ID: 523578
Speaker 1: That was like my parents were, "What are you talking about?"  You know, we had these awful 3.99 skip sneakers, you know, we were teased with all this, but it was, it was, it was different somehow, it was different, and--
Speaker 2: So how did you make light of that?  You know, 'cause you said you, you would, you would laugh at those things, how would you laugh?
Speaker 1: Not when it was happening, we were mortified we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, (laughter) okay--
Speaker 1: --would laugh later, like we even thought we were ridiculous do you know what I mean?  It's not like we thought oh these diggers are great, you know what I mean, we, we, we recognized it, you know?  And so--
Speaker 2: Well what would you say about it?  Give me just an example.
Speaker 1: I don't even know what you, you mean what we would say about it ourselves?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like how would you laugh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh my gosh.
Speaker 2: --it off because sometimes--
Speaker 1: We never laughed it off there.  We really were mortified.  I mean we, it was painful, it was embarrassing.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it, it can, those things can--
Speaker 1: Oh my god it was awful.  And, and so there were times when it was really, really tough and we were, we were humiliated, we had a lot pride, we were really raised with a lot of--we really, I, you know, we, we did, we, we had a big family and the only other big family that we knew of that was our size was the Kennedys.  And so we kind of felt like we were like, you know, like we had lost our money in the great crash or something, do you know what I mean?  We didn't really feel like we were like this big poor family, feel like this big family that had fallen on hard times but then somehow we were, we, we, we actually thought quite highly of ourselves.  So it was almost double mortifying that we looked ridiculous, you know what I mean?  That we didn't have the right sneakers or that, I mean I remember one, at some point we di- we didn't have, you know, warm winter coats and people could see that we were cold and like it was just mortified.  Those things were painful, there's no laughing about that, but our time together in the home as, particularly as siblings, 'cause in those days, like your parents were separate entities, you know, they did their thing and you did your thing and your came together to watch the news and you did things on Sunday night and so forth.  But we lived our kind of own life, you know, we, we were able somehow to, to, to mock ourselves, to, to, to see the ridiculousness of it, to be embarrassed, but to, to somehow not, it didn't, it didn't wound us.  It was, it--as people we knew that this thing was outside us, you know.  It, it wasn't that we were wrong it's that the sneakers were crazy looking, you know what I mean?  And we wanted to have the nice stuff, we didn't--you know, it wasn't like we were so holier than thou we thought these things are perfectly fine, you know.  No.  We wanted, oh my god if I could have had Converses, you know?  It would have been fantastic in elementary school [P.S. 219, Paul Klapper School, Queens, New York].  So it wasn't about us, we didn't have, you know, and, and that just was real.  We didn't, we didn't think that it had to do with who we were personally, so and, and that's the only, I don't know how to describe, you know, 'cause I think that we talk about bullying, I think those things are really wounding, I think they're, they are wounding but much of the life that we lived was spent, you know, you had your life at school and then you were internally inside this thing, it's not like that now.  Now you're still exposed, there's social media and there's you're, you're almost out there, all--there's no, you, you can't run away from it, there's no safe space, there's no retreat in the way that I think we were able to kind of come into this thing that--and so, at least for a large part of it, that didn't touch us.
Story_ID: 523579
Speaker 1: Now, was there--you know you talk also about being smart and knowing you're smart.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, was that known within the family?  Or is this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's known in the family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say it, first of all we all are.  So, you know, we were all quite bright, and not just like book smart, but discerning smart too.  You know, we were people watchers, so we were, we knew a lot about people, you know, we just, we were, we were good people watchers which I think people in big families are, right.  So yeah, and people knew that and, and my siblings liked my being smart, they, they, encouraged it, they--and my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] definitely encouraged it.  Something I have to say, I only learned when I was an adult, that maybe my father's sense of me, as a, as an intellectual person was unusual.  I mean it didn't seem to me particularly unusual.  But now I see it because he did expect me to do great, he used to, he, he actually said this, this is, I don't even sa- tell this very often, but he used to say, "You're just destined for--you are destined for greatness, you're destined for great things."
Speaker 1: So he saw that in you.
Speaker 2: And, and, you know, and we often didn't get along 'cause he was so strict, right?  So, you know, greatness did not mean that he was gonna let me go to that party or go over that person's house, but he did understand that I had some--there was something.  And I, whether I did or whether I didn't, what was lovely about it was that there was not a gendered sense of whether you could be great or not, and I didn't even know growing up that that was a thing, that not every dad would say that to a girl.  I understood that not every girl said that all their kids, right.  But, but I mean that, that it wouldn't be a gender thing because my father is a very traditional personal, it wasn't like he was some, you know, gender liberal, that, that at least that I saw.  But he, there was never any sense that, as his daughter somehow I wouldn't accomplish things in the, in the career space, there was just no sense of that.
Speaker 1: And did, did you as the youngest, do you, did your siblings tell you that even though your father, you saw him as strict that he was much looser with you?  You know how, by the time they--was there any of that, like.
Speaker 2: I did ask, they like that's ridiculous, (laughter) yes of course they say, but I mean I just can't, I can't, I can't imagine how (laughter), I can't see--
Speaker 1: You can't see--
Speaker 2: They're just mistaken, they're just mistaken (laughter).
Speaker 1: I bet that they're telling the truth.
Speaker 2: I, I didn't see that.
Speaker 1: But, but you saw, but you saw how, you--he still had some st- there was a lot of structure?
Speaker 2: Are you kidding me?  I don't know what they're talking about.  How much stricter--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --could he have been (laughter).  I can't see it.  But of course they say that, yes.
Speaker 1: Well they get looser as parents, and by the time you come along and you're--
Speaker 2: I believe them 'cause it must be, but I didn't.  I, he was, I think they would agree he was still plenty strict.  (Laughter) I don't think they thought that we were getting away with murder by any stretch of the imagination.
Story_ID: 523580
Speaker 1: What other things are forming you though?  'Cause I was looking, you know, Hillcrest [Hillcrest High School, Queens, New York] has, has quite--and Meryl Streep graduated from there, did you know that, in 1971 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, from Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], not from--
Speaker 1: Oh, from Vassar.
Speaker 2: --Hillcrest.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But--no, no, no, I'm sorry, from, I think from high school was Fran Drescher.
Speaker 2: Fran Drescher did graduate from Hillcrest, that's exactly right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, 1975.  And who else did I have here?  So, I want to know how does Vassar come into being?
Speaker 2: Vassar comes into being because they wrote me, you know, you would take the SATs, and then you'd get some kind of halfway decent score and, you know, you start to get, you know, every, every college senior who's--indicates that they wanna go to college gets a whole ton of crap from colleges, you know, all over whose, who are theoretically (air quotes) recruiting them.  And so, I remember I had a advisor at Hillcrest, he never mentioned Vassar or any school like to be perfectly honest.
Speaker 1: That's the typical guidance counselor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But, but they wrote to me and my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] had heard of Va- and he was very impressed, was very impressed.  And so, yeah he wanted me to go.
Speaker 1: So did you go visit?
Speaker 2: After I was accepted.  So we didn't, we didn't have the kind of money where you would like go on a college visit just for no reason (laughter), but you, you know, after I was accepted I went.  They were offering a scholarship, a pretty serious scholarship, and, and it was a good school.  And I, I, I was excited because, again I'd had this experience at Hillcrest, I mean one things that bothered me and that worried me is that I knew it was really small, it was like the size of my high school, and it was a college, which is not really how I had imagined going to college.  But I, you know, I had this--I knew it would feed the kind of intellectual piece that I wanted so, the thought of that was exciting, and I just assumed, you know, it's college it's gotta be fun, you're on your own, you're outta your house, whoo, you know.  What did I know, you know?  So I was pumped to go.
Speaker 1: And so you?  So, in 1980 is when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --you go to school?
Speaker 2: And so what are you thinking that you want to be at that point and, and 'cause '80 [1980], you know, those, those are interesting times in that--
Speaker 1: Oh I'm clear from the time I'm a kid that I want to be a lawyer, yeah, from oh, from very long, yeah.  So I thought I was going to be a civ- a civil rights lawyer, but I really thought, really more international human rights--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --by the time I was in college, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, so who, who is influence and where are you seeing it--
Speaker 1: That's, that's my dad, I mean that's me watching all these documentaries and these, that's the, I wanna be in it.
Speaker 2: But who, who around you?
Speaker 1: Never met a lawyer until I went to law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], never met a lawyer, but, yeah.  I'm, well--remember this is the shift that's happening right?  The shift that's happening is the generation before if the, there was a smart little girl, you would steer her towards being what many of my older sisters became, which is a teacher or a nurse.  I have four sisters who are nurses, you, you, smart young black girl, that's what you think is the path.  By the time I, my generation is coming around right?  By, by the late 1960s, early 1970s, which is when I'm in school, there's a smart little black girl who likes to read and so forth?  Yeah, the possibility of her being a lawyer or doctor, so my sister who's a year older than me is a doctor and I'm a lawyer.
Speaker 2: And where did she go to school?
Speaker 1: She went to Hofstra College [Hofstra University, Hempstead, New York] and then to Tulane medical school [Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So, it just shows you the generational shift in the messages that are being conveyed, not be- necessarily within our family but just in our society about what smart little girls do, if, if you're really bright, what do you do?  So, so it, being a lawyer seemed quite available to me, and I can remember I was maybe nine, eight?  Something like that, were I was like yeah, that's what I'm gonna do and my dad was like yeah she's gonna be the lawyer, that was clear, no problem.  So that's what I wanted.  But I actually found my high school yearbook, and what I sa- what it says under my photograph which is actually funny, it says, first, I think it says, first black female supreme court justice, that's what it says.  Which is, not at all what I'm interested in, but that's what I said, because then I would think like what's the highest, you know?  And that's, so that's 1980.
Speaker 2: See that's the--okay, that still has to yet manifest of--okay sorry.  (Laughter) That's the--
Speaker 1: No, no, no (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, it's fine.  I just had to go there.
Speaker 1: But that's wha- that's what I want to do, I, you know, at, when I entered Vassar, I wanted to be a lawyer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what is the--
Story_ID: 523581
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is the Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] you come into?  What is it like there?
Speaker 2: First of all, it's physically beautiful.  You know, I just gave the commencement address there this spring and was struck again by how much I loved the physical beauty of the place.  I mean it, I almost can't, it really meant a great deal to me.  It had the most beautiful library I've ever, had ever been in at that point, which I loved.  It was much too small, it was very white, there weren't enough guys.  There certainly weren't enough African American guys, but I had the thing where I knew how to have a good time wherever I wound up.
Speaker 1: But it had been recently coed.
Speaker 2: Oh it was coed.  But it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was coed.
Speaker 2: --just weren't, not enough African Americans guys.
Speaker 1: So not, not, but--
Speaker 2: It was about 60/40 then.
Speaker 1: It was 60/40.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it had been girls for a while.
Speaker 2: Until '77 [1977], until '74 [1974], or something like that.
Speaker 1: So that's not, I mean it's not that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was, you know, so socially, eh, but I had a good time.  You know, I, I always--there were many certainly African American girls who, you know, really felt unhappy and, you know, didn't have sorority and didn't have all those things, you know, this is almost like, you know, this is what I did, I knew how to adjust to an environment and find fun in it.  So, you know, I had a good time.  I still had fun, I still had good friends I had the work that I loved, you know.  I was an English major which I really loved, I actually flirted for a very brief minute with being a classics major, 'cause I told you how I loved Greek tragedy and so I took a classics course at Vassar and I loved it, still love this thing, you know?  And I remember coming to my father [Lester Ifill, Sr.] and I actually think my being an English major was already a little strange for him, 'cause like what do you do with that?  For the world he came from, that didn't seem, if I'd said political science, he would say, "Okay I get it," you know?  And I came home one break and I said, you know, I'm thinking about changing my major to classics," and my father said, "You much be crazy."  And that was it, we never spoke of it again, it never (laughter) came up again, he just looked at me like, "Really?  You must be crazy."  I never raised it again, he never raised it again, I remained an English major and so, yeah, so I was able to, to enjoy that, the work that I liked and begin to read and write all the time was really, you know, it's still for me the dream, getting to read and write, you know, all the time.  And, and found good friends and enjoyed being away from home, I really did, I, I, you know, I always thought that, what a, what a terrific experiment to come up with, that kids, you know, you turn eighteen, and then you leave but you're in this kind of controlled environment and, and so it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 523582
Speaker 1: So who, who influenced you there?  You know, what--were there any professors or things that influenced you? I mean I--
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting that well, I did the commencement address and (laughter) so, you know, y- it, it was helpful for me to begin to think about, you know, what, what were the influences?  And, you know, I had really good friends but, I mean I developed a lifelong love of and interest in South Africa that really came from a course I took there with a brilliant scholar Norman Hodges.  And that led to my, you know, not--going to South Africa on a fellowship years later; it led to my running a South Africa externship program when I was a law professor. I mean I never gave up that love that really came from that experience at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York].  I remember a professor who not only exposed me to James Baldwin but made me go see James Baldwin one day.  He was--James Baldwin was gonna be at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] one afternoon and this professor was, you know, he was actually South African, Moses Nkondo, and he said, "We have to go, you know, we're, we're not far away we can drive there in my car."  And I said, "What are you talking about?  I'm not--."  He's like, "It's James Baldwin you have to--I'm--get in the car."  And he took me and another student and we went to see James Baldwin that afternoon.  And, I mean, I think about things like that, that didn't seem at the time it was like what a crazy thing, but just seeing people's passion for subjects and for work, was very powerful to me and, and, and feeling like I was in an environment where people took intellectual work seriously, you know, was always great.  I partied really hard too which was, you know, interesting to me that like how important it was for me to still do well, you know, even as I, 'cause now I was free, yay, you know.  But to be able to have a good time and to do well.  I mean there was no, there was no question about doing well because that was what I had grown up, like that wouldn't have been possible to not do well.  But to also be able to have a good time and, you know, be out and about.
Story_ID: 523583
Speaker 1: And I spent my, my semester in my junior year in Spain and, it was just, you know, I always wanted to take advantage of, you know, whatever there was available to me in that environment.
Speaker 2: Now you--the program you went on in Spain was--?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Wes- it was--?
Speaker 1: The Vassar-Wesleyan Program, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In Madrid [Spain].  I think they still run it at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York].
Speaker 2: So talk about that because you said one of your favorite, your favorite place to vacation was Spain.
Speaker 1: Well I met my husband there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: So how did it come about?  What's the story behind that?
Speaker 1: The story is that the program was in Madrid but they offered that summer a kind of introductory course in the north of Spain in a little town called Santiago de Compostela [Spain] and you could go on that, on that program.  I didn't really have the money to go and I was working and saving money and, and then I decided I wanted to go.  I hate--you know, I hated being at home, it was the summer, I was working my stepmom, the rules, the--all the stuff that happens.  And I told my dad [Lester Ifill, Sr.] I wanted to go and I saved up the--here's what I have saved up and he provided the rest of the money so that I could, he wa- he could be amazing in those moments.  I always said, if you were in trouble, really in trouble and you called him, he'd somehow figure it out, you know.  He was, he--and that was an important quality to me.  So he came up with the money and I went to this program in this very small town, and Spain was not quite, certainly this town was not quite cosmopolitan yet.  Francisco Franco had just died not very long before, a few years before, maybe five or six years before.  And so, it was a little strange, but we were in a class, students from our program and from programs all over the world people just came to take a language course in this little town.  So there were people who were not college students, they were much older or, but they were taking a course a kind of a immersion course and, and that's how it happened, he happened to be in the class that I was in.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So what attracted you to each other?  Or how did--I think because this is your junior year?  You end up getting married, that's a whole--
Speaker 1: Well I didn't get married 'til years later yeah.
Speaker 2: Later, that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --later is what I'm saying that that--
Speaker 1: Well so I don't like to give too many of details of my--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because it's very personal and I know, I really have been very happily married for twenty-nine or so years and it's one of the great gifts of my life.
Speaker 2: So, so like, he was your soul mate?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, no question.  And I will say that, you know, it's, it's one of the things I tell people, particularly people who have the experience as I did of losing my parent [Ifill's mother, Myrtle Ifill], you know.  I really believe that in the, in the midst of the universe, you know there is, there is a preparation for you to heal all of the places that are wounded or the, or the places that are empty.  And I'm, I'm always kind of overwhelmed at the thought that this person was being prepared three thousand miles away, he for me and I for him.  But, you know, we, we were an incongruous pair, but yeah, there was just something, I mean not at first, at first I had no interest in him whatsoever.  But, but over, and over the years we wrote to each other and we would see each other maybe once a year, you know some years we saw each just once a year, but we would write these long, long, long, long letters to each other, we had a very beautiful correspondence over years and there it was.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And his name?
Speaker 1: His name is Ivo Knobloch.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He's German.
Speaker 2: And did, so did he--do you speak German at all?  Or did he speak Spanish?
Speaker 1: He spoke Spanish and he spoke English, and I did not speak German at the time.
Speaker 2: So what, you know, I, I do have to ask this.  So you ha- you met him during that program--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But you came back 'cause this is a semester program, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And so you come back and you--
Speaker 1: Resume my life.
Speaker 2: --you resume--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So are you back for the spring semester?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So you're back for--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the spring semester.
Story_ID: 523584
Speaker 1: What are you thinking at that point?  You're thinking law school at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And you come back and you're, you're studying for the, the L- (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I had my spring semester, this is through my junior year--
Speaker 1: Junior year.
Speaker 2: Then I go into my senior--
Speaker 1: Your senior--
Speaker 2: --year, and then--
Speaker 1: What do you--
Speaker 2: --I'm applying.
Speaker 1: --do between your junior year and your--?
Speaker 2: Work, I always wor- I worked every summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I often--as a matter of fact I recall being in Spain and writing to get my old job back for the December break so I could make some money just in that December break.
Speaker 1: So what--where were you working this--
Speaker 2: I used to work for an organization called, well if it's still in existence, Lutheran World Service and I worked for the Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service and so, also my interest in immigration and refugee matters actually came out of that period working in that office.  First I was just a kind of office assistant and then I would, they would hire me back every summer and there were times when, you know, I worked with the young women who greeted refugees at the Kennedy Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York], and we worked on the connection of those refuges with the host families usually in the Midwest and, so that was, that was kind of my go to job for the most of college.
Speaker 1: And so when you are thinking about law school, where are you thinking you wanna go and who are you, who are you talking to--
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], exactly where I went.  I, I had a sister who went to NYU undergrad and I just thought that was the coolest thing, this is when, when my mom [Myrtle Ifill] died, my sister was going away to coll- I mean, going away to college was like a newfangled thing, you know, in those days.  And that just seemed like the coolest.  She is brilliant, so I always looked up to her, very smart and creative and, just a serious intellect and today still a serious intellect, educator.  And so I thought, yeah, and after I had been at Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], I knew I wanted to be back in a, in ne- in a city and I wanted to be in New York City [New York, New York] because I had been away in this place that was, you know, had so few people and so forth so, so that's where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: And you didn't even think of taking a year off?  You, you went straight?
Speaker 2: No, I did actually.  I, as I recall, I was just talking to my, my daughters about this the other day, I did, I interviewed for jobs and I, as a paralegal.  And I even had a job offer as I recall 'cause I did think, I thought, well maybe I should work for a while and, you know, maybe I'll do some, maybe I'll do--.  You start, you know, you start thinking and then, you know?  I got into law school and so you, you know, keep doing the dream.
Story_ID: 523585
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause I think about this.  This is like, well this is, Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is out of office by now or is he--
Speaker 2: No, he's in office.
Speaker 1: He's still in office?
Speaker 2: He's about to, he's about to be a--no, no, wait, wait, this is '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: This is '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: He's out, he's out.
Speaker 1: Is he out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He's about to be out [sic.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's about to be out.
Speaker 2: He's just like, we're in the midst of the election, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.  So are you--'cause this, this is a time where there's a lot of inflation and the country's starting to--
Speaker 2: I never worried about things like that.  The whole story of my family is so ridiculously improbable that it just never occurred to me to think about it.  I mean, you know, my [paternal] grandmother was a domestic, we, there were ten of us in that house with the terrible sneakers, what?  I mean I just--it didn't--going to Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], you know, people talk about student loans and yeah I had to take 'em like crazy, there's no other way I could have lived my dream, I've never had one moment of regret about it.  I'm doing the thing that I wanted to do when I was nine years old.  So there was never a time where I thought, you know, oh, my gosh what's gonna happen, you know, in my future, like in that way?  I didn't--I never thought I was gonna be wealthy because I never, that wasn't part of the dream, the dream was that I was gonna be doing this, you know, civil rights, human rights work.  So that wasn't part of my thing that, I understood was the (air quotes) me, you know, '80s [1980s], but I wasn't part of the me part, I was part of the part that wanted to, to be, you know, a civil rights lawyer.  And so, that wasn't my world anyway, so it just kind of didn't have anything, I mean it di- it didn't have anything to do with me in a sense of personally worrying about my own future.  Of course every young person, you know, hopes they're gonna get a job and, but it was more about, am I gonna get a job in the civil rights field, than about, am I gonna be employed?  I mean that wasn't something I remember kind of being in angst about.
Story_ID: 523586
Speaker 1: What is the NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] that you come into though?
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh, it was great; we had a great time.  You know, NYU is a very public interest oriented school, it was important to me because, you know, there are some law schools at that period in particular where, you know, everything was about getting the firm job and people wou- did public interest work because they couldn't get a firm job.  Well, NYU had a very different ethic, you know?  They created an ethic in which being a public interest lawyer was a--was the thing, you know, was the gold standard, you know, the firm was great too but, but this was, it was on equal footing and that was an important message that the school sent in a variety of ways, through the clinical offering and so forth.  So for me it was exactly the place to be, I met my two best friends, my two, you know, law school roommates who became, you know, my absolute best friends and we had, again a great time, I had a ball.  I was very active in BLSA, the Black Law Students Association [National Black Law Students Association (NBLSA)], and, you know, had these, had these great, you know, experiences in a school that understood, you know, what we wanted.  It wasn't all great, you know, it's law school but--
Speaker 1: So what courses did you, did you gravitate to, did you, did you like?
Speaker 2: Well the first year you didn't gravitate to anything, right.  You had to take, so here's the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The (unclear)--that's my course that was my course.  And the funny thing is I taught, when I did the law school convocation I talked about this, this is the absolute truth, I had no idea what they were talking about in that class for the first few weeks because there was nothing intuitive about it.  So I told you, I never met a lawyer until I went to law school so criminal law, yeah, I know something about criminal law, constitutional law, yeah I think I know something about constitutional.  Like those things--torts I'd never heard of, but once you explained that it was a civil wrong and that injury and sue for damages, I could kind of get to it.  Civil procedure I didn't have any frame of reference for it, so I didn't really understand anything that was happening.  I was a diligent student, I appeared every day, I had read the materials, I had highlighted and taken notes, but I didn't know what was happening.
Speaker 1: That's funny 'cause you taught it.
Speaker 2: I, I--
Speaker 1: You're (unclear).
Speaker 2: One day we--I can remember the con- the actual case Gray versus American Radiator [Gray v. American Radiator and Standard Sanitary Corp, 1961], personal jurisdiction and I remember us talking about that case, the professor was Samuel Estreicher and it was, like when people talk about a light bulb going off?  Zing, the light bulb went off, I had raised my hand, I answered the question correctly and from that moment it was on.  I mean, I became like the civil procedure star, it was crazy.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute so why--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --why did the light go on?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I have no--it just, you know, I mean that's why sometimes I think, like even when you don't understand something, just like keep reading, people say stay at it, and stay at.  Somehow, I don't know what, a question he asked.  I don't know what, but I got it and after that it was like, yeah, I get this.  And, and civil procedure was a tough class for many people and he was, he was a tough professor, but I knew it cold.  It was just a stra- it was just one of those strange things.  So I loved it, even though it, you know, it wasn't a (air quotes) subject matter class that was focused on civil rights or race and the things that you gravitate too, perhaps in your second or your third year when you can began selecting classes.  But hands down, it was the class, you know, I enjoyed the most because I just loved it, and I did teach it for twenty years and taught advanced civil procedure and complex litigation, love it.  So that I was going to be a litigator was probably a foregone conclusion because I really loved the rules, I loved the ga- I loved the puzzle.
Speaker 1: But it's the rules?
Speaker 2: It's, and the ga- it's the gateway, it's the, it's, it's not, it's not the rules it's the manipulation and the managing of the rules.
Speaker 1: It's the strategy.
Speaker 2: It's the strategy, it's the strategy, I loved it.  And, you know, what do people say?  Pro- procedure is the blindfold of justice, it's supposed to be the thing that puts you on the equal footing, and I like the idea of mastering the gateways in and out.  And so I really loved it and later when I was teaching, I really came to very powerful relationship between the development of civil procedure and civil rights litigation and I basically taught civil procedure from that angle.  I could teach a whole civil procedure course using only civil rights cases because so much of it is shaped by who gets to tell their story, you know, in court.  And I would, and I would tell young law students that, who wanted to be civil rights lawyers, "This is what you master.  Your job is, to get that door open so that the story can be told.  Your job is not even to tell the story because you have a client who should, theoretically if you do your job right, be in position to tell the story.  Yes, you're gonna write briefs and so forth, but your job is to, is to manage it so that you open that door and they get to tell that story as fully as they wanna tell, as long as they wanna tell it with the details that will make clear why they were injured."  So procedure's a big part of being a good civil rights lawyer.
Speaker 1: Or a good la-
Speaker 2: A good--
Speaker 1: --a good trial--
Speaker 2: --certainly a good litigator, yeah.
Speaker 1: A good litigator, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 523587
Speaker 1: So I was talking about this great high school I went to, Hillcrest [Hillcrest High School, Queens, New York] right?  But when I got to Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York], you know, I knew that there were all these students who were from these private schools, schools I'd never even heard of before, you know, even in New York [New York], Dalton [The Dalton School] and Spence [Spence School] and I'd never heard of these places before, I didn't know what a WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] was, I'd never heard that term before.  So I really was worried, I, I felt quite insecure and even though I had gotten the highest, you know, score you could get on the AP [advanced placement] test which meant I didn't have to take freshman English and I took 'cause I felt like I'd probably, you know, these people are gonna be so much better prepared than I am and I, you know, need to just really hunker down and do my best.  And, you know, it took me maybe three weeks and then I realized like, "No, you are actually prepared, you are, you are right where you need to be." and that was to me the biggest kind of testament to the education I was getting at Hillcrest was that I wasn't like some unprepared kid because I'd gone to a big rambling public school; I was actually quite well prepared.  And, and so it, it's my, my belief about what public education can be, my belief that public education can be diverse and integrated and fun and intellectually challenging and prepare young people to be their best intellectual selves, really comes out of that experience.  There was n- there were no bells and whistles to my high school, there was no special programs that I was in, there was no--there was nothing like that. I had to take the bus and then walk down Parsons Boulevard and go to the school, there was nothing, but it, but they did because they had amazing teachers, because they had amazing programs in, you know, I had to take art and gym and theater and all these other things that could round you out as a person.  And it was a big and diverse environment so I learned things that I otherwise wouldn't have learned, and that very much informs my commitment to public education and to the dream of what public education can be and what Thurgood Marshall and the team of lawyers and Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] expected, you know, when the barriers of, of segregation were to be removed, and it's a contract that America just broke with young people largely in reaction to Brown.  But for one brief period I think there was a, there were places where it happened and, and so because I know it's possible to happen it's, it's part of kind of my sense of, of why I don't give up on the fight for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that, you were saying you were the beneficiary too--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --of lot--of that?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 523588
Speaker 1: Law school, in law school you said that you took to civil procedure but you said it wasn't all good.  So what wasn't the good part?
Speaker 2: Well we all had our struggles in law school, I mean that you would, you, you know, we weren't all on the same page about everything, this was a, also interestingly and one of the reasons why I'm so understanding of some of the tensions that we're having on our nation's campuses, you know, today.  I mean this was the period when, you know, there were a series of police killings of unarmed African Americans in New York [New York], Eleanor Bumpurs a grandmother, Michael Stewart, a young man in the train station, there was the Bernhard Goetz shooting of the young man on the train, there were a lot of--and this is all, you know, in New York and I'm in New York, went downtown and NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], there were a lot of very serious and volatile issues that were happening around race at that time.  And, you know, and, and, and so we, you know, we mixed it up about those issues.  At the same time, you know, it's not as though you had, you know issues where there was race in the, in the course work and then there were classes where race wasn't present.  Many of us recognized that race was present in those places even when it seemed not to be present.  And so, you know, we were also quite challenging of our professors and very much demanding, you know, that they, that they recognize the places where, you know, race was showing itself in, in how the law was responding to, to individuals.  So, so it--but that's to me, you know, when I say it wasn't all great, that's even great because that is what is supposed to happen in an university environment in an intellectual environment there's supposed to be challenge, respectful challenge, respectful pushback if necessary, but that's the place to, to work that stuff out.  And so, it we, you know, we had all those issues very much present happening, you know, in New York all around us and we felt very, a lot of us did, you know, activist work to try to address some of those issues and so it was a, it was a tough time in New York.
Speaker 1: So what was the, the racial makeup and the, I mean at this point in time--
Speaker 2: In the law school?
Speaker 1: In the law school.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't really know.
Speaker 1: But what about women?  Women are there, the numbers are more equal--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean--
Speaker 2: I don't remember there being a real--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I mean I'm sure there were more men than women, but it wasn't, it wasn't stark and we had a fair number of African American students and Latino students at NYU at the time and we were kind of a close community as well.  So it was and we had a lot of progressive white students, I mean it was a, it was an interesting, it was an interesting group.
Speaker 1: Now were you active in BLSA [Black Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association]?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Story_ID: 523589
Speaker 1: Now what do you do after your first year of, let- so I want to know--yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first summer, my first summer I was a summer clerk for Judge A. Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: I did not know that.
Speaker 2: That was my first summer.  Yeah, so that was amazing and interestingly--
Speaker 1: So tell me what?  So how did you, how did, did, did this--?
Speaker 2: Okay, I have no memory of how this happened but it happened, I don't know how it happened, but it happened.  How did I find out?  I don't know, I don't remember.  But he would take on a set of summer clerks every year and, and so I came to live in Philadelphia and worked in his chambers with other law students from other schools.  And he of course was a giant and in many ways, like in the ways that I love, like he was a scholar, and he was an intellectual and he had this strong international sense.  I mean, I remember that, you know, he had all these connections to South Africa, once again, you know, a place that I loved and, you know, periodically people would come in from South Africa to meet with him.  And, he was a, he was a giant, physically a giant but he was a giant.  So that was the first summer, so all of these things are kind of reinforcing.  And then my second summer, I worked at the UN center for human rights in Geneva [Switzerland], I don't know how that happened either, but, well, you know, yeah I think it was I won a public interest grant, you know, and, and so I did that and worked at the set of human rights, you know, mostly writing reports and so forth.  I was pretty clear after that, means I di- probably didn't wanna work at the UN [United Nations] that wasn't the pace I wanted.  But, but it was a very rich, you know, obviously rich experience, and so that was the first and second summer.
Story_ID: 523590
Speaker 1: And then when you come back, what are you thinking?  I mean, what are you wanting to do when you graduate?  And are there interviews on campus?  How does that--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell--I, I, I'm still thinking I'm gonna do international human rights, so I'm applying for--and, and, the jobs are like, there're like three, you know.  So, I'm applying for every international human rights job I can find, no luck, can't get my foot in the door for anything, and then I heard about this fellowship at the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union].  And I thought, well it's a one year fellowship, it's the ACLU, it's great.  You know, maybe, maybe I can, maybe I'll be accepted to do this.  And I apply for the fellowship and I got the fellowship.  I had never done reproductive rights work before, but I worked with a great team and obviously the ACLU was doing amazing work, I met a woman who became one of my very, very best friends who passed away last year, Jackie Berrien [Jacqueline Berrien].  She and I started within maybe a month of each other, two African American women, I think we were the only African American women lawyers at the national office of the ACLU at the time.  And so we gravitated to one ano- to one another and became really good friends and it was actually a great time, I lived in Brooklyn [New York].  By then my, my husband [Ivo Knobloch] and I, my then fiance and I were pr- planning to get married and we got married that year of the, almost the end of that fellowship in May of 1988.
Speaker 1: Eight [1988].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So did that?  So the head of the office, was his name Norm?  Was that?  Do you know--?
Speaker 2: Norman Dorsen, you're thinking.
Speaker 1: That the, yeah.
Speaker 2: So the head of th- of, of the ACLU at the time was Ira Glasser, the litigation director was, I wan- I think it was still Steve Shapiro [Steven R. Shapiro] then too, it might have been.  Or maybe I'm not remembering that right, I think so.  And, pretty sure I'm right and, yeah.  And Norman Dorsen was always involved with the ACLU, he was actually teaching at NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] at the time.
Story_ID: 523591
Speaker 1: I do have to--before we go--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to your time at the, the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], I wanna ask you, I have to ask you about your, your marriage.  So, when you tell your fa- or your fam- your father [Lester Ifill, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: It wasn't good.
Speaker 1: --because, this is a race--
Speaker 2: It's a race man, it wasn't good.  So, I'm gonna give you the truncated version, 'cause it's, you know, it's a family story.  So first of all, I'm gonna say that, you know, I really did not want to marry my husband [Ivo Knobloch], really to be honest because, you know, I knew it was gonna be a problem.  I know it's very fashionable for people to be in interracial relationships today, but in those days it was still a pretty serious thing, and I really didn't want any trouble.  I just really just wanted to do m- live my life and, you know.  And so, I, there, I had no plans to marry him but he asked me to marry him and, and that kind of caused the question right?  So you have to answer and I really wanted to, to just to sa- say no, to be honest with you but I would only have said no because he was white, and I kind of couldn't sit with that; it felt dishonorable.  So, so I said yes, but I also knew what it would mean, I knew my father would not be happy and he was not happy and we were really estranged for a couple of years, it wasn't, it wasn't fun, it was a tough time.
Speaker 1: So you went ahead to--okay--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, no no, of course yes.  No, no, I mean--
Speaker 1: What are your siblings saying?
Speaker 2: Well I have a lot of them so, some--so some were not happy, to me the most important was my sister who I told you is my best friend, who is a year older than me and I, and she met--I, I asked her to meet him when I wasn't there and she was like, "I guess you gotta do it, he's, he's amazing, you're like--."  I mean he was, he was and is and having her support was really the one thing that was just important to me.  And so it was tough.  What's interesting is that, you know, my wedding day, to this day and I have three amazing daughters and I've had amazing experiences in my life, still remains the best day of my life.  It was that joyful, it was that amazing it--and I would say everyone who was there would say it was one of the best experiences they had too, which is, you can't even describe how amazing it was, just joy, it was absolute joy, it was beautiful it was, it was, it was fun and generous and, and just lovely and--
Speaker 1: Was he living here before that?  Or did he--
Speaker 2: Yeah he had moved here the year before.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When we re--
Speaker 1: It still--
Speaker 2: --realized we were--
Speaker 1: --begin--
Speaker 2: --gonna get married.
Speaker 1: --hard to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  No, no that was the reason, yeah.  And so one of the things it, it that's been interesting to me and it also than watching the evolution of my family, my father who came around and who really loved him and my siblings who had first been, you know, reticent, but then who were fine.  It's just time, you know, and I do think that, especially in a family, because, and I, and I shared this because I think there are families that go through this today around LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer], you know, marriage and so forth, and so, I, I resonate with how painful it can be to be, to have this tension in your own family.  And I tell people that, you know, "If there's love in your family, give it time," you know.  And really, I, I, I just think it's so important too, because it can happen, people can, people do move, and they move largely by you presenting yourself just as you are, right.  To just love who you love and to continue to live a life of honor to be the person they recognize, 'cause I think the fear, I know certainly the fear of my father was like, "Well, what does this mean?  That we--who is she?  You know, I guess sh- you know, is she the person that I--I thought we were like."  'Cause it, my father and I were like political buddies, you know, I was his, you know, the person that he talked to about, you know, all things race and so forth, you know, "Is she gonna still do what she said she was gonna do, right?"  Which is I, I'm gonna be this civil rights lawyer, yeah I was I did.  You know, there was, I, I'm still me and so I think I, I and I often do not share this story, I'm only sharing it today because I think there are people who are in pain and families who are in pain and I think, you know, some people will never come around, but I think if there's love there, and you're just who you are and you go on and you live your life, you know?  People, people will either get on the train or they won't get on the train, you know.
Speaker 1: So he probably, he might have even thought, I sent her away to--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --go--
Speaker 2: Probably, I don't know.
Speaker 1: She did--
Speaker 2: He never said that, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: It might've, you know he's like it's not all gr- you know, we the--we (unclear) these opportunities for our kids, but look what--
Speaker 2: Well then--
Speaker 1: --happened.
Speaker 2: Isn't that true though?  I mean it is true, it's true that, that the more the world gets connected with one another, the more we get exposed to new people and new ideas, there are orthodoxies that we're gonna leave behind.  That is, that is not untrue, but he never said it so.
Story_ID: 523592
Speaker 1: So you--I just had to ask that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because it's like, you know?  But, and he had to adjust to living into the states too, right?
Speaker 2: Say it again?  He had?
Speaker 1: He had to adjust to living in the states?
Speaker 2: My husband [Ivo Knobloch]?
Speaker 1: Your husband.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very much so.  Yeah, I think, I think that, you know, the, the good thing is, it was a time of kind of, we were having a good time, it was fun, and when you were young and it was, it all seemed like I think like a great big adventure, you know, to him.  You know, I had great work and we had great friends and we had a great brownstone in Brooklyn [New York], I mean, we were, you know, we were having a good time, so we were young and in love, you know.  And--but it was an adjustment, it, it really was because he entering my world, we were, I, I, was very clear about who I am, and the world that we were gonna live in and where we were gonna raise our kids and who our kids were gonna be.  And, and so it was understood that he was entering this world and that we were basically going to live as African Americans, I mean we were gonna live in an African American community, we were gonna raise our kids as African American, I was gonna be doing civil rights work, this is what, this is what it, I, you know, and I told him, "I talk about race every day, you know, so yeah, if you can't hang, I'm probably not your girl," you know.  So, so it was very much a, a willingness to enter that world and to be part of that world and to raise our children in that world and to be uncompromising about the commitment to that world.  That's not an easy thing I think for, for many couples who think that they want to do this but that was the, that was the deal for me, that was the only way I could do it.
Speaker 1: That's right, 'cause you hear, you hear in some families, like I've heard about sometimes white women of, you know, that or it could go either way, but they, they're not, they don't know what all that brings, you know, to it.  And especially, I don't know maybe because he's foreign, but, you know, they don't know what all that brings.
Speaker 2: Well no, I, I was very, it, it wasn't, it wasn't easy to be clear about what all that brings, you know, but, but I, but I think getting past what in America has been, you know, this--and, and abroad in Europe as well--this idea that colorblindness is the standard right.  You know, essentially what I, I was saying was like, no that's not the standard, that's actually an insult, and what this is, is about recognizing the fundamental way in which being a black woman is a part of me that I love and that I embrace and that it carries with it all these other cultural pieces that I want my children to have and that's what we're doing or not, but that's what I'm doing, you know?  And, and I, and I, and that's not gonna be a struggle, that has, you have to sign up for that, if you're signing up for the romance of thing, you're also signing up for the responsibility of making that choice and I think not everyone is prepared to do that.  I credit my husband for his openness, you know, and his transparency and, and it's actually never been an issue.  I mean it, once he made that commitment, there was no, there was no sense of like oh god, goodness what am I in for, it was like a full on embrace and understanding that this is, this is our lives.
Speaker 1: So has there, have you spent much time in Germany, or your kids?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we took our kids every year so I would say for, for twenty-five years, we went every year, I wanted them to--that was the other thing that was important to me was although we were very clear about our kids' identity in terms of what we were saying and obviously my, you know, their, once they're grown they can pick whatever, they can decide what, however they want to identify themselves but we were very clear that they were African American children and that's the identity that we raised them in.  But I never wanted them to deny any part of themselves because that's also a trap and so we took them every year to see their family in Germany and who, you know, who they adored and where they felt so comfortable and, and so that they would know that is also available to you.  And the fact that you are African American does not mean that you have to deny these parts of yourself, 'cause actually to be African American means usually there are lots of parts in there anyway and, and to just full on embrace, you know, all of it.
Story_ID: 523593
Speaker 1: So what do you learn out of the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] experience there?  What were, what were, what did, at what point, I mean you are, did they have a good fellowship program?
Speaker 2: Well what they had was a really powerful litigation department, you know.  They were, they were really smart and they were doing really high quality litigation which was something I hadn't really seen before, you know, in the, in the, in terms of the sausage of it being made.  So that was very challenging to kind of watch that environment and to think about what it meant to be ac- if you think you, think you want to be an excellent civil rights lawyer to watch what it looks like.  There wasn't a particular racial justice lens at that time, at the ACLU as there is now, but to see the dedication of the work that they were doing and to see the smarts they were bringing to it and the discipline they were bringing to it and the, you know, we, we'd pull all nighters to write papers in college, I didn't know you pulled all nighters to write all these briefs too, you know, but you did.  And so that was the, you know, the exposure to the kind of, the rigor of the thing, the quality of the writing, you know, those things were really important to me.  And so I would say that's that was the most important thing I got out of it was just kind of seeing that, that level of work and when I heard about the, the that there was an opening at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], you know, I thought, well, you know, no chance, not gonna happen but, you know, let's give it a try and see what happens and, and so, you know, and so I went over and I remember getting the call, I think I even went over like that day and I wasn't really dr- I had just come back from my honeymoon, so I had on this deep tan and, you know, I guess you don't call it tan but I was quite burnished and I think I had on a, some kind of casual dress and I just remembered like I can't go over there, like no, no, no, come on over.  I mean, so it was just very--and so I had one meeting first with [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was there and who else was there at the time?  [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones was there?
Speaker 2: Elaine was in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] office.
Speaker 1: She was in the--I see.
Speaker 2: And Lani, Lani was leaving which, is part of why there was little gap in the voting rights project and she was leaving to teach.  So, I interviewed with Lani and then she had me to interview with [HistoryMakers] Julius Chambers and, and I had, you know, the prototypical Julius Chambers interview which is that he'd barely looked at you, he played with rubber bands or paper clips and he just asked me like a very few questions, so you would be sure that you had bombed, I mean you just knew there was no chemistry, you just, you just knew it was terrible.  And I thought it was just me, but like when he passed away, I spoke at his funeral, I mean everyone was saying the same, you know, Lani said that was her interview with him, with Julius, you know?  That was the prototypical Julius Chambers interview.  So I left there going, wow, you know, I didn't get the job, it was terrible, but I did get the job which was, you know, he was, he was actually quite discerning in a very--he was very low key, he was the most unassuming giant I have ever met and he really was a giant.  But he was very unassuming and he, he'd never, you know, and he would, he, he kind of would mumble he didn't, you know he would just kind of talk under his breath and--but he was, he was keen, you know, in his discernment.  And LDF was and then in some ways still is, but very much was in those days a sink or swim place, you know, you got thrown in the deep end and so the trick was to spot swimmers, you know?  People who could do it and he was very good at that, so I got the job and I came on over to LDF.
Story_ID: 523594
Speaker 1: So how large was the staff at that point then?
Speaker 2: I don't really remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it was bigger than, certainly bigger than the staff now because we had the, we had a Los Angeles [California] office, but, you know, it, it was a, I mean I can remember my first week, Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] had me come up to his office and he had a whole set of files or maybe they were down in my desk and he said, you know, "Talk to these people in Houston [Texas] and it sounds like there's a voting rights problem, I need you to go on down there and investigate it."  Well I, I had n- I had not done voting rights work before, I didn't, I mean, you know, I never, I don't, I hadn't been south before, I mean I had, you know, no idea wha- but, you know, just go on down there and talk to the people.  So I had to get it together, I had to read and try to learn about the voting rights act, read the big file he had and people had been calling and they had all kinds of election results in there and, oh my god.  And so, I called up and they said, "Yes come on down."  And, you know, and so I went down and they picked me up at the airport because I did not have a driver's license, 'cause I was a New Yorker, and they brought me to the home of the, then head of the black lawyers association and it was filled with like maybe forty people who'd all come 'cause the LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] lawyer was coming.  I mean like they thought I actually, you know, knew something, and it, it was just overwhelming.  And that was actually one of the most important lessons about being an LDF lawyer because their absolute belief that I could bring something to the table made you figure out how to bring something to the table.  The relationship with the clients to me has always been the most important because they live there, you know, you don't live there and they actually believe in you that you can do something, I was about 110 pounds soaking wet, you know, I was twenty-six and--but they did believe I could do something.  And so, I had to be able to do something and I always say to this day the first eighteen months I was LDF, if I didn't get an ulcer then, I will never get one, I worked so hard and I was so anxious all the time, and I didn't get an ulcer and I haven't.  I've been in situations that have seemed more stressful but they were never more stressful because I knew those people were counting on me because I was in this organization with the smartest people I had ever met in life, you know, you talk about the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], I got to LDF and it was like whoa!  I mean, people were brilliant, their experiences were so amazing and, you know, you were part of something that was pretty, pretty challenging, you had to, you had to step your game up.  And the, you know, and the person who was kind of helping me and being my supervisor from afar was [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier, who was like a brilliant giant, you know, in the voting rights field.  So it was really, really challenging to just figure out how to be really good, and then, at some point you are really good.
Speaker 1: Now you--'cause--so how did it operate?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's what I'm wondering.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Like, you know, you said you can--you just said here you've gotta take--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --these files and you're, you know, you're going south, but--and where did you go south, which, which case was this?
Speaker 2: This first case was the, was the judges case in Harris County in Houston.
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: The big, big case end up in three years going to [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 1: That is your first case?
Speaker 2: My first case.  And that's that, that's the, you know, one of the great, the great things about doing this work is that, you know, you get very rich experiences very quickly.  It's, I mean you will, you can get an ulcer because it's so stressful, but you, you know, you're really in the thick of some serious litigation.  And I had, so I had Lani helping me, I had access to Pamela Karlan [Pamela S. Karlan], who is another giant who had left to teach at, left LDF to teach at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and you had to figure it out.  And I would periodically, you know, go up to Julius' office and, you never wanted to complain, but I would say, "You know, Julius I really think I need, you know, some more supervision," and he would invariably tell you some story about some case that he had to try in 1971, and the guy was on death row.  You know, it would be something that would just make you embarrassed that you had ever even, you know--
Speaker 1: Asked the question.
Speaker 2: And, and, but the message was loud and clear like, suck it up, figure it out, get the help you need.  I mean the great thing about LDF also was that there was this wide network of LDF lawyers around the country so you could call, you know, somebody and say, "This is what I'm working on," and you always worked with a cooperating attorney, an attorney who was in the South who would litigate with you.  And my cooperating attorney had just left the federal bench, Gabrielle McDonald [HistoryMaker Gabrielle Kirk McDonald], she had been an LDF lawyer.
Speaker 1: Gabrielle McDonald?
Speaker 2: She had been an LDF lawyer for some time in, doing mostly employment cases, then she was appointed to the federal bench in, in Texas, in Houston and she had left the bench, decided to go back into practice and she was at a law firm and she became my cooperating attorney.  So, had, you had these resources around you, you know what I mean?  To help you kind of walk through and--but a lot of it, you know, you were the, you were the lead and you were expected to know what you were talking about and to figure it out.  And so, the learning curve was incredibly steep and you had to just like power it up.
Story_ID: 523595
Speaker 1: Well I'm just saying, because you're just out of law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] essentially, you know, and you're--
Speaker 2: Well, you gotta be smart and figure it out.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that case, what the facts were, I mean, on that case.
Speaker 2: Well it was a challenge, brought under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], African American voters constituted 20 percent of the electorate in, in Harris County, Texas, which is the Houston area, Latino voters counted, counted for about 22 percent of the population, so about 42 percent was African American and Latino.  But they could not elect any candidates to serve as judges on the district court bench which was the state trial court bench.  When African Americans ran, even when they ran as Republicans, they couldn't get elected.  They would get appointed like a, a judge would retire and then the they governor would appoint an African American to fulfill an unexpired term, then the African American would have to run for that same seat.  So they're running, essentially as an incumbent and they still couldn't get elected the, the white electorate would cancel out the votes of the, of the black and brown electorate because they would not support an African American candidate.  And so, we contended that continuing to elect judges at large in the entire county was essentially allowe- submerging the votes of African Americans within a larger hostile white electorate and that switching to a district method of elect- of electing judges would allow African Americans and Latinos to elect some candidates of choice.  We represented black voters in Harris County.  There were nine other counties that were part of the case also, that other local attorneys were a part of.  And the question really which had not been answered yet was whether or not judicial elections are covered under the Voting Rights Act, particularly under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.  People knew that legislative elections were and school board elections and county commission elections and so forth.  But are judicial elections so different that somehow they're not covered under the Voting Rights Act?  And that's the issue that went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  So, that case ended up on the fast track on that question, now I didn't get to argue it in the Supreme Court, Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] argued it, but I did get to sit at counsel table which is important to me because Thurgood Marshall was on the bench at that time and that mattered a great deal.  And I was, I was only three and a half years out of law school.  I think I, I think I couldn't have argued it 'cause I think in those days you had to be five years out to be admitted to the Supreme Court in any case.  But, but I argued in the court of appeals several times, and we, and we won on that issue in the Supreme Court.  And, and then we had to kind of come back and grapple with, okay so how would we do this?  And that we didn't win.  We got really stymied by the federal appellate court on that question.  So that was the case that we won, but didn't win and, and what the federal appellate court said was, you can't win because there is no remedy that will be constitutional because to elect judges by district, is to appeal to them racially.  And since judges are required to be impartial, unlike legislators, you can't elect judges by district.
Speaker 1: So what was the story?  Is this the one that you were saying, is this the case that you were saying, that really what people wanted or what?  What was the narrative--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --if you had been able to bring the case the way you wanted?
Speaker 2: Well so, the question is then, what's the whole point of, of diversity on the bench?  Why was it important to even elect black judges?  Some people would say, well it's because, you know, you wanna have role models and so forth.  I really believed that that, what my clients believed was that, having an integrated bench was essential to having a better form of justice.  And I wanted to write about that, I wanted to say this isn't something nice that you do just for black people, that actually diversity produces real benefits in how people think, and how they make judgments and how they interpret the law and that the idea that cr- electing judges by district would mean that black judges would feel beholden to the black community, but that electing judges countywide who were all white somehow didn't mean that white judges felt beholden to the white community who elected them was the kind of, you know, manipulation of a kind of a white privileging that really needed to be explored.  We expected these white judges to be impartial even though they were only elected by the white electorate, but we, we had suspicions about black judges and whether they could be impartial.  So, I wanted to write about that, what, what's the, what's the point of it?  What, what is it that black judges bring to the table or women judges or Latino judges or judges who come from different professional backgrounds who have, who are civil rights lawyers or as opposed to prosecutors or defense counsel as opposed to law firm partners.  What, what's the, what's the alchemy of things that helps us become better legal decision makers that transform?  Why do we want diversity on a jury?  And I wanted to, to write about that because that's what my clients were concerned.  They were worried about the kind of justice that gets meted out when the bench is all white, they weren't just thinking about the mechanics or just counting, you know, this many black and this many white.  They saw something profoundly wrong with the kinds of decisions that were coming out of those courts.  And they believed that diversity would improve that decision making by informing it with other perspectives and viewpoints and values that were absent from the deliberations.
Story_ID: 523596
Speaker 1: Was there any intersections between those, you know, 'cause this is a, this is an exciting time and--
Speaker 2: It's in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there's a lot of activity here in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in some ways not, one of the things I loved about doing, being exposed to voting rights work was that it immersed me in the South and it immersed me in the importance of local power because I was from New York and so I, I was thinking about, you know, "Run Jesse run."  I was thinking about and the registration and all that stuff.  When I started doing voting rights cases in Texas, was the first time I started thinking about the power of the county commission, the power of the local judge, the power of the elected DA [district attorney], the power of the water commission, the power of the justice of the peace, the power of the constable, the power of the sheriff.  These are all elected positions and in fact, they have more control over the lives of African Americans living in those communities in many ways than even the president.  It's not something I thought about, because I was from New York, you cared about your mayor, you cared about your governor and then you cared about the president, maybe a senator, you know.  But what I learned from doing these cases was the way in which power was maintained locally and the importance of ensuring that African Americans could participate in the political process, not only meaning that they were registered, not only meaning that they could cast their ballot, but then that they could elect candidates of their choice to those offices where that very intense local power was being exercised.  It was the district judge that had control over your child when they got, you know pulled into all this stuff we're seeing about Ferguson [Missouri] now, we understand that the district judge, all this stuff we're seeing in these policing cases, it's the DA, it's--.  So, that's where I got exposed to that, and that was a revelation to me that has shaped the way I think about the exercise of political power and the way I think about voting rights in particular, even today as I lead LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] a lot of our focus remains in states that, you know, people don't think about 'cause they're not swing states.  We're challenging Alabama's voter ID law for example, right?  I think many people, you know, are, don't think about Alabama, 'cause they think of it as in the presidential election terms as a red state.  Well I'm thinking about the town council and the county commission and the, and the school board and the judge, and the DA, and whether the state is red or blue or purple, those are the offices that are going to exercise disproportionate control over the lives of the people certainly that I represent.  And so, my focus actually at that period actually was really transformed.  I mean I can remember the, the, the, you know, the, the excitement of that campaign and I had close friends who were actually working on the campaign, but I was in these little towns, you know, working on these other offices and it was a revelation to me that there could be this level of voter suppression and of disenfranchisement that almost kind of flew under the radar while this other national conversation was happening.
Story_ID: 523597
Speaker 1: And what are you learning?  I mean, at that point was there--'cause you said, each director general has the way of running, so what was his [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers], what was his way of running?  And then, the office and then what assignments and what--are you learning anything about the internal challenges that, you know, 'cause, you know, you wanna save the world, you can't save it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: People have their pet projects.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I even thought I'd interviewed someone who was, it just, they, I think that they, you know, maybe there wasn't enough allocation of resources for what they were working on, you know on their projects.  So, what are--?  Is, is voting rights the thing?  Is that, is that being allocated enough resources--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I never felt, I never--I mean, I think that's probably still true, I think voting rights has always been a big deal for us, you know, it sometime after he stepped down from the, from the [U.S.] Supreme Court, you know, somebody asked Thurgood Marshall, what was his most important case?  And so, I think everyone would assume he would say Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], but he didn't, he said Smith versus Allwright, which was the 1944 case [Smith v. Allwright, 1944] in which he successfully challenged the all-white Democratic primary in Texas because he really believed that having that political access was so important.  So, voting rights has always had a kind of very important place in LDF's [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] dockets, so I never felt like we weren't being sufficiently supported.  What was interesting is what was happening at the time this is, this is during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] presidency--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and I would say this is a really critical moment of disconnect in the civil rights community not, just the LDF, but the civil rights community at large, which is that the right was developing a narrative about race that we didn't feel like we needed to bother challenging, because we had the narrative.  I mean we had won the narrative of race as a result of the Civil Rights Movement and, you know, and Brown and, and even the early '70s [1970s], and so forth.  And so, we were operating in that narrative, we had a vote, we had tools.  We had a Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], we had Title VII, you know, of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, to challenge employment discrimination, you know, we had the Fair Housing Act [Fair Housing Act of 1968], we had, we had our tools and we knew how to do what we did and the right was losing the narrative, and they knew it.  So, they set about reimagining the narrative, and they were creating things like the Heritage Foundation, they were creating think tanks that could develop their own research.  They were developing legal organizations, modeled after LDF, which sometimes they called some kind of legal defense fund.  They were describing what they were doing as civil rights, they created the idea of reverse discrimination.  So, you know, at the beginning of it was Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978], right?  But, this was a period in which the right was developing the platform that later kind of became very powerful in the courts.  And we were doing a lot of litigation and good litigation, but we weren't at all being attentive to the narrative and to the need to continue to shape or even to develop a new story about race and civil rights.
Story_ID: 523598
Speaker 1: And that is something that stayed with me in my return to LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] because I was very clear that you must attend to the narrative, the narrative is cre- is the story that is existing out there, it's the zeitgeist, it's the context in which the court then comes to view your case, in which the court has before it, the facts of a particular dispute, but they have it in a context, and, and you have to be attentive to that context.  You have to be ex- race is so uncomfortable for most people that you almost have to keep explaining it, you have to keep saying, let me explain to you how it works in this context, let me tell you why.  Because people just fall into a laziness and they are available to any distortion or story because it's just so hard for so many people to confront the reality of race, the intransigence of racism, the historical integration of it into every institution in our country.  So they need a guide and you--they need a trusted guide and that work has to happen along with the work of litigation and of policy because you have to keep explaining the need.  You have to keep explaining the nature of the problem.  I remember, actually I was at LDF at the time, I went to a civil rights conference and a, an older civil rights activist said, "Racism is a shape shifter, it keeps, it keeps changing itself and you have to keep seeing it in its new form."  It stayed with me, this is maybe thirty years ago, it's a shape shifter, and the nimbleness of being able to see it?  First of all, you have to be discerning enough to see it in all its forms, and I think civil rights lawyers, particularly at institutions like LDF, that have such a deep history and have been around such a long time and so we have available to us all the different things that we've done in the past, we actually see it.  But then you have to figure out, how do I respond to it in its current form?  Which is not always the, the, the way you responded to it before.  And so, that's the, that's the challenge of the shift.
Speaker 2: Can I ask you this question, on hindsight, do you think that it took some time for the civil rights community to understand how to respond?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: You know, that they weren't really knowing.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: And then I--
Speaker 1: Remember all the things you have to put into the, into the, into the crock pot to figure this thing out?  You know, it's changing demographics, it's changing economics, it's, it--you know, there are a lot of things to understand, that's why doing civil rights work, you know, it's a really, it's really interdisciplinary and it's really challenging.  And one of the things I would get so impatient with, with some of our [U.S.] Supreme Court justices who talk about race and racism as though it's kind of a simple equation and, and everybody understands it is that, you know, I've been doing this for many decades and as a litigator, as a scholar, it is challenging, it requires that you know something about economics, and sociology and demographics and political science and education equity and funding and--. I mean it's, it's, it's, it's really challenging.
Story_ID: 523599
Speaker 1: So there're these changes happening in America all the time and that's part of why we created the Thurgood Marshall Institute.
Speaker 2: I know I saw--
Speaker 1: We have to be learning all the time too.  We, we have to, we, there's a, there's a new economy, how do we deal with that?  I mean you could keep bringing the same case, employment cases you brought before, but do you know whether that industry will even exist in five years, right?  So, so there's a way in which we have to have internally within LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] the ability to learn about those, about those pieces and those--
Speaker 2: Well, I actually thought that that was a brilliant idea, and it's, you're, one of your, Richard--?  Is this of the--?
Speaker 1: Rothstein [Richard Rothstein]?
Speaker 2: Right, because when he, I saw the panel you were at--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and I was like, whoa.  You know, the in- the information was very--I mean it was like wow.  And so, con- contextual information--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --helping inform--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --things.  So, I thought it was, I think it's really great what you're, you've embarked upon--
Speaker 1: It's so, its so im--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) fund--
Speaker 1: It's so important and, and it's, it's actually useful for us as lawyers too because, look people don't, people who go into, be--become lawyers and certainly these kinds of lawyers and people who are profoundly intellectual and curious, you know.  And, and we need to find ways to, to, to satisfy that, to integrate that into our work, we want to be learning, we wanna be strategic, we wanna be imaginative, in our litigation, not just be handed a template and work out, off of that template.  So it's, it's quite rich and we've already started, you know, some of this work, some of the work we're doing around policing reform is really incredibly well supported by having the resources of the institute 'cause we can, we, and we have, we bring police officers in for a day to talk to, "What are you thinking?"  You know, and we can walk through with them different scenarios and we can bring litigators in and we can talk about, you know, standards set by the [U.S.] Supreme Court and what some of the challenges and barriers are.  So, the institute really allows us to do internally in some ways what Thurgood Marshall would do when he'd invite people in from all over to sit around the table and so forth.  We need to have an ongoing mechanism internally so that we can respond to this shape shifting and, and more importantly than responding so we can be proactive.  The idea is really for us to be able to get out ahead of change and to understand what's coming so that we can adjust our work to those changes on behalf of the clients that we represent and so that we're not just responsive, that's the theory of, of the inte- institute itself.
Speaker 2: You know I thought, I thought it, I really applaud you on that.
Story_ID: 523600
Speaker 1: So, you're saying after three and a half, you worked there three, three--?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Five years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five years, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That you were, you were a lit- well you had a--you had a daughter?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You first daughter?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and though the hours are long, right?  And they're also, at this point, there is--the funding is probably, are funding for LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], is it more challenging?
Speaker 2: I never thought about it.
Speaker 1: I'm telling what about it, the--
Speaker 2: I'm sure.  But, but as a, I mean it's oh--it's, it's helpful to me--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --because, because now I have young lawyers at LDF and I'm saying, listen I've gotta raise this money right?  I, it never occurred to--that was not--I mean, and, and I--in retrospect, it should have been shared, do you know what I mean?  But it wasn't.  I didn't think about, you know, how we got the money that we got to do what we did, I just knew that we needed to do what we did and we knew we were not a wealthy organization by any stretch of the imagination, I stayed at airport inns, I knew that we flew economy, I knew, you know, I knew all of that but there wasn't a, a sense within at least among the lawyers I knew that we were somehow involved in the idea of fundraising, it was something that kind of happened out there.  But, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause we have B- that 'cause Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] has started, I mean I think right, it's from, yeah Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and Bush (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it would've, it would've been tough, I can, I imagine it would've been tough.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And, and people, and then I think the civil rights, they felt like a little under well not a--you know, under assault. But there--and everything is changing; it was changing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I think so. I think so.
Speaker 1: So let me, so how do you happen to get the position at the University of Maryland [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland]?  I mean and how does that come even about?
Speaker 2: So, you know, I, I had, you know, obviously Lani [HistoryMaker Lani Guinier] was teaching and Pam Karlan [Pamlela S. Karlan] was teaching and there was a tradition of academics going, of, of, of people leaving LDF to go into academia, and, and I thought well let me just throw my hat in the ring and I, you know, and I told Julius [HistoryMaker Julius Chambers] and I filled out the application and so forth.  And, and then you had to do come in and do a job talk and I, and I had a job talk 'cause I knew what I wanted to write about, you know.  I had a, I had a scholarly agenda and so forth and I did it.  And I had an offer to teach in the NYU clinic [Jacob D. Fuchsberg Clinical Law Center, New York, New York] and I had an offer which you'd think would be the dream and I had an offer at Maryland to teach in this legal theory and practice program which would allow me to teach, you know, civil procedure in the classroom, but would also allow me to create these clinical offerings and begin clinical offerings with students in their first year.
Speaker 1: Which is sort of groundbreaking.
Speaker 2: It was groundbreaking.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it was groundbreaking, I wanted to teach in the classroom, you know, big classes, and I wanted to write.  So I remember visiting, I mean obviously I did the job talk at NYU, I knew NYU really well, I visited and did my job talk at Maryland and it's one of the fir- few times this happened in my life.  I pulled up the, you know, I walked up to the law school, they had been staying at a hotel and then that morning I walked up to the law school and, to do my job talk, and I knew that that was the place I was supposed to be.  Now it was a completely unattractive and unassume- it was nothing about it that was attractive but it was familiar and in the weirdest way.  I mean I had no doubt.  But I still went through the whole thing and, you know, I, and so, did the job talk, I didn't, I actually wasn't even particularly good at Maryland, I was really good at NYU, so I understood that offer.  But I knew--I knew, and so I decided to do it.
Speaker 1: So who did you consult with?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, everyone, you know, my family, and, Lani and all, you know, all the people that I knew and it was really about, what do you wanna do?  One of the things I didn't want to do was just teach clinical law, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At, at that point in time was--Lani was at--
Speaker 2: She was at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: She was at Penn?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: She hadn't gone to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: So I, so I, so that was part of the, that was part of the deal was that I didn't, and I think I even had an offer from New York law school that I've only been in the classroom, right?  So wha- I mean I had one offer that gave me kind of all the pieces that I wanted and, and my sister lived in Maryland or Virginia, some, so, so I knew that at least I had family down here and, down there and yeah, so I wanted to try it, I didn't know anything about Baltimore [Maryland], but we did it.
Story_ID: 523601
Speaker 1: And what did you fi- 'cause you, you had a very sig- you're about to enter another significant career--
Speaker 2: Whew.
Speaker 1: --but you had a very significant career there [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: And one that you could have, you could have retired from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was no question, I mean I was there twenty years, and I taught civil procedure every semester that I was there.
Speaker 1: So when did you start teaching civil?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety--fall of 1993.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because that's the first year, that's a required course.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and they you allowed (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: See--
Speaker 2: I co-taught my fir- my, they, they would, they had a way to do a soft landing, so I co-taught my first year--
Speaker 1: But even that transition teaching, it's so--people talk about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's hard, you know?
Speaker 2: It is hard.
Speaker 1: Because you have to get the curriculum, you have to--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --have the--
Speaker 2: It was hard, it was, it was hard in the beginning.  It was, again I mean it was, it's almost like beginning at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] where you're like, you don't know what you're doing, but you have lots of men- you have lots of people around helping you and that helps.
Speaker 1: But you don't know how you resonate with students and I'm telling you, in your presentations, because the--you're really very, very strong.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Really, you're--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Really--
Speaker 2: And some people have a problem with it, but--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --but it didn't, it always worked out.
Speaker 1: Okay but, but how did you, how?  I mean, first of all to teach and to see what resonates with the students in a way--
Speaker 2: It was trial and error, you know, in the beginning, I mean I looking back now, I cringe I think my first, you know, year is what?  Was probably really awful, but there was, I mean I have to say there was something engaging abo- I knew that there was something engaging about me as a professor, because I have a passion for the, for whatever was the subject but I was actually for quite transparent about, you know, grappling with difficult issues and people felt my passion, you know, for the, for the issues that we were dealing with and people liked that.  And I learned over time.  I found it very stressful to this day, I would say, you know, especially when I would taught big classes and I did all the time, you know, you walk out in front of eighty people three times a week, you know, it, you know, it's very stressful.  And I learned--and I was very young, so people really did wanna challenge you, you know?  So, you're African American, you're a woman and I probably looked, you know, twenty-three, I was thirty, so it was, so, you know, and so I had a thing where I, I was actually not a very nice person.  You know, I wasn't like, warm and friendly in the beginning because, and when I say in the beginning, I mean like in the first half of the semester, I would have to kind of establish that I was serious about I was--what about what I was doing.  And then I would warm up, and by the end of the semester we were great.  But I always in that first half, because I wanted them to understand seriously and I did, how very seriously I took the work and their learning and that, you know, this was no joke.  And, and people understood I wasn't going through the motions.  As a matter of fact, I would say, you know, for most often I didn't even have notes after the first five years, five or six years.  That's how fresh it, I mean it, how, I mean I would prepare, but it was so fresh whatever was happening was so organic for me, I knew what I needed to hit, you know, in the case, but I would find things just from things students said that would be like, I hadn't even thoug- you know what?  There was a, there was a, there was something to it, there was something, I always tried to keep it very exciting and immediate and dynamic, I knew what they needed to get and that had to happen, and those were the, you know, the markers that I had, you know, in my book.  But I also believed that they were gonna bring something to the table that I hadn't thought of or that I wouldn't have focused on and that's a difficult thing, 'cause, you know, you can go off on tangents, but sometimes there were, there were nuggets in those tangents.  So as I got more confident as a teacher, I only got better at that, I only got better at figuring out when to just say, let's let this play out for a little bit and see where--
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: --it goes.
Speaker 1: --so how, how wa- well how long did that take?
Speaker 2: I think it took a while, I would say the first fo- of so, 1993--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I'm thinking about by '98 [1998], am I good?  Am I good at '98 [1998]?  I'm good but I'm not great.  By 2000, 2001, I'm, I'm singing.  But I'm never, I'm, it's so interesting to me that people talk about like, you know, people take out the yellow notes and they go through the motion, I never felt that way, I felt like right now, if I walked in to teach a civil procedure class, I would have butterflies.  And actually I remember someone asked me about that, you know, "Do you feel--?"  I said, "Always just a little bit, that's your, that's your humility." I never wanna be so arrogant that I don't feel a little something, you know?
Story_ID: 523602
Speaker 1: You're teaching but you also have the clinical program--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you're starting the same time.  And then--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: So every, every--I mean--
Speaker 1: But the first--so you're not doing scholarship the first few years?
Speaker 2: Well, you're expected to write, so I'm, so one of the things that Maryland [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] had is that you're gonna get two writing semesters, so you know that before tenure, you're gonna have two semesters off, just for writing, so that was always helpful, and you had your summers.  And that was when I was really doing my research and, and, you know, I'm beginning to write, but I, I felt think I had big chunks of time, to be able to do it.  So that's what's interesting about it when people talk about like, you know, leaving LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and you were, I mean I probably worked as many hours if not more when I started teaching.  It's just that I was home, you know, I was around, I wasn't, I wasn't in another state, the cases, I started in, doing environmental justice work, and the cases that we were doing were not in Baltimore City [Maryland], one of them was on the Eastern Shore of Maryland.  So, we would go with my students on the weekend.  So even, you know, I would, Saturday morning I would get up really early and my students and I would drive out to the Eastern Shore to meet with clients.  So it was, it was incredibly, now that I look back on it, overwhelming, I just was young and had an incredible amount of energy and, and this was, this was the job.  But I was home every night, which was a big contrast to what I had lived, you know, the way I had lived before.  I was home every night, I had dinner with family.  Yeah, sometimes I worked late, but mostly, you know, I could be there and that felt very luxurious actually to be honest, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what are some of the cases then you take on the clinic?  And who, what other programs are you looking at around the country?  You know, to model the program after?
Speaker 2: Well it's mostly modeling from my colleagues at Maryland, you know, 'cause it was such a unique program to do this thing with first year students, nobody else was doing it, so it was, I was really learning from my colleagues and I had some terrific colleagues who were incredibly thoughtful about this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were they?
Speaker 2: --teaching model, Richard Boldt was one, he still teaches at Maryland, Barbara Bezdek, there were just a number of professors, Karen Czapanskiy, they were incredibly re- really thoughtful about like how to teach this.  So I was mostly look--'cause I felt like I had, could get the subject matter, I need to figure out how to teach.  I knew how to deal with clients, I knew how to work in communities, I, I did not know how to teach and how to really transmit this to students to, without being entirely directional, I mean there was a lot to learn.  So I was mostly learning from my colleagues and, and then trying to figure out how to have my students do really consequential cases when they would only be working on them for a semester.  So what I worked out was that I would teach civil procedure in the fall to first year students and then in the spring, I would teach complex litigation to second or third year students who could then take the same case, but now this--.  Complex litigation I was teaching basically as an advance civil procedure course.  So it allowed me to continue cases over the course of years, which was the only way I could do, you could do kind of high end impact, you know, litigation of a civil rights nature 'cause it doesn't, it doesn't end after, you know, sixteen weeks, you, you, you know, it's gonna require you sticking at it for a while.  So that was the model that allowed me to be able to do some of the environmental justice work that we did.  We represented one community in Harford County, Maryland, a very small African American community trying to keep a developer from building a landfill, you know, next to their, next to their church and we repres- I represented them for fifteen, sixteen years, you know, using this model.
Story_ID: 523603
Speaker 1: We represented an extraordinary community out on the Eastern Shore of Maryland in a case that really became actually quite innovative.  It was, it was a challenge to this, the siting of a highway of a state highway directly adjacent to the African American community and really allowed us to do some, something that actually was quite extraordinary and led to the book ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill] that I wrote.  We, we, the case was a case challenging the siting of the Route 50 bypass [U.S. Route 50], which is a highway out to Ocean City, Maryland, the case was originally handled by the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] and a law firm, Hogan and Hartson [Hogan Lovells] at the time, we wanted to do something in the case, I knew we couldn't take on a major class action piece of litigation with my students, but we wanted to be a part of it, and so we kind of contracted with the ACLU to take a part of the case.  And the part of the case that we took responsibility for was the history of discriminatory sighting decisions in that community, in that area by the state, so we had to develop that history, research it and develop it.  And the first time we went out to meet with the clients on a Saturday we--they had a map up of the community and they showed this proposed highway that was gonna be built directly adjacent to many of their homes.  But what, what already existed, we noticed on the map was a whole 'nother highway that had been built in the 1940s that seemed to run right through the community.  And I remember looking at the map and saying, "Okay but what's that highway?"  And said, "Well that's Route 13 [U.S. Route 13]." I said, "When was that built?"  And so we started talking about this highway and we started researching this highway and when it was built in the early 1940s.  So, we wanted to know, well what was, what if, what was the community like before, they?  Why did they run it?  I mean and so we drove up on it and it's like it's, it is running right through there, we said, well how did this happen?  How is it running right through the com--what was the community like before?  So we started doing research, the only research that we could find from county records and from state records was that, you know, this was a slum, so we started talking with people in the community, elderly people to say, "What was the community like in the late 1930s before this highway went through?"  And they would say things like, "Oh well there was Mr. Jones Tea Shop, and there was the bicycle repair shop," and there was something, it didn't sound like a slum.  So the project that we took on was to interview everyone that we could find, African American who was eighty-eight years old, or older.  And from their memories, we would take their affidavits, reconstruct what that community looked like before Route 13.  So now, now we weren't just talking about Route 50, which it had originally been built and run through the community in the 1960s and now they were building a bypass, that was gonna run next to the community, we're now potentially talking about the third time the state had done this to the African American community.  And it was in the interviewing of those very elderly people that I began to learn about these lynchings that happened in 1931, and 1933, in that community and that led to my writing that book years later that was published in 2007.
Story_ID: 523604
Speaker 1: What were you finding that led to a book on lynching ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill]?  That's what I--so can you talk about that, 'cause that's, that's different--with highways coming through but what were you finding?  And what were they called?
Speaker 2: It was, it was--what struck me about the lynching was, well a couple things.  So this is, it must have been 1998, because I had come back from South Africa.  South Africa had, was involved in its Truth and Reconciliation Commission process, and I was struck by the fact that when I was there it was so hard to find anyone who had actually supported apartheid.  Everyone seemed in their hearts at least, to have been against it and there were whites who were shocked that these, this kind of brutality was happening in their country, you know.  You know, African Americans would be arrested and questioned by the police and well, you, you know, would jump out of the window in John Vorster Square [Johannesburg Central Police Station, Johannesburg, South Africa] but somehow, you know, whites never, never thought it was odd that, that, that in the newspaper there would be this--why were people jumping out of the windows?  And what, what was that about?  So there was this kind of way in which the African American community was saying that this, this all was happening in plain view and white people were saying, "Who?  We didn't know."  So I'd come to this community and I'm working on this case and I'm hearing about these lynchings and so I, I would encounter white people in the community who were elderly too, and I'd say, you know, "I heard about some lynchings that happened in this community, can you tell me anything about--?"  And they'd say, "No, no, no, I don't think I was, oh no, that was, I don't think I was even alive then."  And I said, "No, no, no, you were, it was in 1933, and so you were probably in high school.  Did you, did you hear about it?"  "I think so."  I mean there was a kind of a, almost the same thing.  The last case I did before I left LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] was a case challenging, or maybe it was the penultimate case, was a case challenging judicial elections in Oklahoma, in Tulsa County and Oklahoma County.  And when we were researching the history of discrimination in that community which is a part of any voting rights case, that was the first time I'd heard about the Tulsa race riots and it was the same phenomenon.  White people were saying, "What?  I don't know what you're talking about."  We couldn't find anything in the local newspaper from that period and yet black people had this account which we included in our complaint, on the basis of what our clients told us, even though we couldn't find anything to corroborate it.  We, on information and belief, we put in allegations about the Tulsa race riots and the history of discrimination.  So here I am now, years later up in Maryland, and I'm hearing again about some, some active racial terrorism that white people claim to know nothing about, that black people are describing in tremendous detail, and that so clearly has had a powerful effect on how these communities interact or in this case, do not interact with each other.  And having just come from South Africa, it got me thinking, "Well, we need a truth and reconciliation process."  That's what, that was the original thought about it.  And so I thought I was gonna write about lynchings all over the country, but the more I did the research, I just ended up really focusing on what I regard as the traumatizing effect of these kind of mass forms of terror on local communities and most of all the, the silence that falls for decades, maintained for decades after these events happened, and that was the basis of the book.  But it all came out of the conversations I started to have working on the transportation case with, you know, elderly black people in that community who, who would describe, you know, this lynching.  One man, one man, he wasn't even particularly elderly, he was older but he wasn't, he wasn't as old as some of the people we interviewed, he told me the lynching had been described to him in such detail that he thought he had seen it, you know.  It wasn't until he was grown and, and realized the actual year that he realized that it was impossible for him because he was a little baby.  And in fact, most black people did not see the lynching, right.  Because black people, when the lynching started to happen, they were trying to get outta there, right, for obvious reasons.  The people who really had the memories where white people and they weren't talking, we found some black people who actually did witness part of at least one of the lynchings, but, this idea of the silence, the decades long silence and the separation between the communities and the, the gaslighting of black people, it didn't happen, it and with that, you know, for years with the Tulsa race riot was supposed to be figment of black people's imagination, and this was just fascinating to me and, and, and even though my, my principal scholarship was still about diversity and judging and so forth, I ended up getting involved and, and writing this book.
Story_ID: 523605
Speaker 1: --University of Maryland [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland], one is with your--who else was influential there? I had heard Taunya Lovell Banks, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was really my, my mentor and a brilliant scholar she'd been a civil rights lawyer when she was young in Mississippi, she wasn't from Mississippi she was from Washington, D.C., she's from Washington D. C. and, had also came from an academic family.  So her dad, you know, was a, was a professor and she, she'd been teaching a very long time, she'd taught in a number of institutions, she taught at Texas Southern law school [Thurgood Marshall School of Law, Houston, Texas] and she taught in Oklahoma and so she was an experienced academic, you know, she understood how the academic world worked and she really shared that information with me.  She really was a mentor in, in navigating the process, you know, of becoming an academic and really was my guide.  And then she also just was really good friend.  We had, you know, really good times together and, you know, it was, it was really lovely to have a friend on the faculty, I have to say, who you could commiserate with, and, you know, have dinner with and so forth and she just played an important role.  People like her, not just to me, scholars, young African American scholars all over the country, you know, she, she really served as a sounding board and a--you know, she read people's work and, and, you know, gave them suggestions about how to improve their, their scholarship and so forth, she was a real, a real, is a real unsung heroine in, in legal academia for, for young African American scholars.
Story_ID: 523606
Speaker 1: When did you meet Derrick Bell [HistoryMaker Derrick A. Bell, Jr.]? I mean dur- in, in this process, because he, you, I heard that he had recommended a writer's conference--
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: --for you to--
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: --to, you know, to help finish your book ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a good question, I actually don't remember when I met him.  I'm gonna think, I'm gonna say--I really don't remember so I wanna say in terms of just my, I mean I knew of him of course and had seen him and so forth.  But, you know, meeting him would have been sometime in the, in the very early aughts [2000s] maybe.  Maybe 2000, something like that? Hard to remember.
Speaker 1: But he had come to NYU [New York University School of Law, New York, New York] by that point.
Speaker 2: By then--but he was at NYU by the time I really got to know him.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And yeah, I was writing, I was writing this, trying to write this book, the, the book on lynching and--
Speaker 1: How long did it take you?
Speaker 2: It was about five years.  I mean, again I was doing it in the middle of, you know, raising kids and teaching full time [at the University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] and writing other things and doing this clinical work and so forth.  It's actually a wonder to me that it got done.  But, and, and I was trying to finish it and I, and I, really you know, and, and Derrick said, "You should go to a writing colony."  I said, "Well that's for like real writers, you know, not--."  And then he said, I, you should, you know, and this, and try this wa- first of all, to do it and try this one.  And I did, I applied to Yaddo [Saratoga Springs, New York] and I was, I think I was waitlisted at Yaddo.  I started to feel really great, you know?  But MacDowell [MacDowell Colony, Peterborough, New Hampshire] accepted me and it was truly one of the dream experiences of my adult life because I really in addition to all this talk about wanting to be a civil rights lawyer, I always wanted to be a writer, 'cause I love, I love literature, and I love reading and I, you know, and so, it's always been important to me and of course I had written scholarly articles, but I want to be a real writer.  And I also just am fascinated by artists, you know, and, and the process of--and what it means to, the, the, the, the kind of, oh gosh, what would I call it?  It's so, it seems so transgressive to decide that that's what you are, you know?  So I'm just fascinated by people who make that decision and feel comfortable with it and the world that they live in, in which they have identified themselves in this way.  So to be at this wr- writing college, to be at this artist colony, 'cause it wasn't just writers, it was writers and, and choreographers and painters and composers and was a dream come true.  And I remember one of--my husband [Ivo Knobloch] and my daughters drove me up there, it's in New Hampshire and I thought, you know, I'm, I live such a crazy life, it's probably gonna take me three days, you know, to kind of get it together and then, you know, and you get, and you have your cottage and it's across from James, the cottage where James Baldwin stayed and it's, you know, it's filled with all this stuff.  But it's gonna take me three days and then I'll really begin to get the writing done.  They pulled away, I sat down.  I had a cork board and I had up my articles and photographs and things I needed for the book, I sat down and I started writing, and I wrote for like five hours, and every day I wrote, I for--I wrote from like, I would say ten to four, at four o'clock I would stop and I would walk down to the village and putter around a little bit and then come back for dinner.  I wrote the, the first three chapters of the book pretty much are verbatim, I wrote there and I thought I had, I mean what became the first three chapters I thought something else was the first chapter but, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how long was the co- what?  How long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there not--most people were there for extended periods of time, but of course I had a teaching job and so forth, so I was there for three weeks.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: It was amazing, I mean I had, so I say to people all the time, "You need to go to a writing colony," you know.  Really because it's all in there, I mean, I had done, you know, the research and I had everything, I had boxes and I had everything with me but just the--I mean, I had three kids and I had a teaching job and I had, you know, all this other stuff and just the permission to have all day to just write and to be in the company of other people who were so dedicated to their art and their work and who take it so seriously, it's, it's a very inspiring and environment, you know, it's, it's, it's just, it's, it's a really extraordinary place, so.
Speaker 1: So that was--so 2007, it's published?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was the, who was the publisher again?
Speaker 2: Beacon [Beacon Press].
Speaker 1: Beacon?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 523607
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what, what does this represent for you though, the book ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill]?
Speaker 2: It's interesting the way people responded to it, so it was a period and when a lot of books about lynchings were, were coming out, which is always nerve wrecking too, 'cause you're like, "Oh my god, is somebody gonna say what I'm--," you know, and then you just sort of kind of trust like, you're just doing what you're doing.  I think people first think, when you're writing about a very particular set of lynchings that you're on a manhunt, you know?  "Did you find the lynchers?"  And that wasn't my project, in fact, my project was very much not about the people who actually did it, right?  It really was about the housewives and the law students and everybody who was watching.  And so the, so it was a gift to me to that community.  And my own view about the lynching is that, the, whatever truth and reconciliation is to happen, needs to happen really locally, because the events created the kind of a local imprint in the relationship between people in the physical landscape, much of how communities responded to the lynchings continues to affect the landscape today, I mean I'm still not certain that the decision to run that highway through the African American community originally was not about the kind of post-lynching fears that whites had that, you know, the projection that, we've done something terrible and so they must be planning to do something terrible to us.  And so I think that needs, that conversation needs to happen locally.  And so my view is like this was a gift to that community to begin that conversation and, and I wanted to dispense with the gaslighting, you know?  What did and didn't happen because so much of this is telling black people that what happened didn't happen.  So I wanted to show what actually happened, that it did happen, this is how it happened, and this is how many people were there and, you know, it happened at this time of day, so you can't pretend that you didn't know it happened and it happened on the courthouse lawn, which is the name of the book.  Not like I was taught when I was a young girl, somewhere in the woods, you know?  It happened at the corner of Main [Street] and Division [Division Street, Salisbury, Maryland] in the case of the 1931, lynching of Matthew Williams, at the corner of Main and Division, on a Friday night at eight o'clock.  There was an officer, you know, directing traffic, right.  So, let's dispense with the idea that I didn't know and that nobody in my family knew and that--.  Everyone knew, now what?  Now what do--how do we deal with this act of terrorism that happened downtown at the most American sounding of corners at Main and Division and that traumatized this community?  And that was the purpose of the book, to deal with that past.  It's interesting I've heard other people say this in writing books, until--but then I experienced it myself, you're so intensely involved with it for a really long period of time and even after it was published, you know, I was around the country talking about lynchings and you're intensely involved.  And then one day, you're not intensely involved with it anymore, you know, it's like three or four years later, and people keep asking you to come speak about lynching but you've actually, you're actually writing something else, or you're doing something else or you're--and so it's, it becomes a weird thing because you, you know, so, you know, right now, people are talking about lynching again and lynching memorials and so people ask me about it and so I'm happy to talk about it.  But it was interesting to see that like there are these phases that even you go through with the material, but I feel proud that I created something that is concrete that removes the deniability about something that traumatized our people.  And by the way, that traumatized white people which is something I talk about in the book, you know?  Talking about white children who, who witnessed lynchings and trying to find a space where we all need to deal with the issue of silence, the silence is born of shame and fear, and that is so toxic.  So I wanted to do that, I wanted to give that, you know, that was the story I needed to tell, there's another story I'm hoping to tell, I can't really, you know, but I stopped writing that book when I took this job and so well--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --I'm still hoping I can return to it.
Speaker 1: I see, that is a continuation or--?
Speaker 2: No, it's a different story
Speaker 1: It's a totally different story.
Speaker 2: It's a whole 'nother story, but really important to tell.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 523608
Speaker 1: You also mention Judge William Murphy [HistoryMaker William H. Murphy, Sr.] and Michael Mitchell [HistoryMaker Michael Mitchell, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And those are two, I say those families, you know, one in, in Maryland--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --one owned the newspapers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the other--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --owned--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the--
Speaker 2: Still owns the newspapers.
Speaker 1: --politics.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean this is, that's part, part of the history of these lynchings that's so fascinating is, so first of all this is happening in Maryland which is a strange state, it's, you know, up, up south I think, Thurgood Marshall used to say, and so, you know, you have these very dynamic young African Americans.  You know, you have Juanita Mitchell [Juanita Jackson Mitchell] and her sister coming back from college and starting a Young People's Forum [Baltimore Citywide Young People's Forum] and becoming an anti-lynching, you know, activist, you have Thurgood Marshall's under the tutelage of Charles Hamilton Houston. In fact, one of the best finds, when I was researching the book was a, a petition signed by thirteen black lawyers, you know, some of the names we'd probably know, Charles Ransom [ph.], and other, others, who was my favorite guy from Delaware?  Leon Red- Louis Redding [Louis L. Redding], Leon Ransom [Leon A. Ransom], the last name on it is Thurgood Marshall, but it's signed in 1933, and it's a petition to the governor asking for reparations for lynching, for the lynching that happened in 1933.  I mean, so, you know, so, that's one, when I talk about the connection to LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], there ways in which all those connections and what Thurgood Marshall was doing, and other lawyers were doing in that period that's so connected to this.  Charles Hamilton Houston was very involved in representing a white lawyer, a white communist lawyer, who had been involved in a, in an earlier case, representing someone, an African American man who was accused of killing a white farm family and who narrowly escaped lynching, and the white community in this same area that I was writing about so hated this lawyer, they actually tried to have him disbarred, and Charles Hamilton Houston represented him.  So there were all these historical connections that--to, to, to names that, that many African Americans would know that actually were really connected to this incident in some way and to the kind of proliferation of lynching.  And Maryland was seen really as a place where we can't allow this to happen because it was, it wa- it wasn't regarded as the Deep South, and so these, these two lynchings in 1931 and 1933, and I--in the book ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill], I write about several other near lynchings that happened as well 'cause we tend to write only about the, quote unquote, successfully completed lynchings.  But there were several other lynchings that almost happened, and were narrowly averted and so, in the book I write about, about some of them also.
Speaker 1: So, you know, 'cause that's interesting that you would see Thurgood from that side, too--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that people would not--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --necessarily even know, or have researched.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 523609
Speaker 1: So I wanna ask, how does, how does, how did the position of LD- how does it come available or how are you made aware of it?  Because, first of all the, there had been the death of--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: So, I knew John Payton died and wrote a piece, you know, my, probably the, the next day after I heard the news that was in The Root about him.  And it's weird I think, many of us who have, you know, most of us who worked at LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] are in, kind of in  the LDF family and somehow we do know kind of what's happening.  So I knew that the position was open.  I had--was not pursuing it at all, as a matter of fact, I was really quite interested in thinking about other people who might pursue it and, you know, I, of course wanna know what's gonna happen, and love LDF so much.  I always said that even though I'd spent twenty years at the University of Maryland [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland], I always considered LDF my professional home.  It was a strange thing; that's how strong the connection to that organization is.  And I think most people who, who've litigated, who've been lawyers they will tell you that they feel that way, that whatever else they've done, there's something about LDF that is, is a kind of home for them.  So I, I always felt that way and, you know, so I knew that, that the change would be happening, so when people reached out to me, to say, do you think?  Would you think you'd be interested in it?  I was, no, please no, no way, and, but, you know, there were a lot of conversations about, you know, this is the right time and you could do it and, and to be honest, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], this was a, this was a moment in which I actually knew that I had all the stuff I needed to do this job.  I mean I actually did know it.  I had, I had become a different kind of civil rights lawyer than I had been at LDF, I had moved to a place kind of second tier American city, and had been working in this state and, you know, I wasn't coming in with my big new federal law, you know, theory.  I, I had to figure out whatever was gonna help that community.  I had to create something out of it and help create a narrative that surrounded it and think about all the different ways that we could litigate and do policy and I had to be, I had to be nimble and creative and, and really be responsive to whatever was the need in that community.  And I thought that was really helpful to me in thinking about filling myself out as a civil rights lawyer and that meant, you know, in the case of community we represented up in Harford County [Maryland], if it meant getting county historic landmark status to keep the, the developer from being able to build the landfill, that's what we did.  If it meant researching the Maryland darter, you know, an endangered fish that somebody thought they saw in one of the streams, you know, up in that community so that we could've maybe used the endangered species act like it was about that, you know?  It was whatever it took.  I did zoning hearings something I've never done before, you know?  So I felt like I had stretched myself in important ways, I had been writing a column for The Root for a couple of years, once or twice a month and before that I had written for the blog, Black Prof, but I was writing for The Root, you know, regularly so I had this writing experience, you know, kind of op-ed writing experience, opinion writing experience, and I knew that LDF needed a communications piece that, that this narrative piece that I was talking about was what needed to be attended to.  I'd done a lot of local television a lot of local radio in Baltimore [Maryland].  In fact I had become a kind of a minor local, you know, personality around issues of race and civil rights, so I'd, so I felt quite comfortable in front of the camera, I felt very comfortable, I thought, I felt like radio was really my medium.  I'd obviously done, written the book ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill] and I'd done the book tour, so I'd been all over the country talking about the book and doing radio shows and call-ins and, so I, so I was quite comfortable, you know as a public person, so I knew I had that to offer as well.  I had been working with a foundation, I was on the board of the Open Society Foundations, and so I wou- had a kind of a window into the foundation world that I knew how they worked and how they talked about organizations and, and the ways in which the foundation world influences, you know, work and then the way the work influences foundations.  So I felt like I had a peak into that world and then I had been living in Baltimore, I'd been living in a, an extremely challenging and troubled second tier American city that had been actually quite good to me and my family, I raised my kids there on the west side of Baltimore, and fell in love with it.  I was not the person who--people, the people there actually thought I was from Baltimore, that's how much I embraced it.  I didn't do that like I'm from New York [New York], and, you know, I'm just here, you know, hanging out with you guys, I really got into it.  And so I felt like I really understood, it's, it's held me in quite good stead especially these days, I understood what was happening in cities like Baltimore and how dangerous it was, how, how, how much suffering there was, how much complete disconnection from the, you know, the opportunity in those communities.  So I felt like I had a perspective to bring to the table and I had all these experiences, I described it as like I'd ultimately felt like I was packing my suitcase for twenty years to come back to LDF.  And now I was coming back with, with stuff which was important to me that I wasn't, I wasn't coming to take from LDF, I really was coming to say like, I've learned all this stuff and now I'm, I'm giving it.
Story_ID: 523610
Speaker 1: And then I knew LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] enough to at least know something about the culture, and felt like that was important too, because I'm extremely loyal to LDF, you know, always was, and I thought that's important.  People need to feel like the person who's coming in, especially after something tragic like the death of the director counsel, it's somebody we can trust.  It's not somebody whose, you know, admit, doing the--engaging in a career move or doing this for themselves or, you know, doesn't revere the organization, I revere LDF, and I know a lot about the history of LDF so I felt really comfortable that like, I know a lot about this organization, you know, more than anybody else in this building probably, you know, with the exception of one or two.  And I felt like that was important to bring to the table too because, you know, to lead LDF is to steward a really powerful and important African American institution, an institution that represented African American intellectual strength.  You know, we have other--and we have cultural institutions, we have artistic institutions, we have activist institutions, like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but LDF represented and represents kind of the intellectual legacy and I take that very seriously.  So I felt like I had all those things.  I mean I knew I did, and, but I also knew what it would mean, I knew that this would be overwhelming and I also know myself, and in the same way, you know, you were asking about, "How did you start this teaching thing?"  I mean I know myself, I knew that I was gonna go all in and that meant, you know, incredibly hard work, not having much of a life, not, you know, being able to do much else besides work and really I would say for the first two and a half years, you know, it was sixteen hours a day every day, but Saturday.
Speaker 2: I believe that because--now your, your husband [Ivo Knobloch], your family all bought into that?
Speaker 1: They were, they were encouraging me like crazy which was making me crazy.  I was, 'cause I kept thinking, you just don't even understand what this means, you know, you're just, you, you think it's just great 'cause you think I'm great, you know?  But I'm telling you, this is not, this is, this is, you all are gonna be enjoying having me do this, but it's gonna be awful for me, that's what I thought.
Story_ID: 523611
Speaker 1: Was the board clear about what they wanted?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because that's the other thing is that they were--this was a time of crisis, sort of, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They, they needed to get this right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's funny because I was so transparent about what I wanted to do, and since I wasn't looking for a job, I was actually very happy doing wha- I mean really happy doing what I was doing, teaching at the law school [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] and getting ready to write this other book.  I could be really--I didn't feel like I had to lie or pretend, that, you know, I was very transparent about what I thought LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] needed and what I intended to do and I was very clear that if you don't want that, I'm not your girl.  You absolutely shouldn't do it and I'm, I mean I wouldn't, I would have no hard feelings at all.  But this is what I think LDF needs at this moment and if, you know, and if that's not what you believe then I'm not, I'm not the right person for the job.
Speaker 1: What, what is the vision you laid out at that point?
Speaker 2: Well some of it is some of what we've already talked about, that LDF needed to have the apparatus internally, to be able to be holistic in how we presented issues of race and the law in country.  And that means we had to speak, not just in the courtroom, but we had to speak outside the courtroom and we had to speak in a powerful way that would allow people to regard us as the trusted guide.  We had to set the table before we brought the dinner in so that there was a context in which we were litigating.  I also felt we had to make tough decisions about the things that we're going to be involved in and it's so hard because when you're doing impact litigation, you're focused on structural change and the future, but you also have to be speaking into the moment, right.  It's like our policing reform work, you know, everything we do is great, you could be, you could be working on employment discrimination, you could be working on housing discrimination, you could be doing any number of other policy things, but if at this moment, you're not also working on policing reform and you're calling yourself a leading civil rights law organization, there's a legitimacy question that's gonna arise.  So, figuring out how to have enough bandwidth that you can be responsive to what's happening in the moment even as you maintain your, your structural impact litigation that's visionary and that's headed towards the future, is a real challenge and it involves some structural changes within the organization.  It had--it's--it involves thinking about fundraising in unique ways so that you can do rapid response, thinking about how you, who you have on staff that has the ability to respond in that way.  So, so there was that, and then the last thing was about the Thurgood Marshall Institute and the need to be able to have the tools so that LDF can be engaged in affirmative campaigns, not re- not, not just our work that I would largely call defensive, or that's responsing--responsive to a wrong, but that gets out ahead and envisions how we would move the needle on equality to areas where it hasn't existed.  To, to push the envelope in ways that it have--haven't yet happened, and to have some bandwidth that allows us to do that as well and that's incredibly challenging because so much is going on and because LDF is lean and mean, we're not a huge organization and because, you know, fundraising is so challenging, for every public interest organization, but especially one associated with litigation, which doesn't make, you know, everyone feel warm and fuzzy.  So all of those things were things that I thought were critical to kind of refurbishing LDF to the position I know that it can have and I was very transparent with the board that those were things that would be priorities for me.
Story_ID: 523612
Speaker 1: And then all the events of the current few years. I mean si- from the time that you came on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's yeah, I mean--
Speaker 1: --have been, I mean, have been things that are right in LDF's [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] sweet spot in many ways, you know.
Speaker 2: No question.
Speaker 1: And so, I wanna ask though, what was the organization?  I mean, because you hadn't run a non-profit organization.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: So how, so what did you find?  What was the organization that you found?
Speaker 2: So some of this I'm gonna be, you know, 'cause I don't wanna--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --get all into the organization's business.  So one of the things when I, we talked about before having worked with the foundation, one of the things when I was at OSF [Open Society Foundations], I had, I chaired the search committee for the new director and in the, that period in which we didn't have a director, I kind of served as the de facto director.  So I'd had a little bit of also, you know, experience running an organization, not certainly a great deal.  But one of the things I thought was really important was to, to create a position that LDF had never had before which was a COO, someone who was actually running, to be attentive to the kind of internal running and the management of the organization because, you know, lawyers we, we're not necessarily instinctively good managers, and we're litigating and we're doing all this other stuff, and you have to be really well run, you know, internally as well.  And so--so that was one thing that I thought was really important and we did that and it really was transformative in many ways for just people thinking about being intentional about the running of the organization in a way that, produces the kind of results that we want.
Speaker 1: Was that a condition of you coming on?  Or do you (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: No, I hadn't, I hadn't talked about the COO idea but, I, you know, I was pretty clear when I came on board, that, that I needed something like that to make it work.  And, and so that was really helpful and useful in, in moving certain things in the organization.  And I wanted to get people to buy into the idea of LDF as a trusted source of information.  So, refurbishing our website, getting everyone on social media, be--you know, becoming a kind of social media presence myself.  These were things I think people thought was a little bit loopy for the director counsel of LDF but I felt it was critical and important to get people to listen to you and to listen to other people.  And I have to say that, you know, I felt quite vindicated when Ferguson [Missouri] happened because my presence on social media allowed me to know in real time, I mean I, I, I knew about Mike Brown's [Michael Brown] death within two wa- two hours, if not before of him, and with those first, you know, tweets that were up.  And so, and that was maybe a Saturday, so Sunday night, we were having the conference call and figuring out what we were doing, you know?  So just moving us into the--that was, that was, that was a culture shift, you know, for LDF, that that was not something that people thought was our role.  I did think it was our role, having a ma- a more robust media presence I thought was our role.  I thought using our brand in creative ways was important too, in terms of the actual litigation matters that we were involved in.  So, what we, you know, long before Flint [Michigan] there was the Detroit [Michigan] water crisis, when they were doing the turn offs, you know, and the anticipated turn offs for seventy thousand people of water in Detroit, while they were still in the bankruptcy process.  And, you know, this was entirely framed as an issue of people who can't pay their water bills, and just thought that can't be, you know?  And there were lots of questions, as to how can this be a civil rights issue?  And I, you know, I thought about it a lot, and, and I thought well it has to be.  I--these are, these are citizens of this country who don't have access to water, thousands, tens of thousands won't have access to water.  And moreover I thought that, you know, if LDF says it's a civil rights issue, it will be one, so, we can sometimes decide when we stretch the brand, you know.   And so, opportunities like that to, to engage and to get on the ground, and to really get in, in, in, involved in issues that actually reveal, 'cause when you get involved in those things they reveal other things to you about what's happening, you know, in our nation's infrastructure, and some of the decisions that are being made and how African American communities are suffering with that, those infrastructure disparities and so forth.  So, so just being open to that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 523613
Speaker 1: Creating a rapid response team and a rapid response fund, so that when things happen, like Ferguson [Missouri], we can respond because, you know, you don't, you don't budget this happening, you don't plan for it to happen but, sometimes a moment happens in civil rights.  That's been the history that changes things, you know.  It's not that Rosa Parks called Thurgood Marshall, you know, and Fred Gray called and said, "This is what's gonna happen two weeks from now."  It happened and then they called, we didn't--nobody got permission to do the Selma march [Selma to Montgomery March] from LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], but LDF did represent the Selma marchers, right?  So, the, they're these transformative moments that happen that we have no control over, but we need to institutionally be able to respond to the moment, that's as a matter of man power, as a matter of budgeting as a matter of bandwidth and so forth.  So creating, creating that space, you know, it was vitally important I think and has proven to be really critical actually to our engagement and our centrality and some of the most important issues that we're dealing with today.  And that's all at the same time that we're doing something like voting which we never stopped doing and we litigated the Shelby case [Shelby County v. Holder, 2013] and that's the issue and, and so being able to do the two at the same time is extremely challenging but I do think it's part of LDF's tradition actually, you know.  I remind people all the time about the array of matters in which LDF was involved and sometimes people, you know, are surprised.  When Muhammad Ali just died, it's like, well who represented Muhammad Ali in, you know, when he wanted to get his boxing license back from New York State?  Who represented him before the [U.S.] Supreme Court that got his draft conviction overturned?  That was LDF.  So--but that's while we were doing all the other stuff that people tend to associate with LDF, we were doing that.  So sometimes there are these moments when we, we, we have to get engaged and we have to get 'em even though we didn't plan it, and creating that bandwidth is important.
Story_ID: 523614
Speaker 1: The history is a, is a key part of it because actually the history is what lets you know what's possible, I mean there's almost nothing when people say, "Well I don't know about that."  I say, "Well yes we can do it," 'cause I, I keep in my head all the things that LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] has done that people don't even remember any more so that people can understand what I'm thinking about the standard that I wanna reach, it's actually quite high, it's actually quite high because I think, I think people, you know, have their own memories or, or thoughts of what they think LDF did, but whatever you think that LDF did, we did so much more, so much more.  And, you know, and, and since I'm very in touch with that history, I always feel like there's more we could be doing, you know?  You know, assuming that we had the resources and the bandwidth, yeah, there's more we could be doing.  Now the question for me, always and when I came back that that was a key question for me is, should we be doing more?  Because one of the challenges of doing civil rights work or any so called  do gooder work is that everything you do is good, and so it's hard to make decisions about, like we're gonna do this but not that and that's, that's always the struggle, that's still a struggle.  That's why I tend to think of it more in terms of, you know, leaving room so that you can respond to--and, then having a larger narra- you know, because the decision making about what you do and what you don't do is just incredibly difficult in times when there's so many challenges facing our community.
Story_ID: 523615
Speaker 1: Now, because you come in at 2013, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And that is like, you know, we were in 2008, well not we but there are lots of people saying we're at a post-racial society--
Speaker 2: I think, it was one or two people and it was blown out of proportion but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Well there were, there were more than, there was hope let me put it that way, okay.
Speaker 2: There was hope.
Speaker 1: So then, then you come in and there are a lot of things, I mean there have been rumblings, you know, we had to have the University of Michigan, the anti-affirmative action [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003] and then, by which LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] had been very involved with.  But I, I want to say that it's like this perfect storm because the young people and the cameras and the, you know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and Trayvon Martin.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I think Trayvon Martin you--
Speaker 2: That's the beginning.
Speaker 1: --you speak of as very seminal--
Speaker 2: Oh I think so, I think so because I think young people could see themselves in this young man and, I mean it's just a, it's just a power--such a powerful and tragic and awful story and, and it, you know, what was powerful and what has been powerful is young people first of all begin to speak up about an experience that they were having and saying enough is enough.  Saying that they'd had it, saying that they weren't going to take it they weren't going to tolerate it and those are the moments of, you know, of transformation and you have to be, you have to be ready.  So yeah, I think it was a perfect storm, I mean we started out actually with the Shelby case [Shelby County v. Holder, 2013], if you think about the Shelby case was decided in June of that year.  Eric Garner was killed in July, and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the Shelby case is the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]?
Speaker 2: That's the Voting Rights Act case in which the [U.S.] Supreme Court struck down a key po- portion of the Voting Rights Act, which produced devastating results as we knew it would in the town--local towns and communities that I was just talking to you about.  So we knew what this would mean, we knew this devastating.  Eric Garner was killed in July, Mike Brown [Michael Brown] was killed in August, that was, that was 2013, you know, in a, in a nutshell.  And so it was just very, very difficult for us to, to put it all together and to figure out how are we gonna deal given how, I guess its 2013 and 2014, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Two thousand thirteen [2013], 2013 and 2014.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the, and we ended 2014 as I recall with the killing of the two officers in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I remember getting to the end of that year and just being like, whoa.  Wait a minute.  So that's just, that's a year and a half of just--
Speaker 1: Nonstop. It's nonstop.
Speaker 2: Nonstop.  So yes, so I guess 2013 was Shelby and then 2014 were the two killings was, was Trayvon Martin, not Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner and, and Mike Brown--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and the killing of the officers at the end of the year back into 2015, and I honestly think, by the time you see Walter Scott running in that park, in North Charleston [South Carolina]?  We are forever changed.
Speaker 1: Because that was like how could that even be?  And then the woman who, in Texas--
Speaker 2: Sandra Bland.
Speaker 1: Sandra Bland.
Speaker 2: That was, that was, so many of us saw ourselves in her, it was, it's just so powerful and we just can't ever be the same, you know?  You've, you've seen it now and, not once, you know?  There was the video of Rodney King being beat but it was one.
Speaker 1: And that went on for, that that stayed on our conscious for--
Speaker 2: And think how about, right, think about how much we kind of still resonate with that?  I mean these are just, you know, Philando Castile?  Good god, you know?  So, so we're forever changed and, and, and Clifford Glover, you know?
Story_ID: 523616
Speaker 1: Well see, that's what the thing is, is that, you know, that and I, what I was thinking of when you were talking earlier was the time period is, has changed--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a lot.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and when I say by that, that, you know, I, this whole thing with Brown--well I'll ask you.  So, we have Brown versus the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you're, you've been speaking on this but, the communities have changed but if all this time, LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] is fighting, you know, or the, the, the people involved in social justice are fighting, fighting.  But it's invisible to a lot of people, even to the community, the black community, it's invisible.  Are you there--you know, we understand that there's maybe a different--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  You're--this is why, this what, this was my point about, I mean I, I, I've, I really take this very seriously, I'm just not doing the tree that falls in the forest and nobody hears it anymore.  And that's part of why I do a lot of media and I talk about what we do and that's why I write.  I write all my own pieces basically, you know, I, I mean I, because, because I do want people to know what we do.  You know, when I'm, when I'm going out to give, you know, talks or speeches, you know, some of them are at very lofty places and some of them aren't because that has to be part of my portfolio also that this is a responsibility to transmit the information about what's really happening and about what you're doing.  So I think the intentional presentation of that as part of the job, and not just my job, I mean I'm, I'm pushing lawyers too, making them write op-eds and pushing 'em on TV.  That that has to be for the modern civil rights lawyer?  That's part of the job.  It's got to be, people have to know what you're doing and understand the significance of what you're doing.  It's a, it's a partnership, it's not that the community tells you something and then you go off and then go do something, it's a partnership and you're learning from people in the community all the while you're doing the work and that has to be the model that is currently gonna work because the community is so complex and insular and many of us are not part of the communities where we're working.  So, you, so you really need, you're relying on people in the community to trust you and to tell you and, and to trust you, you have to tell them something, you have to give them some information that they can use to navigate power and inequity.  And that's part of the job, and that's part of the institute [Thurgood Marshall Institute] also.  That's why developing our own research and like people have a great instinct, one of the things I just love and have always found in this work is that black people have an incredible instinct for that, that something is wrong, you know.  And, and even have a hint of how it's wrong, and are looking for the affirmations sometimes, they're looking for the information, they're looking for the data to the extent we can provide it to say, here's what's wrong, here's why it's wrong, here's where the problem is.  I know you thought it was there, but look at this piece.  It's part of the, and educational fund, part of our name, we're also supposed to perform an education function and that function is not about just schools, it's about, you know, what our corporate charter says about that, educating the American public about the state of black people in American life.
Speaker 1: So how are you handling with this outreach, how are you handling the demand?  Because, you know, outreach like that creates more demand (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's tough. It's incredibly tough.
Speaker 1: And especially because it's almost like an epidemic, like that shows no signs of stopping.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've tried to do two things, I mean we work at the national level around what we think are some of the national issues around policing reform, and then, and then there're particular locations that we're doing our work in.  But I have to say th- certain instances happen and we feel like we just have to, you know, the young woman who was killed in her home in Baltimore County [Maryland], Korryn Gaines, we've gotten involved because they're certain, certain cases raise such powerful issues and imagery and sometimes add a new layer onto some of what we've seen right.  That this now in a home, this is not in the street this is not, you know, that we feel like we have to engage.  So, it's always a struggle because it's a resource issue, but we, we try to be careful about, you know, picking--engaging in those, those cases, first of all, where there's, where there's not already, you know, 'cause the, the good news is we're not the only game in town.  There are other people engaged doing this work too.  And so, you know, whether our colleagues are, you know, the National Bar Association or the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union], if they're in there working on an issue really powerfully as the ACLU is around body one cameras for example, then we're, we're there in support but, that they're taking the lead on that issue, we think that's great because we have so many other things that we have to do.  So we try to work with our civil rights colleagues, our other civil rights legal colleagues, and handle the part that we think is uniquely, the LDF is uniquely positioned to speak to.
Story_ID: 523617
Speaker 1: The other thing about the young people, how did they know how to do nonviolence?  In a way--you know, and I asked this because you always hear the older generations saying, I mean the, of--speaking of this disconnect?  And--
Speaker 2: Well this and all these, you know, look, there have been groups of, you know, the Dream Defenders--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, that formed a really, after Trayvon Martin was killed, many of the other youth groups, these are people who've been doing activist work and organizing for a very long time around a whole variety of issues.  And some of them have come together around the policing issue.  It's interesting to me that people are surprised by that, you know?  Even the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], you know, you go to the, the--their youth night at their convention and you're blown away by these very, very powerful committed young people.  So I actually think it's a reflection of the older people who are not active when they're, when they're stunned and surprised.  It's because you're not out there, and that's why, that's why you don't know, you know?  And so, I, I, tell people all the time, like if you're, you know, if you're just waking up to the fact that young people are activists, then probably you're not an activist because you haven't been engaged out there to see that they have been looking for, for ways to speak to the injustices that they see in their society.
Speaker 1: So what do you think of this time period we're in?  And, I mean this group--
Speaker 2: It's a, it's, it's a, it's a much--
Speaker 1: It's a very--
Speaker 2: It's a transformative period and it is filled with the discomfort of transformation.  Those of us who are in it right now, are not going to enjoy it.  But what will come out of it, is the opportunity for real transformation around issues that we all have swallowed and accepted as intransigent or unsolvable.  And, you know, there are, there are enough people now who are saying, "Nope this must be solved or we just won't have peace."  And so, the issue of policing violence, police involved killings of unarmed African American citizens, I'm not proud to be telling a story about Clifford Glover when I was ten years old, and none of us should be proud that for forty years, you know, we've had this problem and, and certainly didn't begin with that case, certainly before that.  It's an in- it's an indictment of our failure to take on an issue that we all know about and we all have known about and now, people are saying, no more.  So whatever it takes to produce the solution, we've got to be as creative as, as committed as serious, as innovative, as demanding as exigent as we ever have been about any civil rights issue about this issue.  And, you know, I'm not anxious to be having the talk with my grandson ten years from now--from now.  That would be profoundly humiliating to me, I may have to have it, but I will be mortified because I'll be saying, "Your grandmother was a civil rights lawyer for forty years."  So, I think the moment that we're in is a moment in which we have to take seriously the possibility of transformation and those are uncomfortable times, very uncomfortable times.  But what comes at the end of it is always an opportunity for this country to be better, not just black people, this country to be better, and, you know, I think that we are always holding up a mirror to the state of our democracy.  That's what, you know, civil rights work really does, and right now, everyone can see that there's trouble.
Story_ID: 523618
Speaker 1: So, when, under when, with Brown [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] there was the whole thing of all deliberate speed and not people really understanding what that meant or what its impact would be, and now, we really live in two, al- almost two separate societies even more, maybe, maybe not more.  But my question for you is, what do you think?  Have you learned?  Has LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] learned?  Or has the society learned?  So it will not be a return to the, where we, you know, find ourselves now.
Speaker 2: Well I think that there're two lessons of Brown that are tough lessons but important ones.  One is about unintended consequences of, of, you know, the good work that you do, but the other lesson is about the irrational violent and persistent forces of resistance to change and the complicity of those who allow it, that you cannot underestimate that.  It's not as though we didn't think LDF, that there would be some resistance to integration, but massive resistance where all the apparatus of government was on board with this, the closing of schools for five years in Prince Edward County, Virginia.  These are things that are almost kind of beyond imagination, and I think now we have to imagine what it looks like to, to, to, to have people really stand and refuse to change.  And what it means to have the complicity of courts, you know, who are afraid of change and the complicity of well meaning people who think if we go half measure, you know, it'll be okay.  I think that's an important lesson for us.  So, always trying to spin out, you know, to really play it out like a chess game, if this, then that, to, to try to imagine the different scenarios of what could happen.  And really I think the charge for us now, because I--I'm always impatient with people who suggest that Brown didn't bring a benefit or there's, you know, I'm certainly a beneficiary of Brown, but we certainly also have to recognize that there are many who didn't make it, who didn't get the benefits.  And the question now is, how do we--how do we deal with that?  It doesn't surprise me that we would be doing this in parts, that there wouldn't be global transformation in terms of civil rights in one fell swoop.  So now, we have to go back and, and clean up and do some things that needed to be done but that couldn't be done then and that's the work we have to do and, and we won't get it all done either.  We will do the, the very best we can, and then we'll pass the baton to the next group and they'll do the very best they can.  That's the, you know, that's the work, you can't aggrandize yourself so much to think that you are going to be the generation that does the whole thing, but you sure can do a lot.  You sure can kick that door open as wide as it can go and put a stop in it so that it stays open for a while, they are gonna be others who are gonna come push--pushing that door closed, no question about it, then you'll have to deal with that when the time comes, but you have to take advantage of your moment.  And the biggest moment is the moment when everyone's paying attention and that's the moment we're in right now.  For so many years we couldn't get people to focus on voting rights, on any number of issues and now people are paying attention and that's the big hurdle.  The question is, what are you gonna do with it now that you've got everyone's attention?  And that's what we're working on every day, is trying to take advantage of this moment, the door will close, on--a moment is a moment, you know, it could be five years, could be three years, but it's still just a moment.  Most people find it exhausting to be this vigilant.  You know, for those of us who are, who are civil lawyers, who wake up thinking about this stuff every day, we think about it going to bed at night, this is our bread and butter.  Most people aren't trying to think about this all day.  And so, there will come a time when a kind of exhaustion will set in, and that's why I feel such a sense of urgency, that the moves that we make have to be made now and that we can't be compromising on the need to make the change now, because we won't have forever.
Story_ID: 523619
Speaker 1: So Sherrilyn [HistoryMaker Sherrilyn Ifill], so you, there--those five years go by, what do you want LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] to look and--look like and be at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm four years in now, so you mean another five years?
Speaker 1: Another five, yes.
Speaker 2: I really want LDF to be strong, a strong organization at that--and that, and that strength will be reflected in our ability to do the two things I've talked about, which is strategically play the long game and be in the moment, and to do it, you know, without so much creakiness and rust and difficulty.  So that means having the resources to do it, that means having the staff to do it, that means having built in the capacity within the organization to do it.  That means having the, the trust, you know, of our community that, that we can operate at this level.  But it's really being able to do those two things, its being able to play that long game with a clear strategy and being able to be in the moment and being responsive to the moment.  And my hope is that I, you know, in the next five years, we will have affected some real change around some of the most critical issues, certainly around voting and policing.  Those two issues the, there, there will be change, they only question is, what will it be?  And how, how deep will it be?  And I think it's critically important that we work and do everything we can to make sure that the change that happens in those two areas is real transformative change, so at the end of, of that five years, my hope would, would be that LDF would have played a powerful and leadership role in that change.
Story_ID: 523620
Speaker 1: What as you sit here, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?  One thing that I have to say is that, at least the attention is being brought back to our community, it was almost gonna be lost in some respects.  I mean we were losing--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the attention on us.
Speaker 2: What do I want for the black community?
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: I have to say I'm, this moment is actually a quite beautiful one, and I hope we can sustain some of what's beautiful about it.  You know, it's painful but the way in which I see the concern of, of us with our own community and on multiple levels, you know, in terms of not only, in terms of, you know, racism and racial inequality, but our images of ourselves, our narrative about ourselves, our art, our music, our--.  There, there's a way in which there's a kind of a thoroughgoing conversation happening about who we are and what we contribute to one another, and a questioning that, while painful, is incredibly powerful and beautiful also.  So, I'm, I'm feeling actually very, very hopeful in a way that I haven't felt in some time about what you know, what we're tranfor- how we're transforming ourselves, 'cause some of this is about transformation of the condition of--in which we live in this country and some of it is about transforming ourselves and our own communities and how we think about ourselves, I think is really powerful and exciting.  You know, and what I--I'm hopeful is that we can sustain it and that people don't check out because these are tough times, and you almost wouldn't blame people for feeling, excuse me, discouraged enough to wanna check out.  But, to not check out, to hang in this thing, to be able to see the long arc, you know, that we talked about before, to see, to see the, a role in it.  And to have the humility and the, the love of your own community enough to accept that you may not be there for the--for all the benefits of it.  But that the work is still valuable, that's the--you asked me, how did our grandparents know?  That's what they knew, and they were okay with it, you know, they, they, the beauty of it is, is that all the praying and the, and the work wasn't just for themselves, it was for some story that they weren't even gonna see, it was for some, you know, some grandchild who was gonna grow up to be not, my grandmother was imagining this, you know.  So that's, we have to bring that humility to it too, and that keeps you in the fight for the long haul because you, you're, you can accept that your fight, your work has value even though you may not see the outcome of the thing, you know.  You know, I think about this all the time and, you know, there's so much attention to being (air quotes) famous now, people, you know, young people wanna be famous and I think, well I think about all the people that I admire and that many young people admire--I think about Zora Neale Hurston and goodness, all kinds of obscure writers and musicians that, in their time were, eh, not that famous, but, you know, certainly not financially s- successful and so forth.  How do you know, you know?  What young woman isn't gonna find your poetry or find your book, how--maybe it's, maybe it's not your kids, maybe it's your great-great-niece, who one day writes a book about how extraordinary you are, you know, who finds your contributions.  Think about how we talk about when we find members of our family that we didn't know about, you know, my, my great, great, great aunt was named a famous person, you know.  It doesn't have to be what you're imagining, it doesn't have to be your children it doesn't have to be you it doesn't have to be the people you see just make the contribution put it out there.  It's like what I was saying about the book ['On the Courthouse Lawn: Confronting the Legacy of Lynching in the Twenty-first Century,' Sherrilyn Ifill].  Create it, generously give it, and then believe that fruit will come of it, even if you're not, you know, there for the harvest.  But that, that takes a little bit of humility and it's, and it's important because, you know, without that, then you would give up the fight, I mean if you did--if you didn't think that, that you know what?, It's gonna happen, even if I don't see it, then when you didn't see it, you'd just say, oh, I'm gonna throw in the towel.  And we don't make it that way, we, we make it with a kind of an embedded belief in the future and so a, a sense of nihilism is a dangerous, the most dangerous and scary thing and that I hear really too much, not only in our community but just, you know, these days, I just think that sense is very, very perilous for us.
Story_ID: 523621
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about what you want your legacy to be, that's all.  What, when all is said, because you started out, you know, you said that's what you wanted to be was civil rights.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Boy, not many people are so definite so early.  So, I just--but yet you're still very young, I mean--
Speaker 2: You know I wanted to be in it, I don't know that I wanted to, like my legacy, do you know what I mean?  I wanted to get in it, I don't know that I can answer that question, you know?  I'm, I'm, I'm always--
Speaker 1: Well what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay well that's different.  First and foremost, hard worker, you know, just working at this thing.  I like for people to feel like they learned from me.  Yeah, I want people to feel like she worked hard, that I, they learned from me, I certainly want people to feel that I strengthened LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] at a critical time in this country when we were needed, that I strengthened the idea of being a civil rights lawyer.  That matters to me a great deal that this, that this go forward, that young people wanna be civil rights lawyers, that it not end as a--as a path.  So, to, to, to, to excite people about that idea whether it's through the many students that I've taught over the years, you know, or through this work, planting that seed is really important to me.  You know, and then ultimately that real change happened and I--and even if it's in one community.  I had a client talk to me about that, you know, about it, a case that we worked on and, when the case settled and I was just furious 'cause I wanted to win this case in court.  And, you know, and he had this whole long story for me about, you know, you have no idea what you did, but he told a whole long involved story about World War II [WWII] and, and when he was in the [U.S.] Coast Guard and so forth.  And anyway, the story ended with him saying that a young--a man that he ended up in a tussle with said to him, "You know, if you come back here, you're gonna have to go through this again," this terrible fight that they had.  And he said, at the end of the story which seemed to me to go on forever and ever and ever, he said, "And that's what you told the state in this case, you know, if it didn't turn out the way you wanted it to, if they try to do this again, they're gonna have to go through all of this," and that was his, you know, "so we feel like great, you know?"  I was like, "What?"  You know?  But it's like, it's not just your idea about what changes, you know, or what transformation is, or what contribution is, you know, but that other people will thing, wow, she made a contribution because she made me think this way, or because this happened or because, yeah.  And so, his theory was, "Yeah but now they know that what they would have to go through to try and do what they had been doing with impunity for decades," you know?  I didn't think about it that way, I wanted to win the case, you know.  So, just to have others feel that sense that you contributed something I think is really important, not, not so much, I'm, I'm unlikely to be satisfied with my own contribution, myself, but I would like others to feel that.
Story_ID: 523622
Speaker 1: And just one last question, your father [Lester Ifill, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I think of the race man--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I think of all the things like the, the discussions at the dining, you know, around the house, the watching the TV.  And what would he say if he could see you?
Speaker 2: Oh my god.  He would be beside himself, I do miss him for that I must say, there were just, you know, there were moments that are my father moments, you know.  Giving the commencement speech at Yankee Stadium [New York, New York], you know, at NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  That's a, that's a moment in which, oh, I wish my father could be there and the fact that he's not here to see it, is quite inspirational to me for all the reasons that I said before.  Because he didn't get to see it, but he did it anyway, you know.  All the conversations and all of the seeds that you plant.  He saw some of it, I, I became a civil rights lawyer, you know.  I mean, I remember when I left LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.], my father thought for sure I must have been fired because he couldn't understand why would she ever leave her dream job, you know?  Like the, he just thought that was like what?  So he got to see some of it and, and during my time at Maryland [University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law, Baltimore, Maryland] and so forth and he loved it when I was on TV.  You know, every time I was on TV he loved that and--but that he didn't get to see the full measure of it in this way, you know, it's kind of the lesson of the thing, right?  It's that maybe you don't, but do I believe that without what he invested this would even happen for me?  Or that I could make--do this work and make contributions?  No, I, I--he was a cr- critical part of it, so that's part of, that's part of the poignant lesson right?  Which is, it's not about that you get to see it. I would love for him to see it; I do believe he is seeing it.  But that he does--he's not getting to walk it out and live it with me, yeah, that's actually the point.  You may not get to, doesn't mean that what you're doing doesn't have extraordinary value, and doesn't transform the lives of the people that you touch.  So I'm okay with it in that sense, you know.
