Story_ID: 237678
Speaker 1: We're gonna get starting by stating that my name is Jodi Merriday, and I'm the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and there are no other observers present today.  Sir, could you please state and spell your name including your middle name?
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Edward D. Irons, that's Edward, E-D-W-A-R-D, D as in David, I-R-O-N-S.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Hulbert, H-U-L-B-E-R-T, Oklahoma; August the 29th, 1923.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is September the 25th, nine, no, it's the 24th; it's the 24th, 2004.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Forty, at my home 4720 Guilford Forest Drive, G-U-I-L-F-O-R-D, Forest Drive, Atlanta [Georgia], 30331.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us what your occupation was?
Speaker 2: Is.
Speaker 1: Is.
Speaker 2: Currently, I still do what I do (laughter). I am an educator, I am a businessman, and I am an author; those are three things that, that I do currently.
Story_ID: 237679
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish kinds of question just to begin to warm the interview a bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I like food, period, and I don't know that I have a dish that's stands out above everything else.  I guess I would--I don't have a favorite food.  I just enjoy food generally, and it's hard for my wife [Joyce Irons] to cook a dish, and I don't like it or enjoy it.  I don't, in fact I guess that's unusual, but I'm not sure I have a favorite food.  That's the way I see it from, from my experience; I enjoy all foods, vegetables, meats, deserts; whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I enjoy them but I don't know I don't know any one of them stands out.
Speaker 1: When is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I would say the spring, because that's the most beautiful part, from my perspective, the blossoming of flowers and trees and grass and nature.  It's--that's what I enjoy.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I, again, I never thought about a favorite color, most of my wardrobe is grey and blue (laughter), so somewhere along in there I guess I have a favorite.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, my wife and I enjoy going to the Islands, Bahamas is our number one.  We like some of the others; we go to the others, but we like the Bahamas, Nassau [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase; well, I think I like the one of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], "I will find a way or make one."  I've always like that phrase; it's a motivating phenomenon, I will find a--I will find the way or make one.
Story_ID: 237680
Speaker 1: Could you please tell me about your mother?  What was her name, where was she born and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: And you gonna be disappointed that I don't know very much about my family, and that's a failing that we've got to remedy.  But my mother was Jerylean, J-E-R-Y-L-E-A-N Collins--and that's her maiden name--C-O-L-L-I-N-S  And I do not know where my mother was born, so but that's far as I know, I do not know where she born.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about her growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  I know that she had four siblings, and she had two sisters, wait a minute, she had two sisters and two brothers in her family.  I knew all those, and they're all in various parts of Oklahoma when I was a kid growing up.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: You will see the picture later, later.  I thought my mother was a beautiful lady; was not highly educated.  I don't think she finished high school; she was a domestic, and she lived a life of a domestic.  And I'm very, you know, I loved her very much; we all loved her very much and a very fine person in my perspective.  But she did not have an education in a sense of having finished high school or gone to college or anything of that nature.  She was a domestic all her life.
Story_ID: 237681
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your father?  What was his name, where was he born and where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Jeff Irons; you will see his picture, that's one of those that I have to print out.  His name was Jeff Irons, J-E-F-F, and I do not know where he was born.  He was a laborer; he was a laborer far back as I can remember.  I guess first six years of my life, we lived on a farm in Oklahoma, and we moved to a little town in Vinita [Oklahoma], and my dad then became a laborer.  He was a farmer until I was six years old, and then he became a laborer working in construction.
Speaker 1: What do you know about his background and his growing up?
Speaker 2: I do not know his background, except as my father; that's one of the weaknesses that I have in my family.
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Jerylean Collins Irons] or your father ever share stories with you growing up that you recall?
Speaker 2: No, not none that really resonated as being important or significant or something that I can remember. They were good parents at their level always trying to get us to do the right thing, and--but they did not have an education and, therefore, did not have the ability to steer our lives in productive ways, which maybe a person with more education would've.
Story_ID: 237682
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I can only trace my ancestors on my father's [Jeff Irons] side back to my grandmother and my grandfather.  My grandmother was full blood Cherokee, and the Cherokees moved--the Trail of Tears, you know that history.  They settled in Oklahoma, and my grandfather looked like he could've been straight from Nigeria: tall, dark man.  His name was Ned [Irons]; her name was Julie [Irons].  The story in our family was that Grandma Julie married my grandfather, and the Indians [Native Americans] on the reservation came and stole her and to her back to the reservation.  She then stole her way back and came back to my grandfather--
Speaker 1: Is this your--are these your grandparents on your mother [Jerylean Collins Irons] or father's side?
Speaker 2: It's grandfather--on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You'll see her picture and also my father, and I have a picture of my grandfather.  His name was Ned, and her name was Julie; that's far as I can go back on my father's side.
Story_ID: 237683
Speaker 1: On my mother's [Jerylean Collins Irons] side--I did not know this as a child, but at one time we assembled five generations on my mother's side.  And what I recalled after I grew up and studied some history, that my mother is a fair-complexioned person; my dad [Jeff Irons] was about my complexion or darker.  My mother's mother [Nan Collins] was fairer than she was and her mother was fairer than she was--well, they were house slaves.  It was clear to me after I studied history that they were house slaves on my mother's side, and I would guess my dad came from the field slaves, I would guess.  I am going to, I going to engage one of these companies that trace my lineage back to Africa--I'm gonna do that; I'm gonna do that this year, before this year is out.  Because I've been listening to the commercials where they do that and that's one of the things that I plan to do that I haven't done.
Story_ID: 237684
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, it's so many are you, are you asking for any particular issue or area or just general?
Speaker 1: It could be general, perhaps even the first thing that comes to mind when you think about, oh, when I was this age, this is something that I was doing or this is something that happened.  And this is just to capture your early years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My early years was in a small town in Oklahoma called Vinita [Oklahoma]--that's where we moved from the farm, V-I-N-I-T-A, Oklahoma.  Small town of six thousand people, five hundred of which were black, our high school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma] was K [kindergarten] through [grade] twelve, with thirteen teachers.  And we had to walk in my early stage of going to that school about two miles to get to school, and we passed white schools en route.  And you know that was common in the South, but that's what we did as kids.  And we didn't have expensive toys or anything like that to amuse us, and we played games like leap frog.  You probably never heard of that, it's a sport where one person bends over and touches his toes and the other guy gets back maybe twenty-five yards and run as fast as he can, and he jumps from a particular line and then leaps over that person, and that's called leap frog.  So that's one of the sports that we did. In my high school, we were so small that our basketball team was comprised of six players.  We never had more than six players; you know it takes five and if you know anything about basketball, it takes five on the floor at one time.  And if one fouls out, then we put in the substitute; there were times when we--two people would foul out, and we had to end the game with four people on court, and win.  We often did that; we had a very, very smart coach, and he developed a system that--a strategy that we would run the score up as fast as we could in the early part of the game on the thesis that if two people fouled out, we could still win.  And we did that and never had more than six players.
Speaker 1: Could you please share some other memory; memories with that can you describe what your family life was like maybe holidays, special events or daily life?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we were very poor, and this little town the upper-class in the black community were the thirteen teachers.  The rest of--we had one doctor, no lawyers, black--and these were the days in segregation, and we were all poor laboring people.  And we did the things that poor people do; we didn't have lavish parties or anything like that.  Holidays were simple; we had you know Thanksgiving and Christmas where we didn't have a lot of toys and stuff like that, that the affluent people had.  So we were--we lived a simple life, very simple life, and--but everybody was on that same level in this little town, all the black people except the thirteen teachers, I mean, as I say we had one doctor.
Story_ID: 237685
Speaker 1: Would you please give your siblings names in birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sibling is Viola [Irons] Prewitt; she's still living; she's eighty-four, and she lives in a home for senior citizens about three minutes from here.  So we kind of help take care of her.  I mean, she's independent, but we make sure that we're there for her.  My next sibling was Le--did I give you her name?  Viola; Viola was her name, or is her name.  And my next oldest sibling was Leota [Irons], L-E-O-T-A, and, and I'm the third sibling Ed, Ed Irons [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons], and my youngest was my brother Jeff [Irons, Jr.].
Story_ID: 237686
Speaker 1: What street did you live on after you all moved (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Vinita [Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We lived on a street called 2nd Street, in Vinita.  Vinita is--was a unique little, little town, little country town, and most black people lived on 2nd Street, either on the north end of the town or on the south end of the town.  Now the north end of the town was separated by railroad tracks; I lived across the railroad tracks, so that that was the way this little town was structured.  And we walked down Second Street going to our school every day, Attucks high school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma].  Attucks high school as you know was named after Crispus Attucks, the first American that was killed in the Revolutionary War in 1776.  And so that was the name of our school, so we lived the life of poor people.
Speaker 1: Can you describe what 2nd Street was like?  Your neighbors or your community?
Speaker 2: Well, that in that little town, it might've been unique; poor white people lived on 2nd Street like poor black people.  And we interacted like neighbors.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We're talking about maybe what the 1930s?
Speaker 2: Yeah '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: And you were an integrated neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right--I mean poor, poor; all of us poor.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Poor whites played with poor blacks, and so that was the way our little town--and if you went there today, the interesting thing--and my wife [Joyce Irons] who's from Alabama, but she lived twenty-seven years in--my current wife--in New York.  When she first went down there, I think it was my forty-fifth or something anniversary from my high school, and quite a number of the people there, black people, were married to white girls in this little town. And that's current right today.
Story_ID: 237687
Speaker 1: How were race relations?  There was never any tension, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's an interesting phenomenon.  Vinita [Oklahoma] was segregated like all southern cities; blacks lived in one area, and whites lived in another area.  But would--it was fairly common for blacks to accept the status quo that--that's all we knew.  Blacks weren't supposed to go in the front door of the restaurants or in the one hotel that we had, that was the way it was, and I guess it was just accepted.  But as far back as I can remember, I wanted to get out of that lifestyle, and I didn't like it.  And every chance I got, and I'll share with you along the way, some of the things I did along the way as one person can do to try to change that kind of lifestyle.  Black people were complacent; they didn't think they could do anything about it, they accepted it, but it was classical segregation, and both sides accepted it as a way of life.  But there was no--we called the mayor by his first name, and obviously he was white.  He ran a hardware store; so you want to talk to the mayor, you go buy a pound of nails or whatever you need from the hardware store and talk to the mayor.  Craig Goodpaster, I remember him just as clear as if we were sitting where you are; it was that kind of society.  I mean, the mayor wasn't anybody that we feared or looked up to; he was Craig Goodpaster, that was his name, and that's what we called him.  And so, and that was the way it was, but we still had to go in the back doors of restaurants if we went into them.  And accepted the segregation mores of the South; that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can't, at your generation, you can't relate to that.
Speaker 1: Or to understand the city was essentially segregated.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But your neighborhood was essentially integrated.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and I mean, you know, but let me be realistic.  As I remember, reflecting, after the kids had gone to high school, then we began to see them pull away.  We saw that, but as kids, we played together.
Story_ID: 237688
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Sights, smells and sounds; well, sights: we were in a small town [Vinita, Oklahoma].  There were no rich black people in that town.  We had one family that was affluent and their names-well, the patriarch was a doctor.  He was a doctor, and he built what was to be a small hospital.  He was a very good doctor, and he treated people all over the city, and built a small hospital and died before he could actually make it operational.  And that became the social center for the black people that--particularly the schoolchildren, 'cause it was on 2nd Street.  And all the social functions of the school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma] were held on the third floor of that building, which was scheduled to be a hospital.  But they made the third floor into a sort of a place where we could dance, and have parties and do things like that.  And until we got a gymnasium in our high school--and we didn't have gymnasium in my early years at the school--all our sports had to be played or outside on clay, on the ground.  That's the way we started our sports, and we didn't--the school didn't have any room to have parties, so we had them in that particular family's third floor; that was the social center of the town.  And it's still there and we went back this past summer, and we took pictures of it.  I guess it's--well I finished there in 1941, so you can say it's about almost sixty-five years old.  And that's where we had our social functions as kids at the high school.
Story_ID: 237689
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, our school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma] wasn't divided into elementary and middle and high school.  It was one school, K [kindergarten] through twelve, so I went all twelve years to Attucks high school, and so that's where I went.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in that experience that influenced you?  If so what, what were their names?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, we had, now we didn't have--we were so small we didn't have a football team, we didn't have a band, and when we played basketball, we had three cheerleaders (laughter).  When we got a gym you know, we thought the world had turned on its axis, 'cause we didn't have a gym, and we were still competing across the state.  We had to practice on the clay court outside during the week, and then our competitive games were held at the Catholic high school gym.  The Catholic school allowed us to use their gym for our competitive games, and you'd be surprised that we were good enough to win the state championship, and we didn't have six players.  And teachers that--we had very good basic teachers: math, science and English; those three were very strong, and even as I moved on up through college and all the way, I was strong in all those disciplines.  A lady named Mrs. Arms, well she was Miss, Miss Armstrong [ph.], she taught English and Latin.  I took two years of Latin in high school.  And so I was very good in English when I went to college, 'cause she was a good English teacher and made us learn that Latin, made us learn all the rules of English, so we were good at English.  The math teacher was our principal, Professor Lloyd Blyde.  He was our principal, and he taught the math.  He was excellent.  And I'll tell you a little story about him and me--I worked for him--he saw something in me and he said, "That boy's going places."  And I remember that, and, "Just look how he walks," (laughter).  He'd say that in front of the other kids.  And I never quite knew how to take that and he hired me to do his typing, that's how I learned to type.  But he always said, "That boy's going places," and so that sort of stuck with me, and he was a good math teacher.  He was a good disciplinarian, and he saw something in me--not just me, but since it was me, that's what I remember.  And his judgments of what my future was going to be like stayed with me.  I remember Blyde said that boy's going someplace, and so, and I never lost that.
Story_ID: 237690
Speaker 1: The science teacher [at Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma]--he was twenty-one years old--Louis Ryan.  He was one of the siblings of this family, the father of which was the doctor that built this hospital that never became a hospital, became the social center.  That was the rich family in the black community, and all the social functions took place at their house; it was a big house.  But they had nine siblings, and the mother never worked, because the father--and he died at thirty-nine years old--the father had made enough money to buy real estate that became the source of their income; his mother never had to work.  All the children had the opportunity to go to college.  Now, two of them didn't go, but they had the opportunity if they had wanted to.  But seven of the nine did.  One became a doctor.  The oldest, who was the coach and science teacher that I talked about, he was twenty-one years old, he'd gone to Langston University [Colored Agricultural and Normal University, Langston, Oklahoma] and made the highest record that ever been--academic record that ever been made at Langston at that time, Langston University.  That was our black university [HBCU] in Oklahoma.  And he was going to be a doctor, but then as soon as he finished, his dad died.  He then had to become the man of the house, and he did not go on to become a doctor, but the youngest son did, Herbert [Ryan].  And so he became the science teacher and the coach.  He was an excellent coach, and a very good science teacher, so my life was shaped by three good teachers, the principal [Lloyd Blyde] who was math professor, Miss Armstrong, Miss Armstad [ph.], who was the English teacher and Louis Ryan.  He wasn't very much older than we were when we were in high school; we called him Louis, that's what his name was.  And--but he was the coach.  He was a good coach; he wasn't big enough to play varsity ball in college, but he played intramural and had a big brain.  And he'd sit down and work out plays and for our basketball team, and we'd make a basket in ten seconds.  When the game started, we'd have a basket in ten seconds that was his strategy: just blow their minds.  And just keep blowing them and so we had the kind of plays that was designed to get us out in front early in the game for fear that we wouldn't have but four players on the court when the game ended, and we wanted to win, and we often did that.  So those were my--but we, we had, it was a lot of fun in high school.
Speaker 2: So you were playing basketball and football (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was the captain of the basketball team, and I was only 5'9"; we didn't have but one six foot tall guy.
Speaker 2: Okay, and still made it to the championship?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 237691
Speaker 1: Let me tell you some of the dynamics of that little school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma].  When I finished, there were five seniors, five in my senior class, and we didn't have enough students in the class to give the senior class play.  Usually in our school, the seniors gave a play you know every year when at graduation time as part of you know the ceremony that was going on.  And so they didn't have enough girls to staff the play, and the teacher looked at me and said, "You have to be the girl."  I was a basketball player, she said, "You got the prettiest legs on the court, so you gone be the girl."  And so I had the play the part of a girl, and the guy that I that was supposed to hug and kiss me was the guy that looked like the--he was the son of the principal [Lloyd Blyde].  He had great big lips and he was--he was an interesting guy, looked like Bubba.  You know that character, Bubba?  He looked like Bubba, so when we were practicing the play, when he got to the place when he was supposed to kiss the girl, you know he never did kiss me, 'cause we, obviously, we were men.  And this was something we just had to do but here was something that we didn't enjoy doing, but the night of the play, he was supposed to kiss me.  Well, by the time he at that point, I turned, and he kissed the back of my head.  I turned my head all the way around; the crowd just went wild.  Because you know they (laughter) this his boy--they knew me, and so they knew that was me.  And so he kissed the back of my head, but that was a funny thing, and everybody-well, we just enjoyed it.  The boys took home economics and learned to cook just like the girls, because that's what we did (laughter); that's what we did.  We had fun learning to cook a cake with the girls.  And that was the fun part for the boys.  Now, they didn't care about making a cake, but they enjoyed--they knew the girls were gonna take home economics, so they wanted to learn to bake a cake.
Story_ID: 237692
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What kind of student were you?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was the valedictorian, and you will see, I have a piece here--I don't know what I did with it.  Oh, I'm sorry.  I have a piece here that gives a sort of trend of, when you say what kind of student I was, it shows what kind of student I was all the way through.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Education, from high school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma] on.  I was the valedictorian of the class; president of the senior class; captain of the basketball team.  And when I got into the [U.S. military] service, the guys would go around in a circle and ask, "Well, what did you do back home?"   And I was more obtuse.  And all--they had all say what they did and got around to me and I told them, I said, you know, "I was captain of the basketball team; I was valedictorian; I was president of the senior class."  They said, "Was anybody else in that class besides you?" (Laughter) And so that was the kind of a joke, but it was the truth.  But we didn't have but five people in the class, and so you know didn't have much to pick from but, I was the valedictorian, and I always prided myself on trying to be the best at whatever I did.  If it was learning math or science or playing basketball or whatever it was, I wanted to be the best.  Boxing, wrestling, leap frog, marbles, whatever it was, I wanted to beat whoever my opponent was.  That was just my philosophy.  And I knew that I was good in whatever I did, and I say that advisedly but that's the way it worked out.
Story_ID: 237693
Speaker 1: What were your dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: I didn't know specifically what I wanted to do, 'cause I didn't have any role models--my parents [Jerylean Collins Irons and Jeff Irons] didn't know how to advise me, or us.  See in a poor community, in those days--and we're talking about sixty-five, seventy years ago--if you didn't have the money, the girls got married, and the boys got a job.  I wanted to break out of the life that I saw in that little town [Vinita, Oklahoma] for black people.  And I don't know where it came from, except it came from in here. And I didn't like going in the back of restaurants; I just didn't like that.  I didn't like being treated like I was unimportant as a person; I didn't like all of that.  And that's the way you were treated as a black person back in those days, and so I wanted to get out of that life.  Now, what I wanted to do wasn't clear to me at the time, but it had to be something better out there.  And so my aspirations came from that lifestyle that I did not like, and the only person that I knew that had achieved anything were our teachers.  That's all.  You didn't have anybody to achieve anything of any significance, and so those were our role models.
Story_ID: 237694
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes, we always attended church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: It was a little Methodist church, C.M.E. Church, what was that called Colored Methodist Episcopal church [Christian Methodist Episcopal church] or something like that, C.M.E.  That's what we were.  It was across the track.  We walked to our church and far back as I can remember we went to church.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like there in the church, was it a small or large church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the church?  Oh yes.  It was a small church, small church--I don't remember fifty people being in the church.  I don't remember fifty people being in the church.  And, you know, contrast that my membership at (unclear).  At one time we had as many as nine, ten thousand people.  But I don't remember fifty people, maybe twenty-five or so as being in the church.  And the minister--he would come one week and miss the next week, and he several churches he would pastor.  He would come to our church one week and go to another small church another week, that's kind of the way we did it.
Story_ID: 237695
Speaker 1: --Who would you say most influenced you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess it's my principal [Lloyd Blyde].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's the guy that kept saying, "That boy's going someplace," 'cause my dad [Jeff Irons] nor my mother [Jerylean Collins Irons] had enough education to point us in the right direction.  Nor did they have the money to send us, even if they wanted us to go to college.  So my role models were my teachers, they were my teachers.  Now, I loved my parents; they were good parents, but they didn't have the background or the economic strength to send any of us to college.
Speaker 1: So you graduated from high school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma] and you mentioned earlier being in the [U.S.] military, was that the first part of your transition?  Did you go directly from high school into the military (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.  Well, yes that was the way it worked.  Nineteen forty-one [1941], I finished high school, and the way I found out about the war--the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], and you know that from history.  They bombed Pearl Harbor, and President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt declared war, and the way I learned about the war [World War II, WWII], we were driving from Tulsa [Oklahoma], which was the number two city in Oklahoma.  Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] being the first largest, about seventy miles from Vinita [Oklahoma].  We were--my family moved to Tulsa from Vinita.  And so we were going back to visit some of our friends around in Vinita, and in those days on [U.S.] Route 66 had a lot of small towns along the way, maybe had one light.  And we stopped at one of those lights, and a hillbilly-looking guy walked up to the car when the light was red, and he had a mouth full of tobacco, and he spit one on the ground, looked in the car.  And said, "Hey boy, you know what just happened?" I said "No, what just happened?"  He said, "Them Japs done bombed the hell out of Pearl Harbor."  I said, "Well, where in the hell is Pearl Harbor?"  He said "Damn if I know, but them Japs done bombed the hell out of it."  And then the light turned green, and he spit his tobacco and went on back, and I went on back, and we drove on to Vinita.  We didn't have air conditioning in those days so our windows were down; that's how he was able to come out and talk to us.  And that was how I learned about the war, and in those days, [Adolf] Hitler was the enemy, and he--the war--the word was that Hitler was going to dominate the world, that was the motivation to get people interested in fighting the war.  And so, the philosophy was that, "Well, we got racists right here in this country, but it appears that Hitler is the worst racist, so we go and fight him," and that's what we did.  He had killed six million Jews, and he could come over here to kill all the black people and the Jews, too.  So we said, "We'll go," and so we went with a fatalistic attitude that we'd probably wouldn't come back; we'd be killed.  But we wanted to go; we wanted to fight Hitler.
Speaker 1: Was your going into the military an option or had you been drafted (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we were drafted.  We were drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days, we were drafted.  Now, there might've been a few guys who volunteered, but most of us were drafted.  And they were drafting you right out of college.  If you were in college, you were drafted right out of college.  And you didn't have a choice, you had to go, and if you had paid your tuition and--you just lost it.  I didn't have--I had saved a little money, not much, but I saved a little money with the idea I was going to go to college.  I'd cut yards, and shined shoes, and mopped restaurants and did whatever I could to make money.  It wasn't very much, but I was saving to go to college.
Speaker 1: What branch of the military were you in?
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Navy, you'll see my picture.
Story_ID: 237696
Speaker 1: And what was it like to enter the [U.S.] Navy going to fight World War II [WWII] as an African American man (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was terrible.  I'll tell you my experience.  When you got up to the draft table, they'd say, "What service you want to go to?"  And that meant if you want to go to the [U.S.] Army, Navy, [U.S.] Air Force, the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  And I--all I knew was Army and so I said, "Army," well they stamped Navy on my (laughter)--Navy on my paper, and then I had to move on.  And so I went in the Navy and went to boot camp in Chicago [Illinois] and that's where we--[Naval Station] Great Lakes [Lake County, Illinois], I don't know if you ever heard of Great Lakes.  But that was a training ground for Navy, and they gave you everybody, I guess it was a procedure, everybody had an opportunity to take the officer's candidate school [Officer Candidate School, OCS] test.  And so we all took it.  I took it, and it was duck soup, and you know when you know that you know, don't you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I blew that test away, and I said, "God, I'm gone be an officer," I said that to myself (laughter).  When they came around to tell us what our next move was gonna be, I said, "Well, what about my test?  What--I'd like to see what I made."  He said, "Well, we lost your test," I said, "Well, I'll take it over," he said, "No, you can't take it over, we're gonna send you to Williamsburg [Virginia]."  Well, Williamsburg was a drydock where they had a ship in a drydock, and they taught you how to load ships.  And if you know how a cargo ship is designed, it has the hole where you put all the material or whatever you gone ship down in a hole.  And you do that with what is called a boom, a big long steel arm that swivels from the dock to the ship.  And it has a pallet on the end of it, and if somebody on the dock would fill that pallet up with whatever you going to put in the ship, and then that big boom would be lifted up swing it over to the ship, drop it in the hole, and somebody would pick it up and stack it where it should go, and that's what--and you call those stevedores.  So they made me a stevedore, I learned to operate that boom to move the goods from the [U.S.] 7th Fleet, Navy fleet.  We had to ship all of the supplies, goods and supplies, to supply the Navy fleet from Boston [Massachusetts] naval pier [Charlestown Navy Yard; Boston Naval Shipyard, Boston, Massachusetts].  So that's that was the beginning of my naval career.  Black people couldn't be an officer in the Navy, in those days.
Story_ID: 237697
Speaker 1: --And how long did you do that [work as a stevedore]?
Speaker 2: Well, I did that the full, my full [U.S.] Navy career, but fate intervened; I got rheumatic fever in Boston [Massachusetts] when I was getting ready to be shipped to the South Pacific [for U.S. military service in World War II].  My group was going to the South Pacific, and I got rheumatic fever, and they put me in the hospital, and I stayed in the hospital four months.  And I came out with a double heart murmur, and they told me I was permanently and totally disabled, would never be able to do any strenuous work or play.  Which I was no more good as a soldier, so they discharged me, and that's--but my group went over to the South Pacific when the Japanese were shooting everything moving, and most of them got killed.  So, fate saved me, and I got discharged, got a medical discharge instead of going to the South Pacific.  Had I gone, I may not have been sitting here today, 'cause most of them didn't come back.
Speaker 1: So after your discharge, what was next?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's an interesting story.  I was discharged; I'd been in the hospital--in those days, you had rheumatic fever, the treatment was that you just lie still in bed.  That was the treatment for rheumatic fever.  Then they gave you aspirins or something called salicylate something pills.  And you take those and lie in bed, don't move around, and I did that for four months, side my back, so to speak.  And then they discharged me into the veteran's hospital [Veterans Administration Hospital, Muskogee, Okla.; Jack C. Montgomery VA Medical Center] at Muskogee, Oklahoma, which is where I was from.  And I had five months of rehabilitation in the hospital.  Well, as fate would have it, it was a segregated hospital, as was operational in the South.  White G.I.s stayed on one side; black G.I.s on the another side.  And the black G.I.s had to come in the back door of the dining room, for example, that was the policy.  It was 1945, and I decided I wasn't gonna go in any back door, and I knew most of my colleagues had been shot and killed.  If I'd gone, I might've been killed or maimed, and a lot of those G.I.s that were there in the hospital, black and white, with no legs, no arms, all shot up, and they wanted us to come in the back door.  I said, "I will not do it," and this was 1945, and that was before the civil rights, twenty years before the Civil Rights Movement.  I said, "I'm not gonna do it," I got six guys, other guys together, and I said, "We're gonna go in, and we're going in the front door; we're gonna sit in at these tables and--until they serve us."  And so we did, and I'm the leader, I said, "Okay," I pointed to the table, each of us take a different table; we aren't gonna all sit at the same table.  And that's the way it was anyway, you come in, and you just sit at a table, and somebody else was there, that's all right.  And so white boys were at the other table, and we sat with the white boys and--because when bullets flying over there, they didn't care whether you're black or white.  And it's amazing, and when those white boys saw that they're no different than blacks when you're under fire, totally changed their outlook.
Story_ID: 237698
Speaker 1: You and your six friends?
Speaker 2: My six friends--seven of us.  So, we each sat at a different table, and the other soldiers were white, and they came to me.  I guess they saw I was kind of directing traffic, and the waitress came to me, and she was shaking like a leaf.  She said, "We can't serve you here," I said, "well, why can't you serve us here?"  "Well, the state law requires we separate whites from blacks."  I said, "Did you separate us when the bullets were flying," you know, "in the war?"  She said, "No, but that's what we have to do."  And I said, "This is state law," I said, "This is federal government property; the State of Oklahoma has absolutely no authority to intervene in what's going on in this government establishment.  And we're gonna sit here until you serve us," and she said, and she said, "well, our administrator,"--I shall never forget his name--P. T. Lundquist [ph.] was the administrator of the veteran's hospital [at Veterans Administration Hospital, Muskogee, Okla.; Jack C. Montgomery VA Medical Center] in Muskogee, Oklahoma which is where we were.  She said, "Well, he's--." I said, "Where is the administrator?"  "He's out of the city," I said, "Well, I'll just sit here."  And so, she was just shaking, and she walked away, and then pretty soon she came back, she said, "Oh, they have found him.  They thought he was out of the city, but he's coming down," and he did come down and a cigarette in his hand.  And he said, I think he called us "boys"--that was common in those days.  "Boys, we know how you feel, and we'd like to do something, but we are just abiding by state regulations."  And I said, I think I called him Mr. Lundquist, "Mr. Lundquist, the state has nothing to do with this; this is federal property, and we're gonna sit here until you serve us."  He said, "Would you consider coming to my office, and we will find a way to get this solved?"  I said, "If your plan is to find a way to change this, we'd be willing to come to your office.  If it's just to get us out of this dining room, we're not moving."  He said, "Well, I can't do it by myself, but I can start the process, and if you'll be willing to come sit in my office and talk to me, we can work this out."
Story_ID: 237699
Speaker 1: So we all got up, all seven of us and followed him [P.T. Lundquist (ph.)], and then the next two hours we talked about what we felt about the situation.  And here we were going over to defend this country to be killed--many of us are being killed, and we're coming back here having to go in the back door.  We aren't going to do that anymore.  And he said, "Well, I understand that, but we have to go through the channels to change it."  I said, "Well, when can you get it done?"  He said, "I can't say unequivocally, but I'll tell you what we're gone do until we get it done.  Anything you want from this canteen"--I think that's what we called it, the canteen, and they served food, you know, like a restaurant, and then they had little snacks and things you could buy, candy and all this stuff.  And he said, "Anything you want from this canteen, all you got to do is pick up the phone and call; we bring it to you."  Well that was unacceptable, but as an interim I said, "Well, as long as I know that the change fundamentally is in process, we'll accept it.  It's unacceptable for the long-term."   He said, "Well, we'll assure you we gonna get this changed," and then the seven of us sat down and wrote a seven page letter to General George Gray who was the administrator of the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs].  He had been a general in World War II [WWII], and so he was now administrating the Veterans Administration.  And we wrote him this seven page letter telling him what we were going through, and what we felt that what shouldn't have to go through, and we want something done about it.  And within two weeks, there was a two-star general from Washington [D.C.] down there investigating this situation, which we asked for.  Meanwhile, they shipped me to the veterans hospital [Edward Hines, Jr. VA Hospital] in Hines, Illinois; they said I was a troublemaker and that I was a fomenting a possibility of riot.  The townspeople were gonna come up here and cause riots, and we're gonna ship you to Hines, Illinois veterans hospital, and they did.  But they did change the procedure, I've forgotten what the timeframe was, but they changed it so blacks no longer had to come in the back door as a result of what we did.  So we were sitting in, in 1945, so that's the end of that particular scenario.
Story_ID: 237700
Speaker 1: The next part of it was my preparation to go to college, but in World War II [WWII], they had a very expansive G.I. Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944].  If you were a veteran, they take care of your education, totally: pay your tuition, buy you books and all that sort of stuff.  So, at this hospital [Edward Hines, Jr. VA Hospital, Hines, Illinois], they had a counseling center where they give you aptitude tests, so they had me come and take an aptitude test.  When they got the results, they said, "Well, you really did well with your hands; you're ambidextrous, so we think you'll make a great mechanic."  And I said, "You're absolutely right; I would make a great mechanic, but that's not what I'm gonna be."  They had enrolled me in Kansas State College [of Agriculture and Applied Science; Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas], without my knowledge or permission, to send me to the school to become a mechanic.  And I said, "I'm not going to do that," and "I'm not going to Kansas State; I'm not going to be a mechanic," and I walked out.  And this is 1945, you're not supposed to say no to a white man in those days and particularly in the tone of voice that I used, and I did--I walked out.  And so the next stage of my life I said, "Well, I'm going to Wilberforce [Ohio]."  Well, I had read enough about history to know about Crispus Attucks, and you know it was war [Civil War] when we broke away from the union.  And I learned about Harriet Tubman and the Underground Railroad, and I want to be a part of that.  So Wilberforce in Ohio was one of the Underground Railroad's junctions, and that's where Wilberforce [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]  was created, so I'm going to Wilberforce.
Story_ID: 237701
Speaker 1: So I got on the train.  In those days, we had to ride in a special car.  We couldn't ride with white people; they had a car for black people.  And so I got on the train and went to Xenia, Ohio, which is a junction where you get off the train that's four miles from Wilberforce [Ohio].  Wilberforce is just a country stop, doesn't even have a light.  So I got off the train then caught a bus and went to the campus [of College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], and they were already registering.  And it was beautiful weather, so they were registering outdoors in front of the administration building.  And the administration building was a combination administration and girl's dormitory on the upper floors.  So that's where they were administering in the school--in the registration.  So I got in the line, and when I got up to the desk where they were registering, and a man sitting there, turned out to be the dean of the school; Dean Warrick [ph.], I never shall forget.  He was sitting there, and he reached for my papers, or reached his hand out and thought I was gonna put something in his hand.  He said, "Do you have your admission form admitted to the school?" I said, "No, I haven't been admitted; I'm a G.I. and you know the government's gonna pay for my way."  "Do you have any money?"  "No, I don't have any money."  "Do you have your G.I. [Bill; Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] eligibility?"  "No, I don't have my G.I. eligibility; I didn't get that."  And so he just sort of stopped whatever he was doing and reared back and looked, and he was sitting down and I was standing up because that's--the line was standing.  He just sort of reared back and looked at me like he saying, "This guy got to be out of his mind--he come up here; he doesn't have his eligibility certificate; he doesn't have an admission form where he's been admitted to the school; doesn't have any money.  And he's coming up here to go to school?"  He asked me where I was from, I told him I'm from Vinita [Oklahoma].  And he looked at me (unclear).  But anyway he said, "Young man," and he just looked at me like I was out of my mind, and he said, "See that building over there?  That's Emery Hall I want you to go over there and tell that lady to give you a bed.  And then I want you to come back here and go in Charter Hall [sic. Shorter Hall] and tell that lady to give you a meal ticket, and we're gonna get these certificates for you, we're gonna get your eligibility for you, and we gone get you admitted."  And I hadn't sent in an application; I had not send in an application to the school, I just got on the train and went up there.  And so, and that's the way he handled it, now he got my eligibility, and he got my admission to school, and he got me a bed to sleep in, got me a meal ticket.  And so that's the way that played out.
Story_ID: 237702
Speaker 1: So you're entering Wilberforce [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: And what was the campus like?  What was going on at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days, it was just a beautiful, small school; beautiful, small school.  And that's what I remember, and I just felt privileged to be there.
Speaker 1: And what was your major?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have a major at the time, and I wasn't sure I what I was going to be.  I--because the first two years are general education anyway, when you take all, you know, basic courses, and so I had decided I wasn't going to be--there were two professions I wasn't going to be.  We had one doctor in our little town of Vinita [Oklahoma], and he was on call twenty-four hours a day.  If you had a headache, and you called him and it was midnight, he'd show up at your door.  I said, "I do not want to be a doctor, because that's no life," and then I learned enough about the legal profession to know that a lawyer has to be able to take either side of the case.  Either side--you got to be able to argue either way, and I say, "Suppose a guy is guilty, and you know he's guilty, and you have to take the side to defend him--I don't want to do that."  And so, I decided I didn't want to be a doctor, didn't want to be a lawyer, because of the experience that I had in Vinita.  So I decided I wanted to be an engineer, an architectural engineer, 'cause I felt that would be a productive profession.  You know, design buildings and build buildings--that sounds like something I'd like to do.  So I took my first two years of pre-engineering at Wilberforce, and then I was gonna transfer to a school that had an engineering school.  And that would've been Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio]; I don't know if you've heard of Antioch, it's a small liberal arts college in Ohio, not too far from Wilberforce.  But anyway, it was one of the most liberal schools in the country, and I--they had a program where you go to school one semester or one quarter and work one quarter.  That's what I wanted, 'cause then I would have an opportunity to make contacts for a job.  So I applied after my junior year, and they rejected me, and I had a 3.7 cumulative average, so they couldn't reject me on academic qualifications.  So, they said the reason that they rejected me was that they didn't want to have a person who had double heart murmur or--and was working twelve months a year, because they would have school once a year.  Because you're off one semester or one quarter and you were in school one quarter, so it was twelve-month program.  They said it was too rigorous for my heart, and that's why they wouldn't admit me.  Well, of course I knew what--we knew what the real reason was.  They--the engineering industry would not have accepted me as an intern in those days.  So they couldn't make 'em take me, and so rather than go through that, they just wouldn't admit me.  Now, if you were in music, sociology, education, any of those courses, history, they'd admit you as a black.  But in engineering, they rejected me.  So there I was--had to make a decision as to what I would do.  So I changed my major to business, and that's what I do today.  And I got a bachelor's [degree] in business administration.  Four year curriculum--I did it in three, and I finished cum laude.
Story_ID: 237703
Speaker 1: What types of activity were you participating in, in  college [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], and were you still sustaining your sense of activism against the conditions?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, when you're in HBCU [historically black college and university], there are no barriers.  You don't have any barriers: you're in a cocoon of support.  Everybody kind of interacts with each other and you don't have the tension of racism.  If I had gone to Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] and run into some racist students or faculty members as I did at the University of Minnesota [School of Business; Curtis L. Carlson School of Management, Minneapolis, Minnesota], or as I did at Harvard [Business School, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts], but that was a--at HBCU you, as you know, there's a great support system, so I was into everything.  I couldn't play sports, 'cause of you know my doctors had told me I'd be permanently and totally disabled.  And the coach tapped me on the shoulder one day and say, "Boy, why aren't you out here on the football field?"  And I said, "Well, I have a double heart murmur, and my doctors won't let me do that," so I didn't play varsity sports, but I did play intramural.  Because I was an athlete, I was an athlete, and I could do it all: I could box, I could run, I could play basketball.  And we didn't have a football team in Vinita [Oklahoma], but I could learn it; I was tough, and I could've learned it.  But the doctors told me I'd be permanently and totally disabled, so I couldn't do it.  But I did get involved in everything.  I ran for the mayor of the school and came in second, but I would've won, but the guy who won--you know how those things work, this guy, back in those days, was a drug dealer.  And he had a lot of money, and he did some of under the table stuff and got some votes that allowed him to win, but it was a good experience, and I didn't regret it.
Speaker 1: Were there any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was in the fraternity; and I did all those things college kids do.
Speaker 1: What fraternity is that?
Speaker 2: I'm Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].
Story_ID: 237704
Speaker 1: And were there any professors at Wilberforce [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]  that you recall that were very impactful?  You mentioned when you were a--upon arrival that you met a gentlemen who essentially opened the doors for the opportunity for you to be there. What was his name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  Dean Warrick [ph.].  Dean Warrick.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dean Warrick.  Were there any other professors?
Speaker 2: Well, Dean Warrick was just the person that got me admitted; he didn't have any impact on my life.  But I'm--I really didn't have any outstanding professors that--like I had in high school [Attucks School, Vinita, Oklahoma].  Most of 'em were pretty ordinary.  I had some interesting ones, but not outstanding.  I had a professor who was professor of language, and he was an eccentric-type guy.  He always wore a suit with his creases as sharp as a razor.  But his trousers that came down about two inches above his ankle, and he carried his books in a burlap bag on his back.  And he'd come in the class and dump his books on the desk, and he'd call you by your name, but he'd do it in Spanish, 'cause that's what I took, Spanish.  "Senor Irons," and he'd make me--asked me a question in Spanish.  And I was supposed to respond in Spanish.  I was pretty good; I don't remember anything but "Habla espanol senor," or, "senorita?" that's all I remember.  But I know that I was pretty good at it while I was in (laughter) the class.  But, you know, that was an interesting professor; he was very eccentric.  One other professor was the only professor on our campus, or one of the few people in America, that had interviewed [Adolf] Hitler.  He was a historian--is that what he taught?  I believe it was history he taught.
Speaker 1: An African American professor?
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Interviewed Hitler?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That interviewed Hitler, and he was an eccentric guy; he wore gloves and spats, walked with a cane and, you know, he just sort of carried himself like he was the royalties.  And that's way he behaved, I mean, that's all I know about him, and he, you know, we--"I interviewed Hitler," and you know that's what he was famous for on our campus.  But I really didn't have anybody that was really outstanding, as far as I was concerned, and made a major impact on me like the three teachers that I told you did in high school.
Story_ID: 237705
Speaker 1: I always tried to do my best at whatever I was doing, and I finished four hundredths of a degree below magna cum laude, and I got three Cs on my transcript [at College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  And all from--well, two of them were incompetent teachers, and one was because when I got there as a freshman, when we had English and the word got out that I knew English, and somebody got the test and brought it to me, I worked it out.  And those guys got A's, and the teacher found out I worked it out and gave me a C (laughter).  That's one of the Cs I got (laughter); that's one of the Cs I got.  Another guy was an alcoholic economics professor.  I won't go into details, but that's what he was, and another lady was a sociology major teaching math, and she didn't know anything about math.  And I didn't have enough sense to know that if you could outwork the teacher, don't let it be known.  And she'd put a problem on the board, I'd work it out while she's still writing it up there, and--but she gave me a C.  And I would blurt out and tell her what the answer was, I didn't know enough that I shouldn't do that, and I got a C.  But anyway, when I got that C from my economics professor, another pretty--student, she was a mature lady, and her son was also a student there.  They came to college together as freshmen, she and her son; she was brilliant lady.  She got a C like I did, and she was an A student, as I was, and she was gonna raise hell to try to get her C changed, I said, "You're wasting your time," I said, "I'm not gonna spend my next year trying to get the grade changed, that's not gonna change my life."  And so that's the approach I took, but she did raise a lot of sand, but she didn't get the grade changed.  And I just took the position that you're gonna run into people like that in life, and you gonna have to find a way to make it in spite of them.  I said, "I'm not gonna let this stop me being whatever I'm gonna be in life, I'm gonna take this C and step on it and go onto the next level."  And that's my philosophy and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 237706
Speaker 1: So you graduated from college [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  What did you go on to do?
Speaker 2: I got a degree in business administration, and my aspiration was to be a businessman, and I had saved some money, because in those days, the government paid everything, and then I was a hundred percent disabled or at least that's the designation I had.  So, I got a stipend for a person being--you know, I had a medical discharge, so I was able to save money.  I also worked on the campus, became a light type operator.  And worked my way through school, and I was able to save.  All the money that the government was paying me, I sent to my mother [Jerylean Collins Irons].  She saved it for me, so I wanted to save some money and then go into business when I finished, and that was my aspiration.  And I had done a business plan on the business where you take your clothes and get 'em washed and dried--that was just beginning, that industry was just beginning.  I wanted to get in that business, and I had done the research, I knew the economics and finance of it, but I also knew that it was very important to get the right site, because you have to make it convenient.  That's a convenience service, and I was trying to find the site, it was taking me too long, and I was, you know, depleting my savings by, you know, not having a job.  So, I took a job as business manager of a hospital [Moton Memorial Hospital; Morton Comprehensive Health Services, Tulsa, Oklahoma].  I accepted that job, and then I had to take my savings and buy a car.  And so (laughter) that was my business money, and that's kind of the way that played out.  Became business manager, at twenty-five years old, of a hospital.  At that time, you know, it was fairly significant, the money--I think the budget was two million dollars, but it was losing twenty to fifty thousand dollars a year.  And my job was to make it break even.  It was a non-profit hospital.
Story_ID: 237707
Speaker 1: We were discussing after you graduated from Wilberforce [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Oh, I had taken the job at the hospital, and they were incurring this deficit.  The interesting thing about that, in those days, $300 a month was a good salary, but they wanted to pay me $250 a month, and I wouldn't take it.  And of course, they said, "Well gosh, if we have to pay you another $600 a year, or a month, then we're gonna add $3600 to the deficit.  Well, as fate would have it, they had the administrator of Hillcrest Medical Center [Hillcrest Hospital, Tulsa, Oklahoma] on the board of this hospital.  It was called Morton Memorial Hospital [sic. Moton Memorial Hospital; Morton Health Care Center; Tulsa, Oklahoma].  A black--in the black community, a black hospital, and he said this to the other board members, he said, "Well now, the young man is asking for $600 more a month than we normally pay for this job.  And we're incurring a deficit of $30,000 or so.  If he saves us that $30,000 or any part of it, he's earned his pay.  If he doesn't, then we'll fire him and get somebody else," so they did agree to pay me $300 a month.  And as fate would have it, I came in and set in control, and the hospital broke even that next year, and that was the goal, to make it break even.
Story_ID: 237708
Speaker 1: I then decided that I ought to go and study hospital administration.  I had a B.S. in business administration [from College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  I understood accounting, and I stood organizational management, but I didn't know hospital administration per se.  So this administrator, Bryce Twitty--I remember as though it was yesterday--Bryce Twitty was the administrator of Hillcrest Medical Center [Hillcrest Hospital], Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The city that had the worst riot in this country; you might've read about it, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He was administrator of that medical center, which was number one medical center in Tulsa.  He interceded and recommended me to the University of Minnesota [School of Business; Curtis L. Carlson School of Management, Minneapolis, Minnesota] to be admitted to a master's program in hospital administration, and I was accepted.  And when I finished my year of residency, I had to do a year of--I mean, residency on the campus--I had to do a year of administrative residency.  That was the year in which I had to work with an administrator of a hospital for a year, and then write a thesis on some major problem, and that's what I did.  I did that under Bryce Twitty, this was the first black that had been able to serve in administrative residency in a major white institution in the South.  So, I finished that that year and I got statewide publicity.  The major dailies made a big story out of it.  I had gotten the award for the best management thesis, class of 1951, the University of Minnesota.  And I had served as administrator with my thesis at Hillcrest Medical Center, and so the governor of the State of Oklahoma [Johnston Murray] was looking for an administrator of that institution [Taft State Hospital for the Negro Insane, Taft, Oklahoma] that I told you about.  It was called, it was just called by the name of the little town that it was in, T-A-F-T, Taft [Oklahoma]--it had the institution in it.  And historically the governor had appointed the administrator of that institution the black person who, in the opinion of the governor, had had the most influence in the black community in getting him elected.  In other words, the person who delivered the black vote got that job, and that was a plum job in Oklahoma in those days.
Story_ID: 237709
Speaker 1: You didn't have to know how to do the job [hospital administrator] professionally, but you had to know the governor [of Oklahoma], and the governor had to believe you helped him get elected.  But when it came to me and [Johnston Murray] asked me if I would consider it, 'cause I'd gotten all this publicity, I said, "Only on one condition that you're--well, two conditions: one, you let me run it [Taft State Hospital for the Negro Insane, Taft, Oklahoma] using the professional training that I had gotten as hospital administrator," so I upgrade the quality of the institution, "and, two, that I would be your boss out there, at that institution."  That had not always been true.  The local representatives would call up his administrator and say, "I want this person to have this job," and that's the way it was run, he would get the job.  "But in my administration," I said, "I won't do that, unless the guy is qualified and once he gets hired, he knows that I am the boss, I don't want the job."  And I put that in writing and so the black emissary who came and interviewed me took it back to the governor, and I thought they were gonna throw that in the wastebasket.  Here's a guy that--from po-dunk Oklahoma, so to speak, writing the conditions under which he would do the job, and who does he think he is?  So, I thought that would be thrown in the wastebasket, and I would move on.  Well, I didn't have any money.  My wife, at that time, have taught school back in Oklahoma, and I thought she was gonna save some money so we could go on a vacation when I finished.  Well, it so happened that when she, you know, the bank statement came, the last bank statement for the year was red, so she didn't have any money, and I didn't have any money, and we need a vacation.  So, we had enough money to buy gas to get to Ohio, which is where is our--was her home.  And we'd go up there, and we'd eat, and we'd have to have the gas money to get back.  I didn't have a job, I didn't know where I was gonna work.  But I wasn't gonna take that job, unless they did it the way I suggested.  Well, by the time I--it took us two days in those days to drive from Oklahoma to Ohio.  I was broke and in St. Louis [Missouri].  And so when we got there the governor's office had already called and asked if I would back and take the job.  And when I got there my mother in-law, she said, "Somebody from the governor's office calling you; you done something wrong?"  I said, "Not that I'm aware of," as it turned out it was the governor's office; they were asking me if I would come back and take the job.  I said, "Well, I just got here, and I need some rest," so they said, "well, when can you come back?"  I said, "Give me a week.  Let me rest a little, and I'll come back," and so I did, and that's my first job, and that got statewide published.  Again, I was twenty-five, twenty-seven years old.  And I had the second largest job of blacks state employees, and the president of Langston [University, Langston, Oklahoma] was the highest paid, I was the second highest paid in the state.  And at twenty-seven and the youngest, and you saw a picture of me--the youngest of the people that worked for me.
Story_ID: 237710
Speaker 1: How long did you stay there [at Taft State Hospital for the Negro Insane, Taft, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I stayed there two and half years, and I left because of political machinations that were always there, and you couldn't change them.  The governor [Johnston Murray] said, "Now, I will support you; I can't control those representatives in your area, I can't control those--they're elected by the people in their district."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: "I'll do the best I can to give you all the support I can from the governor's office," and he did that.  But the representatives who had been accustomed to calling the administrator and say, "I want Joe to have the job at the storeroom."  Well, the storeroom--we had a hundred thousand dollars' worth of merchandise and that was because we supplied all the needs of the people in those institutions.  Whatever they needed, we'd have one hundred thousand dollars' worth of merchandise in there.  And, therefore, it was subject to all kinds of pilfering and stealing and--well, I set up a control system.  And cut that out, and I said anybody found stealing, whatever it is, would be fired, and I put that in memos all across the institutions.  "If it belong to the institution, leave it there; do not take it with you," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so I set up a perpetual inventory system, and I could go out there and say how many shoes--pair of shoes we got on this shelf, let me see your record, do you have a record on you?   I mean, because the record had to always agree with the physical inventory.  And so we cut out the pilfering there, and, to show you just how much corruption was going on prior to my administration, we would cook five or six hundred pounds of--say we were gonna have stewed meat, stew for dinner.   And we cook five or six hundred pounds of that to feed everybody.  And so I set up a system to--and they were just stealing the food just right and left, and we wouldn't have enough to go around.  So I set up a system to control it, so that when the chef requisitioned five hundred pounds of stew meat, the storeroom guy where the meat was stored had to put that on the truck and weigh it, make sure it weighed.  And then when the chef got it, he had to weigh it again.  And if it didn't agree, then he had to find it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And we ended up having to fire some people, because they would take off fifty pounds or twenty-five pounds, hide it and then take it home.  They did that, so we had to fire a couple of people to let them know that we were serious.  So I cleaned up that part of the institution, and we had a medical director who ran the medical side, and we increased the quality of the care of people, patients.  And we ran a tight administrative ship, but it was always some kind of political (unclear) I was, the same kind of situation, scenario--they didn't like what I was doing because they couldn't control me.  And I finally decided it wasn't worth staying, and then I went into education.
Story_ID: 237711
Speaker 1: What was your next job?
Speaker 2: Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU), Tallahassee, Florida]; I was the assistant business manager of Florida A&M University.  See, I can say this right now so that you at least know this is a part of my background.  I've never applied for a job upfront; it's always come to me, from that job all the way through to the job I have now, and I've had a number of--I've been fortunate that jobs come to me.  So I took the job as assistant business manager of Florida A&M, and the interesting part of that period in my life was the Civil Rights Movement.  Our students started a bus protest just like they did in Montgomery [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Same year?
Speaker 2: This was nine, no--we, yeah must've been because this was nineteen fifty--yeah '55 [1955], because I left in '57 [1957] and went to get my doctorate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our students started a bus boycott and created a lot of tension just like Birmingham [Alabama], and the presidents of these state schools, where they had civil rights activity going on like this, were pressured by the legislature to keep the faculty out of it.  They couldn't control the students, but they could keep the faculty out of it, the faculty and staff.  Well, I was treasurer of the Inter Civic Council which was like the Montgomery Improvement Association in Birmingham when they did the bus protest.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was treasurer, but I was treasurer as  Ed Irons [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons], citizen, I wasn't treasurer as Ed Irons as Florida A&M University administrator.  But the president [Dr. George W. Gore] called me in, as he did others, and said, "I brought you down here to help me build the school, not get involved in civil rights activity."  And I said, "Mr. President, I'm fighting for my kids; I'm fighting for my kids, and I can't accept your order to stay out of it."  Well, then I knew I had no future there, and so, as fate would have it, those who got out got raises; those who didn't, didn't, when the raises came around.  I then decide to go get a doctorate before I took another job.
Speaker 1: How long were you at FAMU again?
Speaker 2: I was at FAMU four years.
Speaker 1: Four years, then you went from there to pursue your doctorate?  Where?
Speaker 2: Yes, Harvard University [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And your doctoral area was?
Speaker 2: Finance, and that's another story.
Speaker 1: Let it begin. Amazing (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's another story.  I had built a home in Florida two blocks from the campus, so I owed everybody, and so when I got ready--when I got accepted to Harvard, I went to the bank.  And the banker was a young white man, and he would come to the Inter Civic Council meetings.  He would come; he was a good guy.  And so when I came to him and said, "I've been admitted to Harvard University to study on my doctorate; I'm going study finance; I'm gonna learn how to organize a bank.  And I owe you all this money, and I can't pay you if I go to school," he said, "Ed, if Harvard University has accepted you, here's what I'll do for you.  I'll suspend all principal payments for your loans; you pay me the interest every three months until you finish.  When you finish and you resume paying, paying the principal."  So I did that.
Story_ID: 237712
Speaker 1: --Got to Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], a lot of stories along the way, but I'll tell you one that I think that's probably most valuable.  Finished--my first year--see they organize you at Harvard into groups, and you stay with your group throughout your career at the school.  And the group, between classes, we'd get together in little cliques and talk about whatever they wanted to talk about.  And these were all--these are Harvard kids, you know, attracted the sons of the rich.  I didn't even have a grey suit (laughter); I didn't even have a grey suit.  So, in between time they was talking about, well, you know, "My--I got to call my broker," and you know, "and tell them to sell GE [General Electric] short."  I didn't know what he was talking about.  And so they wouldn't even let me in the little clique, I'd stand up and get in the clique so I could talk to them, and some guy would turn his back to me.  And, you know (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this was around the nineteen--?
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was very racist in those days, I mean the students were racist, mere faculty were racist.
Speaker 2: Were there any other African Americans there?
Speaker 1: I was the only one there at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At the doctoral level, and they only had sixteen graduates in fifty years with blacks in.  I was there during its fifty year anniversary.  They had sixteen graduates that were black to get an M.B.A. from Harvard at that time, and now, that year, I was the only one in my class.  So anyway, they wouldn't let me in and at the end of the year, and you know you now working on Ph.D.  And each school is a little different, but they had milestones you had to pass along the way, and they'd give you two chance, two chances to pass.  If you didn't pass, you got one more chance; if you didn't pass the second time, you're out.  So into my first year, I passed my milestone test, and the guys begin to say, "Well, Ed [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons], how did you know that?"  So, so, so.  And as I continued to pass the milestones, then they opened up.  They would come to me; I mean, they found out that my brain was as good as theirs.
Story_ID: 237713
Speaker 1: In those days, you had to sell your professor on being your advisor.  In other words, you had to find a research project that he had an interest in, otherwise he'd probably wouldn't take you.  And so the number one professor in banking in those days at Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], was a guy named Charlie Williams [Charles M. Williams].  And he was considered the top banking professor in the nation, and so I selected him.  I selected him to be my major advisor.  I went to him and I asked him, I said, "I'd like you to be my major advisor," and he said, "what's your background?"  I said, "Well, I got a degree in hospital administration at the business school [University of Minnesota School of Business; Curtis L. Carlson School of Management] at the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  He said, "Minnesota?  What they teach up there?" you know.  He said, "I don't know what you know; I don't waste my time when you, you know, don't know what you should know."  He said, "I'll tell you what I'll do.  You go out and do a research project in the field of banking, bring it back end of the summer; if I like it, I'll take you; if I don't, I won't."  So, I went out to Worcester, Massachusetts, I was gonna study banking, new banks, 'cause I wanted to learn how to organize banks.  And it was a new bank, two years old, and I was able to persuade them to let me study their bank.  The entrepreneurs were still there that had organized the bank.  So I was able to get all the information from the people who organized it, how they did it, what the problems were and so on.  End of the summer--and analyze it, so I could draw the conclusions, economic finance and the organizational dynamics and so forth.  Brought it back to him, and he said, "Well, come back in two weeks," and I came back in two weeks.  He had his tennis shorts on--this was summer, end of the summer, but it was still summer--had his tennis shorts on, his tennis racket in his hand, and he walked to the cabinet, the filing cabinet, he dropped my paper off the top of it.  Threw it on the desk, walked back to the window to look down at the window, said, "I guess I'll take you."  That's the way he did it, and so I said, "Well, okay, here's what I wanna do, I wanna bring you a milestone chart of how I plan to proceed from here on 'til I get my doctorate."  He said, "Well, nobody's ever done what you're doing, I mean, you're changing from management to finance at the doctoral level, nobody's ever done that.  And what makes you think you can do it?  You could fall flat on your face," and they would wash you out pretty easily there in those days.  And I said, "I realize that," when I gave him a milestone chart saying what I plan to do by what date, and what milestone, and he looked at it, "Nobody's ever done this; you could fall flat on your face."  And every time I meet a milestone, he said, "Well, you made that one, but you could still fall flat on your face."  Right up to the time that I passed my finals, my orals for my dissertation, he never gave me one word of encouragement, he never.  And then he shook my hand and said, "Congratulations, Dr. Irons [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons]."  That was the first positive thing he said during the whole time I was there.  And half of the guys that started with me washed out.  I finished in two years--
Story_ID: 237714
Speaker 1: What sustained you through the [doctoral] process with no encouragement?
Speaker 2: My own inner desire.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I was in the library or in class or in my little cubicle at home eighteen hours a day.  I knew I had some deficits.  I was changing from management to finance; I didn't even know the terminology (laughter), but, end of the first year [at Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I did.  I could talk the talk, and because I was passing the milestones, the white boys would come to me and ask me, at the end of my first year, how I did it, what you should do, and so on.  When I got ready to take my oral to start my dissertation, I already had a reservation on a plane that Monday and I was taking test that Friday to go on my first field trip.  And of course if I had failed, I'd have to cancel it, but I didn't fail.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so I'm--I flew to Kansas City [Missouri] to research Douglass State Bank [Douglass National Bank] in Kansas City, Missouri.  And that's the kind of thing I did all the way through.  I just believed I could do it, and I did it.  Now, I know that I'm not the master of my fate in spite of my convictions which is what I learned when I went into the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity].  I am the master of my fate; I'm the captain of my--all that sort of stuff.  I thought that was true and of course when you get knocked down enough in life and find out that you aren't the master of your fate, you know, you learn that somebody up there is pulling the strings that let you do what you do.  I believe that very strongly, and so I believe that I'm good at what I do, but I think that, as good as I am, is not good enough, but somebody up there does and always has--I'm not good enough.  So that's--and I finished in two years and then, and many of those guys were staying four and five years above the master's [degree], above the master's.  Four and five years, half of them got washed out altogether, so I guess I consider myself lucky or something.
Story_ID: 237715
Speaker 1: So, let's come back--you are now a graduate of Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: University, graduate school of business--they, well, they gave--I pursued the Doctor of Business Administration, the D.B.A.  At that time they weren't giving any Ph.D. per se at the business school; they gave me a doctor of business administration.  We weren't required to do a language.
Speaker 1: And where did you go from there?
Speaker 2: Went to Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas].  Again, that was one of the quirks of fate.  The dean [Dr. Milton Wilson] of the School of Business at Texas Southern University was doing a summer training program at Harvard, there.  Harvard brings in leaders of various institutions--could be business, be education, be hospitals--and they have what they call executive educational training for those people.  And the dean of Texas Southern was in one of those programs my last summer there, and so I got know to him, and he got to know me.  And he asked if I would consider coming to Texas, and being a professor of finance.  Well that's just right down my alley, because I wanted a state that was a unit bank state, 'cause I was gonna organize a bank.  And so that's the way that played out: I went to Texas and was associate professor of finance at Texas Southern University.  And my mission was to organize a commercial bank, and had not been a national charter granted to black people in the United States for forty years.  And so the word was around the nation among black people that we can't do it, and so we had ten black-controlled commercial banks in those days.  The largest of which was Citizens Trust [Bank] here in Atlanta [Georgia].  It had 10, only 10 million at that time in 1961, at that time.
Speaker 1: Now this was a very tumultuous time--
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: --in America's history.  How was that impacting your experience?
Speaker 2: Well, in one way it served as a motivator.  The reason I left Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] was because the white people had put all kinds of constraints on black people.  They were calling loans that were outstanding; they were denying loans when people wanted it, and so I wanted to learn how to organize a bank.  And nobody in the black community knew how, so I said, "I'm going to go to school."  That's how I decided to go and study finance.  And so, when I got to Houston [Texas], you know, Houston was no different than any other black community; people all felt the same way.  That, you know, we just don't know how to do this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --and we can't do it.
Story_ID: 237716
Speaker 1: Well, I had learned how, learned that we can do it.  The people who were organizing banks were no smarter than anybody else.  In fact, when I was at Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I did a study of the educational level of people who work for banks, and only six percent of them had finished college.  This was 1959.  Only six percent of the employees who worked for banks in those days had finished college.  And banking is a simple business, it's a simple business: you get the deposit from the public, you invest those deposits and other income generating assets.  You pay up, interest rate on time deposit, you didn't pay anything on demand deposit, and the expenses you take from the total operating function, and the balance is your profit.  It's simple, and it is simple--you don't need a Ph.D. to run a bank; you can run a bank with a high school education.  You have to learn the rules, just like you learn the rules of English. There are rules of accounting, but once you learn the rules, it is not difficult, and I learned that, and so I went to Texas to organize a bank.  So I put together a group, I'm cutting through a lot of the machinations, but I organized a group, and we applied for the charter, and we got it.  And it was the first that had been given to black people in forty years in this country, and I served as its first president.  I didn't have but 4 percent of the stock.  I was still paying for my education.
Speaker 2: And you were president? What was the name of the bank (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm president of the bank. I organized, I pulled the--I organized the directors, I got the direct--I went to the directors, one-one-one.  And told them my vision, I said, you know, said, "You ought to be a part of this, 'cause it's gonna be an important institution."  And of course, I didn't have any money, and I borrowed twenty thousand dollars, but you see you could do that when you're organizing a new bank.  Because the correspondent bank, that's the bank that--it's a little bank, your new bank; you'll put your reserves in the big bank, you call it a correspondent bank.  And they, then in turn, would lend the organizers the money to buy the stocks to control it.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the bank?
Speaker 1: Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas].  I showed you that picture in, and that's in there.  Riverside National Bank, 1964, when we opened the doors, and people were standing outside the doors like we were giving away money.  Because we built up such an exciting, you know, environment.
Speaker 2: Now what part of Texas was the bank located?
Speaker 1: Houston [Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Houston, Houston.  And so--but then, it did what I had hoped to do: create a renaissance in the organization of black commercial banks in the nation.  People begin to organize banks all over the country.  I served as consultant to many of them.  But they saw--"What they have in Houston that we don't have?"  And so they started organizing banks all over the country.  From New York to California, from Texas to--I don't think it was there was one in Minnesota.  So they started organizing banks, and I set that in motion with my vision.  I didn't have any money, still don't, but I had a vision, I believed, and I did it--
Story_ID: 237717
Speaker 1: I got nationwide publicity when we opened Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas]; it was the first [African American-controlled chartered bank] in forty years.  And I got a call.  John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy had just become president, and he was looking for all the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduates, so they got in touch with me.  So, they got in touch with me and asked me if I would come to Washington [D.C.].  I was, at that time, organizing the bank.  I said, "No, I can't come; I'm organizing a bank."  They said, "Would you serve as consultant?"  Well, I did serve as a consultant.  In those days, fifty dollars a day was big money.  That's what I got as a consultant in 1960, that's when I had started serving.  And they asked me would I come after we finished organizing the bank.  I said I would consider it.  Well, as fate would have it, the United States had created what they called development banks in many of the developing countries around the world.  All the developing countries, not all of them, but they had developed, they had about fifteen or twenty development banks around the world that we had funded, U.S.  And that those banks' responsibility was to take the high risk developmental projects that build the infrastructure and basic industries for the country.  Commercial banks did the short-tem lending and, therefore, wouldn't take the risk that the development banks were designed to take.  And so they had one in Nigeria, and they asked me if I would be willing to come serve as president of that bank.  And I jumped at it.  I said, "Yes, I will," and so Nigeria, at the time had a hundred million people in it.  This was in 1960.
Speaker 2: And at that time was the naira really strong against the dollar?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't strong, no (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 1: No, no, it is--
Speaker 2: You have any remembrance of--
Speaker 1: No, no, it was not strong.  None of the developing countries at that time had strong currencies against the dollar, if that's what you're asking?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The answer is no.  So, I went to Washington and was gonna go to Lagos [Nigeria] to run that development bank and the Biafran War [Nigerian Civil War] broke out [in 1967].  I don't know if you've heard about the Biafran War?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This was the war fomented by the former colonial powers to control oil, that's what they were gonna--they orchestrated--like they gonna have civil war in Iraq--they orchestrated by this country.  Well, the same thing happened back in 1964, when--see they wanted to control the oil, so the former colonial powers fomented a civil war.  And Nigeria got to fighting among themselves, and then they controlled the oil, but anyway, they wouldn't let me go to Nigeria once the war broke out.  So I was in Washington now, and I didn't have a job.  Well, I was on the payroll, but I didn't have a specific job then, because I couldn't go to Nigeria.  And I was gonna go back to Houston [Texas], but they said, "No, you can't do that; we got jobs here for you."  I was at the top of the civil service, and that's far as you can go unless you're a political appointee.  And so I said, and they offered me several jobs all of which I rejected, "I don't want that job;" "I don't what that job."  And finally they offered me a job that was a piece of legislation [U.S.] Congress had just passed, and it was a just a piece of paper, the mission of which was to stimulate U.S. business investment in the developing countries world-wide.  And, you know, that's a strategy that U.S. has always followed: get your business people over there and let them dominate the economies.  And see, then you control the companies, countries--anyway that was the goal, and I said, "I'll take it."
Story_ID: 237718
Speaker 1: So I had the responsibility to organize a division, and it was the [U.S.] Agency for International Development [USAID] under the Department of State, U.S. Department of State.  You see the Agency for International Development is the banking and the operating arm of the state department.  The state department makes the policy; the agency for international development implements the operational functions.  For example, if the state department says, "We'd like to lend $50 million to Ghana or to Brazil, then the Agency for International Development carries that out and does whatever the mission says.  So that was my responsibility; I became chief of that, the Investment Survey Division and the first black division chief in the history of the agency.  And I had to organize it, develop the policies, procedures, hire the people and direct it, and I did that world-wide for four years.  And my constituents for that responsibility were multinational banks and multinational firms, because small business typically cannot, usually don't have the management debt or the capital to go over and start, particularly, manufacturing operations.  So, that's what I did for four years, then I got a call from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  They needed a dean for their business school, somebody to organize; they didn't have a business school.  They had a big department of business, but it wasn't an organized school, like you know the med [medical] school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], engineering school [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering, Architecture, and Computer Sciences, Washington, D.C.], all these other schools, dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.].  And so they asked me if I would consider coming and organizing.  They had called the school Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and they referred them to me.  And they came over and asked if I would consider coming and organizing their school.  I said, "Under these conditions: I'd be full professor when I come in, I get the salary that I get now, and then I get the support to be able to do the job.  I don't want a lot of bureaucrats stopping me from doing the job you want me to do.  Under those three conditions, I'll come, if not, I won't," and they said, "Well, we'll do it," so I went to Howard.
Story_ID: 237719
Speaker 1: And I organized the business school [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.]. I got five national advisors from the top schools in the nation to be my advisors for the school.  'Cause I was only wanted to get early accreditation, and just as soon as I got it just about ready to launch, they changed presidents.  And the new president, Jim Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek], wanted his own man, and he didn't tell me until July that he wanted his own man.  In those days, the presidents of black HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] were czars.  They didn't have to clear with the faculty; they didn't have to clear with anybody.  Whatever they decide to do, that's what they did, and so he wrote me a letter in July, July the 2nd.  I can remember it just as clear as if it were yesterday, and said that, "You've done a good job; I hope you will stay.  I've decided to hire an outside person as dean."  Well, now that wouldn't have bothered me if he had told me in the spring.  I mean, you know, he wanted your own man, you're a new executive--that's your prerogative.  But you tell me in July meant that you wanted to box me in.  I would have no options; I'd have to stay whether I wanted to stay or not.  I couldn't say anything, because I was gonna be on the payroll.  But I was at Northwestern University taking a course in mortgage banking to be able to put a course in mortgage banking in the curriculum.  And my wife got the letter and called me, and I said, "Open it up and read it to me," and she did, and she told me what it said.  And I dictated to her a resignation over the phone and told her to send it to him.  So, he had a resignation in two days after he sent the letter to me, and that was July the 2nd.  Of course, he didn't expect that, because normally that late in the academic year, all the good jobs are gone.  But I didn't need Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or anybody else, to earn a living--in those days I had all options I can take.  I mean, I tripled my salary the next year as a consultant, and while I waited to decide what I wanted to do next.  And so the next job I took--I was offered, I guess, at least five jobs, one was in the [President Richard Milhous] Nixon administration as associate director of the Office of Management and Budget.  George [P.] Shultz was director, and he was dean of the business school at University of Chicago [Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], so I knew him.  And he called me up, said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons], I'd like you to come in and be one of the associate directors of this agency."  I said, "I cannot come in; I would like--I respect you; if you were working for another president I'd jump at it," but I didn't want to work with Richard Nixon, and so I didn't take that.  I was offered a couple college presidencies and three or four deanships.  The job I took was Mills B. Lang [sic. Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking and Finance] professorship at Atlanta University graduate school of business [Atlanta University School of Business; Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia]; that's what I did 1971.  And it was the lowest paying, you know, of all the jobs, but gave me the flexibility that I wanted.  And I didn't have to teach but two courses, I had a full-time secretary, had a pretty serious budget, and then I had enough consulting and I earned almost triple my salary.  But I had three kids in college, so I needed all that.  I couldn't work on a fixed salary, so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 237720
Speaker 1: I came here in '71 [1971] and was, for fifteen years, I was the Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking and Financial Institutions [sic. Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking and Finance], the first in the nation.  And the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] passed a law to regulate their banks and financial institutions in 1985.  And they were looking for a commissioner, and they did a nationwide search, and they got in touch with me, and I sent them a letter saying, "I cannot accept a job like this.  The legislation is flawed; unless you change it, nobody can do it."  And then, so I again, I thought they were gonna throw that in the wastebasket.  You know, when a country boy like me writing a powerful government and telling them that nobody can do this job with the legislation like this, who is he, who does he think he is?  Well, and I went on about my business, 'cause I really did think they were gonna throw it in the wastebasket.  But I knew enough about banking to know it wasn't gonna work, and I put it in writing, and I wasn't even thinking about it.  And I got a call one day about a month later asking if I would consider coming, 'cause they would agree to do what I asked them to do.  Well, as I turned out, they made the agreement, they could put--they couldn't keep their agreement.  The legislation was flawed and unless it changed, the legislation--I knew no one person could change the legislation, that's a collective thing.  But I said, "Unless you want to do that and work toward it, I don't want to come," and they agreed to do that.  But they didn't make--they didn't accomplish it, and I stayed my four statutory years [at Office of Banking and Financial Institutions for the District of Columbia], and then the provost of at Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta [University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--by that time they had merged with Clark--came up and said, "We got a group of students around the nation asking if you'd consider coming back being dean of the business school [Clark Atlanta University School of Business Administration; Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia]."  And this was the provost, and he came to my office, and I said, "Under the right conditions, I would come back," but I was back, I did.  And my wife was teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], she loved her job; I could've gotten a job any one of about ten different universities around Washington [D.C.].  I'd already been offered the deanship from American University [Kogod] School of Business [Washington, D.C.], and so I knew I could get a job.  I just knew I didn't want to be reappointed as the commissioner, and but anyway, he asked me, and I told him.  I said, "Under the right conditions, I would come, otherwise, I won't."  Well, I went down, and they invited me, paid my way down, and I talked to the students, the faculty and president, several members of the board, 'cause I knew many of them, members of the board, personally.  And I agreed to come, I agreed to come under the conditions that the president would write me--see I knew Tom Cole [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole], the president.  And I said, "Write me a letter corroborating what we agreed to orally, and then I'll sign a contract," (laughter).  And so, I don't think he liked that, so two weeks passed, and I didn't get a letter, and I said, "Well, this is dead."  And I was turning my sights on something else, and I got a call from one of the guys who was on the board.  He said, "Ed [HistoryMaker Edward B. Irons], when you coming down here?"  I said, "I don't know; I guess I'm not coming; I haven't gotten a letter from Tom corroborating what we agreed."  He said, "He hadn't sent you that letter yet?" I said, "No."  Well, in the next four days, I did get a letter.  So the impetus was coming from the board, as well as my alumni, and that's pretty powerful.  But as I was to later learn, I wasn't his candidate, Tom's candidate.  I wasn't his candidate.  And he appointed me reluctantly, but he did appoint me, and he agreed in writing to all the things that we agreed to do.  But it wasn't worth the paper it was written on (laughter)--wasn't worth the paper it was written on.
Story_ID: 237721
Speaker 1: I pushed the rock up the rough side of the mountain the four or five years, but I was able to accomplish the mission anyway.  My mission was to get the graduate school [Clark Atlanta University School of Business Administration; Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia] reaccredited; we were the first in the nation to get the graduate school, HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] graduate school, accredited by the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business [sic. American Association of Collegiate Schools of Business; Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB)], 1974.  I led that; I wasn't the dean, but I was the faculty that led the operation.  I knew the players; I had gotten acquainted with the players while I was at Howard [University School of Business, Washington, D.C.], so I knew the players.  And so that, that--you know how that works, the players determine what goes on.  And so, I was able to lead that in '74 [1974], so I now had the responsibility getting undergraduate division accredited.  And the regulation was in '95 [1995], if you didn't get one accredited, you lose both.  And the undergraduate school from Clark [College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] had come over with eight hundred students and no Ph.D.s, no Ph.D.s--that was my challenge, I had to get out and find ten Ph.D. students someplace.  Didn't have the money.  Tom [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole] wouldn't give me the money to pay the kind of salaries to attract the people, so I attracted the Ph.D.s.  I begged and pleaded and talked about the vision, got them to come, but I was fully aware that some of them were bodies; they had a Ph.D. on paper.  They were bodies, that's about all, and ultimately they were gonna be washed out, but I had to get them on our record.
Speaker 2: When you say bodies, you mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When I said they--they weren't productive Ph.D.s.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They had a Ph.D. on the record, doing nothing: no publication, no recognition for anything that they've accomplished.  And so I knew got some of those, but I had to have them on the record, or they--for the AACSB to even look at us.  Make a long story short, we got it, we got it.  I, in fact, in the process, they elected me to serve on the accreditation board of the AACSB, so I knew the players again.  And I can tell you without that, I don't think we would've gotten it.  It's like everything else, there's a political element involved in anything you do.  And so we did get it, but I also knew that I had analyzed schools that were trying to get accreditation we had rejected that were stronger than we were; I knew that (laughter).  And so we, I think we had made the history by being the first; they didn't want to take it from us.  They wanted to give us a chance to go ahead, and be what we should be, and so I think that's how we got it.  But we did get it, but I was so drained, I retired from the deanship.  I mean, you know when you push your rock up the rough hill consistently for five years, that's really weighs on you.  And so I retired from the deanship and became a professor.
Story_ID: 237722
Speaker 1: All right this is the photo of the executive staff of the Consolidated State Institutions [ph.] of Oklahoma.  It--I was the chief executive officer of that organization beginning in 1951, and besides my secretary, I'm the youngest of my cabinet (laughter).
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Where are you located in the photo?
Speaker 1: Right here.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  I'm sorry, oh, right there in the light colored suit.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, what year was this about?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-one [1951].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, I'm sorry, you did say that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture where I'm talking to a graduate student shortly after I became dean at the business school of Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  Clark, yeah, Clark Atlanta University School of Business [Administration; Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia], 1990.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my winter [U.S.] Navy suit, 1943; I was a coxswain in the U.S. Navy.  C-O-X-W-A-I-N [sic. C-O-X-S-W-A-I-N].  That's equivalent to a staff sergeant in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 2: Well that's my wife Joyce [Irons] and me.  And this is in our home here [Atlanta, Georgia], but this was some special occasion.  The specifics of which I don't remember, but we were going to some fairly formal function.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  About what timeframe would this be?
Speaker 2: This probably was maybe--what is this, 2004?  Maybe 2000.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Let's see now where were we then?  I think this was, yes, this was just a picture taken on a cruise that we were on probably in 2002 something like that.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Next.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my oldest sister, Viola [Irons Prewitt], and me; I think we were on that cruise--that we were still on that cruise, I think that's what that was.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is just the elevation, the architectural elevation of Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas] which the bank that I was the principal organizer of in nineteen--open for business in 1964.  And I was its first president.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Photograph of me.  I was in the--I was in Washington [D.C.] at the time; it must've been 1967, thereabout.  As president of a proposed ventured capital corporation that would've been financed by the minority banks of the nation for venture capital purposes in the African American community.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my summer white uniform in the U.S. Navy, 1943; I was at Great Lakes Naval Training Center [sic. Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, upper left is my oldest daughter, Trisha [Alexander].  Trisha was born in 1953, so she's fifty-one years old now (laughter).
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And across the upper right?
Speaker 1: That's my son Eddie [Edward Irons, Jr.], and he must be forty-nine, and down at the left (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Lower right is my wife at that time and Tammy [Tamara J. Irons] as a toddler, my oldest daughter, that's up there in the corner.  She's a toddler, while we were living in Florida at that time, Florida A&M University [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, and moving across the left, the color photo?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's the total family, my total family.   That's me and my wife at that time and my three children, and this must've been nineteen, must've been 1965 or somewhere along in there.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, and then finally in the lower left.
Speaker 2: Lower left, that's Trisha again, just about a toddler.  You notice she only has her little panties in Florida.  That's our Florida home, two blocks from the campus.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Alright, next, okay we will start list it and go across the bottom row from left to right.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, that's my brother [Jeff Irons, Jr.] who at the time was about ten years old, and he had an injured left arm that set up tuberculosis of that bone--ultimately, had to be amputated.  That's his picture.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And the next one.
Speaker 2: Is my mother [Jerylean Collins Irons] and my brother Eddie [ph.] at the same time.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And moving across.
Speaker 2: And that's my mother by herself at that same timeframe.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Starting at the upper right.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a group of the Irons cousins; these are cousins from various branches of the Irons, Ryan family.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  (Simultaneous) And the next one down?
Speaker 1: The next down is my wife at that time and Tamara, my oldest daughter and me at a Christmastime.  And we--that was in Florida, must've been nineteen, must've been 1956, somewhere along in there.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And then the last on the left.
Speaker 1: Is me and my two oldest children, and this was in Florida, and this had to be about 1955 or '6 [1956], somewhere along in there.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay, very good.
Speaker 1: And Jerylean Collins, that's my mother, and that's her maiden name; that's my mother.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  And the bottom photo?
Speaker 1: That's me in my college [Wilberforce College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] picture in 1947.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  All right, okay next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you then what it's about.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I was executive director of the National Bankers Association, 1967, when we launched a 100 million dollar deposit development program.  Where major corporations to deposit those funds in minority banks, as a part of their quid pro quo, since they sell their products to the African American community.  So, we had the secretary of state, secretary of commerce, Maurice Stans, and these other people are bankers, and so that's what that picture is about.  Launched that program, I was living in Washington at the time.
Story_ID: 237723
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Coy Melnick.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: I'm [HistoryMaker] Edward D. Irons, E-D-W-A-R-D, D as in David, I-R-O-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: October 13, 2004.
Speaker 1: And we're continuing an interview that we started this summer I believe, right?
Speaker 2: A couple of weeks ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In the interview chronology?
Speaker 1: No, in, I mean, actually space, where are we?
Speaker 2: Oh, we're at my home in Atlanta, Georgia, 4720 Guilford Forest Drive, Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 237724
Speaker 1: I completed my D.B.A. [doctor of business administration] at Harvard University graduate school of business [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] concentrating in finance.  I wanted to study banking; I had left Tallahassee, Florida during the social upheaval and came to Harvard to study finance, because we wanted to organize a bank.  Because the tension in the community during the civil rights era had motivated the white power structure to call loans, to deny loans, and to do those things that were detrimental to the financial health of the African American community, and a group of us had gotten together and said, "Let's organize a bank."  Well, nobody knew how to do it, and I said, "Well, I'm gonna go and study banking," that's how I decided to apply to Harvard or to any graduate school.  But I was accepted at Harvard and that's what I studied.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now was it difficult then at Harvard?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was.  I was the only one in my class that was black.  And, in fact, transitioning from management, which I had studied both the undergraduate and the graduate level, to finance was a major transition in education.  In fact, the professor whom I wanted to be my major, the chairperson of my doctoral committee, he had difficulty deciding whether or not he wanted to work with me.  In those days, the system at Harvard was that student had to sell himself and his idea to the professor.  The professor didn't have to do it, if you didn't sell him.  Now, if you couldn't sell it, the university then would step in and assign someone to you, but ideally they wanted you to find something that the professor was interested in as well as you.  And there was more productivity, they thought, and more synergism and what we were doing, and so that's the way they did it.  But anyway, when I approached him, he at that time was considered one of the most difficult professors at the business school.  And the guy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was his name?
Speaker 1: Charlie Williams [Charles M. Williams]; Charlie Williams was that professor.  He was a professor of banking and financial institutions, and he was supposed to be the most renowned at that time in the nation.  He was on several bank boards, and he wrote prodigiously on banking and finance, and he was a good professor, but he was tough.  And my colleagues at that time told me I was glutton for punishment for selecting him.  And--but anyway, the professor didn't want to accept me as his, as an advisee, and he asked me where I got my master's degree.  And I told him University of Minnesota [School of Business; Curtis L. Carlson School of Management, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and he sort of put a scowl on his face and, "Minnesota?" as though to say, "What do they know up there?"  But at any rate, he said, "Well, the only way I will serve as your advisor, you go out and do a research project on a bank and bring it back at the end of the summer, and I will see if you know anything, and if you can write."  So I did that.  I went to Worcester, Massachusetts and found a bank that was ten years old; entrepreneur was still there that created the bank, and the directors.  So I was able to get the whole picture of the organization of the Worcester National Bank from the inception of the idea to the last financial statement.  And the bank was ten years old, so I did a study of that bank analyzing its financial statements and sort of drawing some conclusions of about its health and that sort of thing.  Came back at the end of the summer, gave him the report, and he said, "Okay, come back in two weeks."  And so in two weeks I came back, he had his tennis shorts on, it was summer, end of the summer and they were still playing tennis in Boston [Massachusetts] at that time.  And so he walked to the cabinet, and my report was on top of the cabinet, picked it up, walked to the desk, put it on the desk.  Walked back to the window and looked out the window--he had his tennis racket in his hand--he said, "I guess I'll try you."  That was the way he decided to become my advisor, so that's the way that played out.
Story_ID: 237725
Speaker 1: And my challenge going forward was to do my dissertation, do my research as a basis of my dissertation and then write it and then defend it.  So my next milestone toward pursuit of the doctorate was to defend my research idea.  And the way they worked it at that time, you had two chances, if you, if they didn't like what you did on the first one, they make you do it over.  If you didn't do it on the second one, you're out; you always had two chances for every milestone that they have.  And so I didn't--I had my milestone defense of my research scheduled for a Friday, and I already had my first research interview at Douglass State Bank [Douglass National Bank] in Kansas City [Missouri].  So, if I had failed, then I would've had to cancel my interview, my travel arrangements and everything.  But I didn't fail, and so Monday morning I was on the plane going to Kansas City to conduct my first bank interview, after I had passed my orals.  And so that's the way that played out, and I never got any encouragement from Charlie Williams [Charles M. Williams] the whole time I was studying, never said, "This is fine," or, you know, "You're doing okay."  He said, "You could fall flat on your face--nobody ever done what you're trying to do."  Changing from one discipline to another at the doctoral level--that was what he was referring to.  And the implication is you're now at Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] so you're trying to do something that hasn't been done, and you could fall flat on your face.  And he said that every time I passed a milestone, and never said, "Congratulations, you did it. " He just said, "Well, you made that, but you still could fall flat on your face;" that was his mantra.  And so, but as fate would have it, I continued to do my research and write my manuscript and have it reviewed, and he would continue to repeat his mantra.  "Well, you did that, but you could still fall flat on your face."  And it wasn't until I actually passed my defense of my dissertation that he said, "Congratulations, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Edward D.] Irons."  That was his first statement of support.  Meanwhile, I was on pins and needles all the time, never knowing when he was going to reject whatever I did, or wash me out.  But as fate would have it, I successfully defended each milestone and finished.
Story_ID: 237726
Speaker 1: And as fate would have it, the dean of the business school at Texas Southern University [Texas Southern University School of Business, Houston, Texas] was doing a summer executive leadership program at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  They do that, they bring in CEOs and aspiring CEOs all kinds of leaders of various organizations, profit and non-profit.  They bring them together in various groups for executive education.  And so [Dr.] Milton Wilson who was the dean of the business school at Texas Southern University at that time, he was there on one of those short educational programs.  And we met, and since I was getting my doctorate in finance, he said, "Would you like to come to Texas Southern and teach?"  Well, it fit my goal, because I wanted to organize a bank, and I wanted to go to a state that had a university where I could teach and also had an opportunity for African American bank, controlled bank.  And so that kind of state had to be what we call a unit bank state, a state that allowed only one site for a bank.  And they were still nine of those in the country, all the others states in the union were bank--branch banks states.  They permitted branch banks at varying levels, either at the county level or the state level or regional level.  But there were nine that didn't allow any branching, and Texas was one.  So the fact that Texas Southern was in Texas, I wanted a unit banking state, just fit my goal, so I said yes.  So I went down to Texas Southern University in Houston [Texas] and began my teaching career.  And I was professor of finance and then my major goal that I had left Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], which is where I was in Florida before I began to pursuit of my doctorate and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this is 1960?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960]; 1960 is when I, well, actually started teaching the fall of '59 [1959], because I had completed my dissertation, all I needed was the editorial corrections and things of that sort, nothing substantive.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, I started teaching that fall in 1959.
Story_ID: 237727
Speaker 1: And so I began to make plans to organize the bank in Houston [Texas], and the first group I encountered was--I've forgotten the specific name of it, but it was the principal business organization of African Americans in Houston.  And they invited me to come talk to them about the idea of organizing a bank, and I did that.  Well, as I developed what I perceived as the opportunity in Houston for an African American controlled bank, everybody was asking constructive questions and were positive in their attitudes until I got to the last question.  And the person who was probably at that time--had the most wealth in the black community made a statement that black people don't have any money, so we're wasting our time organizing a bank.  And it turned the whole organization into confusion, and they started, you know, a confused debate, and no one seem to prevail.  And finally I said, "Gentlemen, this is your organization, and you should do what you want to do and not what anybody else wants to do, including me.  And, therefore, I think it would be wise if I cut this debate off right now and allow you guys to continue doing what you do."  And I said, "Now we're gonna organize a bank in Houston, and those of you individually who might want to become a part contact me.  And those who don't, you know do what you do, and everybody can be happy."  So I left on that note, and then I went to individuals within that community that might be considered the next wave of lead business leaders in the black community.  This was the top wave I started with.  They rejected it, in effect. I went to the next wave, and I went to them one at the time in their offices and sold it to them.  And when they sold them, I said, "Okay, are you interested?" and we would take their name and that sort of thing and until we got sufficient number to have an initial board of directors.  That's the way I began the organization.  And then we, I knew enough to know that we had to get a correspondent, a bank correspondent, and that's the major bank that usually serves as an advisor to a new bank.  And the quid pro quo is that the new bank would put some of its required reserves in that correspondent bank.  They then would have that money to invest for their own account and earn money from that, and that's kind of the quid pro quo.  But also they would lend the money to the directors to buy sufficient stock to control the bank; because they wanted the directors to control the bank, because they were gonna control the directors.  If everything went well, the directors then would pay off their loan on the stock then, free and clear, and continue the relationship with this correspondent bank; that's the way it worked.  If they didn't do it well, correspondent bank controlled the loans--they could call them and take control of the bank.  So that the bank, the correspondent bank was covered in terms of its risk, and the owners, if they produced, would own the bank or control it once they paid the notes off.  So, at that time, I didn't have any money.  I had to borrow twenty thousand dollars, which wasn't very much money in organizing a bank.  But I was able to borrow twenty-five thousand, twenty thousand dollars on a signature, because I was the principal organizer.  And so that's what I did, and to make a long story short, they elected me president, and I was also professor of finance at Texas Southern.  So I had those dual responsibilities.
Speaker 2: What was the name of the bank?
Speaker 1: Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 237728
Speaker 1: Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas], and I--we organized the bank and we had--we got nationwide publicity, because they had not been a commercial bank with a national charter organized in the United States since 1922.  And this was nineteen, well, it opened in '64 [1964]; we had begun the process in '61 [1961] or '62 [1962].  And so we got nation-wide publicity when we got the charter.  Well, we were gonna have to raise five hundred thousand dollars.  Well, in those days, raising five hundred thousand dollars was a major hurdle in the black community.  And there were many naysayers who felt we couldn't do it, and it took us, oh, approximately a year to raise a half million dollars in those days.  But the interesting thing about that in retrospect, once we raised it, and the word got out that we had raised it, we could've raised another half million dollars in thirty days.  That's the way the attitude changed in the community.  We built a brand new structure; we had an architect who went around at that time of--Houston [Texas] had quite a number of independent new banks, and they had modern, modern architectural buildings, and so our architect went around and observed these various architectural structures and came up with a unique design for Riverside National and that's what we built.  And it was an impressive little bank, little building, and in those days, only five thousand square feet.  But that was adequate for a new bank, and the day we opened the bank, because we had developed so much publicity, there were people standing outside the bank door waiting as though we gonna be giving away money.  I mean, that was the excitement associated with opening that bank.  There had not been one for forty years, and so this was a major achievement in the black community, nationally.  And it got national publicity.
Story_ID: 237729
Speaker 1: You were the first black bank, I mean, at that point, I mean to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In forty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That had a national charter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That had been a couple of state banks, Douglass State Bank [Douglass National Bank] had been organized in Kansas City [Missouri], and I believe Tri-State Bank in Memphis [Tennessee].  They had been organized, I think, maybe ten years earlier.  But there had not been a national charter for forty years.  And the prevailing attitude in the black community is that it couldn't be done--that black people could not do it.  And so that, we opened the doors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now would that make this a national bank?
Speaker 2: It was a national bank.  It had a national charter.
Speaker 1: So it was Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Riverside National Bank; it had a national charter.
Speaker 1: For those of us who are laypeople who don't know anything about business, which I'll probably go head of the line when it comes to not knowing.  But don't know the difference between these kinds of banks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That makes it--that's a national bank?
Speaker 2: That was a national bank.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The difference so that you understand: the laws of this country are structured so that states could charter banks.  And the national government could charter banks, and so if a group got a national bank, they were supervised by the comptroller of the currency, which is the regulatory agency for federally controlled banks.  If they got a state charter, they were supervised by the state banking commissioner, so that's the way that operated.  But they all had to become members of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation [FDIC], which was created in 1934 when we had all the bank failures in the big crash [Great Depression], FDIC was created in those days by [President] Franklin [Delano] Roosevelt to stem the public distrust of banks.  And that's what the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was designed to do, and it did it.  So both federal and national, I mean federal and state banks had to become members of FDIC, or they couldn't get a charter.  If you couldn't qualify for Federal Deposit Insurance corporate insurance, then neither state or federal regulators would give you charter.  So that was a must.
Story_ID: 237730
Speaker 1: So we did get the bank [Riverside National Bank, Houston, Texas] open.  The people were standing out in front of the doors waiting just in crowd, in a crowd, waiting to come in the bank.  And we had people with checkbooks, we had people with saving bonds, we had people with money in socks and handkerchiefs and just every conceivable kind of vehicle that could hold money came in that day.  And it was an exciting day and we--I think we got little less than a million dollars that day, as the deposits, the first day.  And so we were on our way, and I was CEO.  Well, to make a long story short, my CEO days didn't last too long, because one of the organizers, who happened had been a medical doctor, knew nothing about banking, but he had the most money of everybody, and he had co-signed the notes of majority of the executive committee, I think that might've been four.  He had co-signed their notes, we all had to borrow money, and either you could borrow it on your signature or somebody had to co-sign.  Well, he co-signed, I think, four of the seven directors, I believe it was, notes to borrow the money to buy their stock.  Well, it looked like the bank was going to really be a major operation and powerful, as you know a bank is.  And then the greed stepped in: this doctor wanted to be chairman, and the way he did it, he got his guys that he--whose loans he had co-signed, got them to agree to vote me from the presidency to the vice chairman of the board.  He then would move another person that was--whose note he had signed to be president, and he would continue.  He would be the chair; he would be the chair.  He wasn't chair at that time, he would be the chairman, and of course the executive committee did that.  Well, I promptly resigned.  Now, they wanted me to continue to do what I was doing, to sit in the president's chair and continue to manage the bank and the public would not know that there had been any changes made.  And that was the idea, because my name was the bank in the community.
Speaker 2: So the public would assume that you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Still doing what I was doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So I couldn't accept that, and so I exercised my right to sell my stock, and we had developed an agreement that if anyone of the directors wanted to sell its stock, that the directors would have the first option to buy it.  So that's the way we did that, so I sold my stock.  And then I exercised my option to go to Washington [D.C.], they had been trying to get me to come when [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy had put out a note.  He was looking for everybody who was a graduate of Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], 'cause he was a Harvard graduate, and he was looking for all the Harvard alumni he could find.  Found me in Houston [Texas]; well, I was organizing the bank at that time, and I told them I couldn't come to Washington [D.C.].  Well, when this happened, I got back in touch with them; I said, "Well, I can come to Washington," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now what, what year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Story_ID: 237731
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-four [1964], and you're on your way to Washington [D.C.], now.
Speaker 2: Well, they [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy administration] had invited me earlier, and I had rejected it, because I was organizing the bank, and at that point when I resigned the presidency of Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas], and I felt I was free now to do whatever else I wanted to do, I got in contact with them, and they offered me a job as president of a development bank in Nigeria--they asked if I would be interested in that.  And I said, "Yes," 'cause at that time, Nigeria had a 100 million people in it, and it was the largest black country in the world, Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Now let's, let me pause here one second, I wanna go back a little bit to Riverside National Bank just s a follow-up.  What happened to them?  Did it--did the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well, that's a good question.  I left, and--as I suggested, I was going to leave.  And several years--the medical doctor became the chair, and then he begin to turn over executive management, because he didn't know what he was doing, and he was a desk spot in terms of a leader.  So good people won't stay under those kinds of environment, and under that kind of environment, and he began to turn over CEOs.  And finally the bank did go into bankruptcy, because of that kind of management situation.  Now, it was ultimately reorganized by a different group, but the initial bank was driven into the ground by this doctor who didn't know banking.  Thought that he--was gonna be a big empire that he would be presiding over, and it could've been, if he had just let us build it.  And but that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Nigeria--now, now who's the president, is that [Nnamdi] Azikiwe was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't know who the president of Nigeria was at that time.  Now, this wasn't a Nigerian bank.  This was a bank that--it was a development bank that was financed by the U.S. government in developing countries.  And they had them all over the developing world, you see?  Nigeria had one.
Story_ID: 237732
Speaker 1: Now, what can you explain to us--now we've heard this before; we've interviewed [HistoryMaker] Milton Davis, of the people who would explain what a development bank is.  Can you kind of tell what us what that is?
Speaker 2: Yes.  A development bank is different from a commercial bank.  A commercial bank is a short-term lender.  Their deposits are short-term, for the most part, and therefore, their loans have to be short-term.  So they want to turn their money over in a year or less, if they can.  Now, they can make what they call term loans, but they don't like to go over five, ten years, at the most.  And it's their--they have to manage the liquidity of the banks, so that if their loans, on an average, is--has a longer duration, then their deposits, you know they could have difficulty managing their liquidity.  But they usually don't want to make a lot of long-term loans; they keep their loans short--that's a commercial bank.  A development bank is designed to help a country that's trying to developing its infrastructure and to try to develop its basic industries.  All of which is a long-term loans and high risk.  When you're developing a basic industry, nobody can guarantee that you're going to make it.  When you developing an infrastructure for a country, like a dam or system of bridges or roads or schools or whatever the country wants to do, and they need some money to finance that, they have to have a source of revenue that will amortize that loan, and it's usually long-term.  So the development bank makes loans thirty, forty, fifty years--see what I'm saying?  And while interest rate might be eight percent, they would make a two percent loan or three percent loan.  So the idea of a development bank is to assist a country, in its development stages, to get on its feet and become a viable industrialized country.  That's what a development--
Story_ID: 237733
Speaker 1: So the U.S. had developed--had financed a number of development banks across the world, and they had one in Lagos, Nigeria, and they asked me if I would consider being the president in running that bank.  And I jumped at that, I thought that was a great opportunity, and so I went to Washington [D.C.] and when you go to Washington to go overseas and do the work, one of the things they require you to do is to learn about the country.  And so that you know how to deport yourself, and so that you can succeed in whatever you're trying to do.  Well, while I was getting versed in the culture, the economics and all the political climate, all those things that are important in any country, in terms of building an economic system, the Biafran War [Nigerian Civil War] broke out [1967].  And that war was a war over the oil; that's what it was.  The former metropoles of Nigeria and other African countries were controlling the development of the oil industry in Nigeria.  And as the conventional wisdom at that time was--at least part of conventional wisdom--was that these former colonial powers wanted to control this oil.  And to do that, they fomented a civil war in Nigeria between the tribes, the various tribes, Igbos, the Hausas and--the third one--
Speaker 2: Yoruba.
Speaker 1: Yorubas.  The Igbos were the leading tribe at that time.  So, they fomented the civil war, and then that--so the U.S. wouldn't let me go to Nigeria during that war--
Story_ID: 237734
Speaker 1: --So, I didn't become the president of the development bank [in Lagos, Nigeria].  And so I was going to go back to Houston [Texas] and teach at Texas Southern [University School of Business, Houston, Texas], 'cause you know when you leave a university you can take a leave, if you wanna do that.  And since I was gonna be working for government I could--that was a legitimate reason to take a leave, so that's what I did. And I was gonna go back to Houston to teach, and of course they said, "No, you can't do that, you got--we need you here."  And so they begin to offer me various jobs, and I was at the top--they offered--I was at the top of the civil service [General Schedule] pay scale, so I had to have a management job.  I mean, that was what they had to offer me, and so they kept offering me various jobs, and I turned all of them down, 'til finally they said, "Well, we got this one over here: [U.S.] Congress just passed a law that that allows the U.S. to do things to stimulate U.S. business investment in the developing countries."  That was what that law was designed to accomplish.  "But we just have the piece of paper, we don't--the organization has to be put together.  Whoever takes it over would have to put the organization together and run it."  I said, "I'll take it," and so I did.  I had the responsibility of conceptualizing the organization, setting up the policies and procedures, hiring the people and launching.  They call that the Investment Survey Division of the [United States] Agency for International Development [USAID]; that's where it was it was housed, in the [U.S.] Department of State.  As you may or may not know, the Agency for International Development is the operating arm of the state department.  The state department makes the political policies that control the relationships between the U.S. and other countries, that's what the state department does.  Now, if it agrees to do something for that country, like lend it some money or send some technical support over there to support whatever they want to support, like agriculture or education or whatever.  It is the Agency for International Development that does that.  Well, the Survey Investment, Survey Research division [Investment Survey Division] was in the Agency for International Development, and I was the division chief--became the first black division chief in the history of the agency.  And I had a division head of each part of the world that run that part of the program, like Latin America had a chief, Africa had a chief, Near East, South Asia, Far East, all of them had a chief.  They ran that part of the program, and they all reported to me.
Story_ID: 237735
Speaker 1: And that was a very challenging and interesting experience in my life.  I encountered some interesting social situations while I was there [at the Investment Survey Division, United States Agency for International Development (USAID)].  In the first place, I had two secretaries, one white, one black.  The black secretary was named Fitzgerald [ph.], and my constituents that I served were multinational banks and multinational firms that did business throughout the world, manufacturing and what else.  And those were the people that came to my office looking for investment opportunities in the developing countries.  They would call our office and, as fate may have it, Miss Fitzgerald would answer the phone.  And they would talk to her, make an appointment to see me, and they'd come to the office, and they said, "I'm looking for Miss Fitzgerald."  And they start walking towards the white girl, and she would say, "That's Miss Fitzgerald;" point to the black girl.  And they'd say, "I want to see [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Edward D.] Irons," and then Miss Fitzgerald would bring them in to see me, and when they open the door, and they see a black man in charge of that division, that was new to them.  And their mouths would drop, and I think they couldn't believe that black man was in charge of that function.
Story_ID: 237736
Speaker 1: I had the authority and responsibility for approving any investment search plan that anybody came in to execute.  They'd have to develop a plan to go search out a business opportunity; I had to approve it before they could go.  And when they came back after working their plan, if they weren't successful in finding what they were looking for, they would present a feasibility study which showed that.  And then I would approve that, and then they would get reimbursed for the expenses: that's the way it worked.  If they found the opportunity, they would get nothing, because in those days, you could make tons of money investing in the developing countries.  Because let's face it, the system that they operated in those days, it was purely exploitative.  They took the natives of the country, didn't matter what country it was, could be Latin America, could be Africa, could be Far East, wherever they were.  They would take the natives where they were, take the natural resources, which was the source of the wealth, develop whatever products that they wanted, usually to a certain stage.  Then send it either to Europe and manufacture it, or to the U.S., and leave the country destitute as it was when they got it.  That was what they did.  And so these were the--so they made a ton of money, that was my point; they could make a ton of money, and they did make a ton of money when they found it.  So we didn't reimburse them when they said, "Okay, we found what we were looking for," but if they didn't, we would reimburse them; they were out of nothing when they didn't find what they were looking for.  That was that.  And we ran for, I ran that [Investment Survey Division, United States Agency for International Development (USAID)] for four years and then I got a call from Howard University right there in Washington [D.C.].  Said they were looking for somebody to organize a business school for them.  They were 102 years old and didn't have a business school.
Speaker 2: Now this was 1968?
Speaker 1: This was '67 [1967].
Story_ID: 237737
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, '67 [1967].  This is when I left the state department [U.S. Department of State, United States Agency for International Development (USAID)] and went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They said, "We got a lot of students in the business department but we--it's not a school."  Howard had a--had the most diversified university of any black school in the country.  Med [Medical] school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], engineering school [Howard University School of Engineering and Architecture; College of Engineering and Architecture, Washington, D.C.], [Howard University] School of Education [Washington, D.C.], School of Arts and Sciences [Howard University College of Arts and Sciences, Washington, D.C.], they had them all, but they didn't have a business school.  And so they wanted to organize a business school, and they asked if I would consider coming to be the first dean of the business school, and I said, "Under the right conditions."  And that meant I would have to come as a full professor and I would be given a certain salary that I would need, and that they would set up the environment in which I could do it.  Because any organization can develop systems that could prevent you from doing it, if that's what they wanted to do.  I knew that.  And so I said, I want to make sure that the wheels agree, so that I can get it done, and so I agreed.
Speaker 1: Who was the president at Howard?
Speaker 2: James Nabrit (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Jim Nabrit, Jim Nabrit was president, and Frank [M.] Snowden [Jr.] was the dean that came to see me.
Speaker 1: Frank Snowden the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was dean of College of Liberal Arts [Howard University College of Arts and Sciences, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: He's a classicist, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a classicist.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Graduate of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So he called up Harvard University, he called up Harvard University, [Harvard] Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] to find out if they had any black graduates, and they said, "You got one right there in the state department."  And so, he came to see me, and I asked where he got his information, and he said, "Well, I called the school, and they told me you were here."  And anyway, I negotiated that situation, and they gave me the full professorship, gave me the salary, and so I went over there.
Story_ID: 237738
Speaker 1: --The business department was the largest in the [Howard University] College of Liberal Arts [College of Arts and Sciences, Washington, D.C.].  The dean of the College of Liberal Arts [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.] didn't want to lose all those students, 'cause that's what they would do (laughter), 'cause that affected his budget.  So he threw every stumbling block in my way--took me three years to get it done, but we finally got it done.  And just as we got it done, Jim Nabrit [James Nabrit] retired, and the board brought in Jim Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek] as the new president.
Speaker 2: Now, he was real young.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Young man.
Speaker 1: He was young--that's right.  He--this was like going from the valley to the mountain, that's right, from his standpoint.  'Cause he was president of a little school [Shaw University] in [Raleigh] North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, at that time, the good guys didn't want to be president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  That with the environment was such, the students were rebelling and had locked the president in the--in his office, and so the good guys didn't want to be president.  So Cheek was the last resort, and they hired him.  Well, he came in and as it turned out, he got rid of, or caused people to leave that were highly visible.  And I was one of those--I was highly visible; I was always being interviewed by The Washington Post about whatever I was doing.  I was visible in the state department [U.S. Department of State]; I was visible in--at Howard.
Speaker 2: Now what, what did he do that caused you to go?  I mean, why did he, did he want you to leave, or?
Speaker 1: Well, here's the way it happened.  I had initiated the organization of the school [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.], doing the normal things that you do when you organize a school.  Developed a curriculum, using the best--the latest information on curriculum education for business schools.  And I had a symbol, several of the former presidents of the American Association of Collegiate Schools of Business [Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB)], which was the accrediting agency for business schools.  I had gotten them to be on my advisory board, because I wanted to go for accreditation as quickly as possible.  Because Howard had a big group of students, and we had a highly diverse, good cross section of students from around the world.  So, I knew we could get our school accredited as soon as we accomplished the basic things that needed to be accomplished.  And I was going to make that happen.  And, in the process, because of the things of what I was doing, I was in the news.  And, as I recall, I just don't think he liked that, and he was a little Napoleon [Bonaparte] in his personality, and nobody could raise their head above him, so to speak.  And so what he did, I was--the Mortgage Bankers [Association] of America had approached me to put in a course in mortgage banking, 'cause they wanted to hire some minority mortgage bankers.  Well, I decided--my field is finance--I decided I would put that in myself, so I went to Northwestern University.  It was on my certificate down there, to study mortgage banking, the summer of 1970, I guess it was.  And so I was at Northwestern University studying mortgage banking with the objective of putting in a course in mortgage banking at the business school that fall.  And I got a call from my wife, said, "You got a letter from Jim Cheek," and I said, I said, "Open it and see what he says."  And she opened it, and she read it to me, and she said, "Dear [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Edward D.] Irons, you have done a good job with the--organizing the business school and--but I've decided to bring in a person from the outside to be the new dean; I hope you will stay."  And that was his letter to me, and this was written July the 2nd, 1970.  Now, this was July.  Normally, anybody in academia knows that if you're gonna fire a faculty member, you let him know at least early spring.  Gives him time to find what he would want, because that's when the hiring is done: in the spring, for the fall.  Well, he waited until July the 2nd; well, I knew then that he was doing that so that I wouldn't have an option--that I would have to stay--
Story_ID: 237739
Speaker 1: And if I was gonna stay [at Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.], I couldn't say anything, so I had to keep quiet and have to stay there, because I couldn't get a job.  Well, I dictated a letter to my wife, over the phone I told her, give [HistoryMaker] Dr. [James] Cheek--I've forgotten the specifics, but--"This is your prerogative to select the division chiefs in your organization; however, I submit my resignation as of the end of this month," or whatever it was.  "And I hope you Godspeed," maybe a two sentence letter.  I resigned.  And of course, I wasn't worried about getting a job or making money or anything like that.  And I decided to take a year and do consulting and decide what I was gonna do next, and that's what I did, and I tripled my income that year.  So that wasn't a problem.  In fact, at the time, I was consulting to the National Bankers Association, which was a minority banks of the country.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they paid me nearly as much as the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] by themselves.
Speaker 2: Now did you--did the National--how old is the National Bankers Association?
Speaker 1: Well, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this is a black, or--
Speaker 1: It's a black organization.
Speaker 2: It has that National name--
Speaker 1: Yes.  I have that history; I have that history, but the specific date that they began business [1927] I don't want to quote, I think it was in the '40s [1940s], but it could been earlier than that.
Speaker 2: Well, I just wondered, because--because it weren't--you know, at certain period of time, there weren't any black banks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It probably was earlier than that.  That's correct, that's correct.
Speaker 2: And I just wondered--
Speaker 1: They would just a handful of them when--I think it was around twenty, when I assumed, and they gave me a title of executive director, but I was still a head of the business school at Howard at the same time.  I didn't have to work; it wasn't an operating thing.  I managed their association and put together their educational programs and their conventions; that's what I did.  And so, then I had other consulting situations, so I didn't worry about that.  And plus the University of Richmond [Richmond, Virginia], which was one of the rich private schools of the country, A. H. Robinson, A. H. Robins [Foundation] pharmaceutical house [A.H. Robins Company] had given them $40 million.  And the dean was a young professor at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when I was a student there, and so he asked me to come down and teach while I was considering what I would do.  And they offered more money than I was getting at Howard.  I said, "Well, now, I'm gonna be traveling around the country.  I can't do this; I can't be there every day."  They said, "Well, when you can't be there just call me, and I'll teach your class."  And for a year I served as professor of finance at the University of Richmond--didn't have a single black student, didn't have a single black student.  He tried--he paid me a premium, tried to get me to sign on to become a full-time professor from then on.  And I told him, "No, I'm--I have some other options," and so that was what transpired when I left Howard.  I spent a year deciding what I would do.  I had a number of offers when the--'cause it hit the press.  The students objected.  They raised hell; the faculty voted 100 percent to ask him to reconsider, so all that was in the news.  And so I--but I told both my faculty and my students, that the CEO of the university had his prerogative to pick his cabinet and that if he didn't want me, I didn't want to work for him.  It would never work.  And so that's the way that ended.
Story_ID: 237740
Speaker 1: --Made national news and soon as the word got out that I was leaving Howard [University School of Business, Washington, D.C.], I began to get offers.  One of the offers was from George Shultz who was director of the Office of Management and Budget. I knew George; he was dean of the business school at University of Chicago [Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  So I already knew George, and he said, "Well, I got a position of associate director of the Office of Management and Budget."
Speaker 2: Now, now we're in the [President Richard Milhous] Nixon administration?
Speaker 1: Yes, this is Nixon administration, and that was the reason I couldn't take the job.  I said, "George, I'd love to work for you, and I'd love to do what you want me to do, but I can't work for Richard Nixon."  And so I rejected that.
Speaker 2: You had made to make it perfectly clear?
Speaker 1: I did, I told him I can't work for Richard Nixon, and so I rejected that.  I was offered several deanships and, and president of my alma mater, Central State [University; College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] it had become Central State at that time.  And they had gotten in touch with me and asked me if I would consider being president.  And I told them I would not like to be president at Central State or any school at this point, and American University [Washington, D.C.], offered me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charles [H.] Wesley I guess was leading it [Central State College, Wilberforce, Ohio] then, wasn't he?
Speaker 1: Well, no--
Speaker 2: Had he left?
Speaker 1: No, he had been gone for some time, he had been gone for some time.  He was there when I was a student, and of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was there, I think from '64 [1964] maybe [1947-1965].  He was there when my brother was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well he, he was, he was an enduring person too, and he had longevity and he was--I remember, he was vibrant at eighty-five, I remember that.
Speaker 2: I heard I don't know if you can confirm this, but my brother said that after he would speak, he would jump off the stage and then walk down the aisle.
Speaker 1: Well, he, you mean at the school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he wouldn't even (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Off the--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: He'd jump right off the--
Speaker 1: And, and I'm convinced he was telling the truth, because he was vibrant man.  I said he was vibrant at eighty-five, I remember that, I saw him at some meeting; history meeting.  He was a historian.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a consultant--
Speaker 1: He was consultant (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [Carter G.] Woodson. They collaborated on books--
Speaker 1: Carter G. Woodson [Memorial] Foundation or something like that.
Speaker 2: The Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH)].
Speaker 1: History, that's right, you know it better than I do.  But he was very vibrant.
Story_ID: 237741
Speaker 1: I did not want to be president of Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], and American University [Washington, D.C.] offered me job as dean of the business school [American University Kogod School of Business, Washington, D.C.], and they didn't have a single black student, and they interviewed me and the outgoing dean, the dean of the college and the president.  And they all wanted me to be dean of the business school, and I agonized over it.  They didn't have a single black student.  I said, "I don't believe this is where I want to be right now," and so I finally accepted a job at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] as the Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking and Financial Institution [sic. Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking and Finance]--became the first holder of an endowed chair in banking at a HBCU [historically black colleges and universities].
Speaker 2: Now, who was Mills B. Lane [Jr.]?
Speaker 1: Mills B. Lane was the chairman of, an organizer of Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia] which is the largest bank in Georgia at that time.  Citizens & Southern [National Bank (CSN)], not Citizens & Trust, Citizens Trust is the black bank here.  Citizens & Southern was the major bank in Georgia at that time, and Mills B. Lane was the chairman.  He created five endowed chairs University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia], Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University, and I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay now, this was a white man?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Doing this.
Speaker 1: The largest bank in Georgia.  At that time was the largest in the South, largest bank in the South, Mills B. Lane.  He was a very interesting guy, answered his own phone, pick up the phone and call him, he'd say, "Mills B."  That's how he would answer his phone, and those of us who were chair holders would meet with him periodically, because he'd want to have us share what we were doing in the area of banking and finance.  And then he would share with us what was going on in the industry and what was going on at CNS [sic. CSN].  So, I accepted the job at Atlanta University, and I've been there now thirty-three years; I still teach.
Story_ID: 237742
Speaker 1: The District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] created a banking commission [Office of Banking and Financial Institutions for the District of Columbia] which is equivalent to a state banking commission.  If you recall, I indicated that states have the authority to charter and regulate banks and financial institutions just like the federal government.  And the District of Columbia passed a law creating a banking commission, banking and financial institution commission.  And they were looking for a commissioner to run it to regulate the financial institutions in the District.  So they contacted me, and then I asked them to send me some information on the legislation that created the commission.  And after I read it, it was clear to me that nobody could do it well, because there was ambiguity between the authority of the commissioner and the city commission that was the legislative body.  And I said, "If you have that kind of ambiguity, you're gonna have conflict and nobody can do it, and I can't accept this job with that kind of ambiguity."  And I thought that, that they would throw it in the wastebasket--"Who does he think he is, telling us what we have to do in order to get this commission to work?" (Laughter) I forgot about it, 'cause I figured that's what they were gonna do with my letter.  And I probably still have a copy of that letter I wrote them--I kept the files--and I outlined four things they'd have to do for me to consider it.  And one was revise the legislation, and so in about a month I got a call from the office of the mayor saying, "We decided to accept what you recommended, and we would like to see if you would consider coming and becoming our first commissioner."  And I said, "Well, if you gonna do what I ask you do--I recommended, I will come."  Well, as it turned out, this was end of August; school was getting ready to start the next month.  And normally you can't just pull up and leave like that at that time.  So I had to go to the president to tell him what had happened, and he said, "Well, if you got this kind of opportunity, we'll work with you and try, and if you help us find a replacement, we'll give you leave," which is what you do.  So I did, and I left and went to Washington [D.C.] to become the commissioner.
Story_ID: 237743
Speaker 1: Well, it was just like the piece of paper that I had in the state department [U.S. Department of State].  All it was, was the legislation; I had to create the agency [Office of Banking and Financial Institutions for the District of Columbia] and run it.  And as fate would have it, I knew the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System], I knew the chairman of the Federal Deposit and Insurance Corporation [FDIC], I knew the chairman of the [Office of the] Comptroller of the Currency--no, they didn't call him chairman, he was the comptroller of the currency.
Speaker 2: Were these all Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] men?
Speaker 1: No, they weren't all Harvard men, but these were the people that were running those agencies that were the regulatory agencies for national banks.  You see Paul [A.] Volcker was chairman of the Federal Reserve System; you may or may not remember that name.  And let's see the guy was Bill Seidman [L. William Seidman]--Bill Seidman was president--was chairman of the Federal Deposit and Insurance Corporation.  And the, the comptroller of currency was Jim Smith [James E. Smith].  I knew all those guys, because as executive director of the National Bankers Association, I had to interact with them.  'Cause I had national bankers and state bankers in my organization, and so I knew them.  And I was doing research in banking and in publishing and, therefore, my name was out there in financial and banking world.  So when I got there, the first thing I did was call each of them and say, "Well, you know, I've never run a banking commission, and I'm gone fail unless you guys help me," (laughing).  And so Paul Volcker said, "Well, Ed [HistoryMaker Edward D. Irons] come talk to me and tell me what you need," so I went over and told him I needed a general counsel to write my regulations.  That's the first thing you have to have as a regulatory agency are regulations.  He called his general counsel in, and he said, "Okay, I'll tell you what I want you to do.  I want you to get two or three of your lawyers, I want you all to write the banking regulations for the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.]."  And I said, "Wait a minute, now, I don't have any money to do--I just, I just need help," he said, "Well, did I say this gonna cost you anything?"  And he wrote--his lawyers wrote my regulations, and it would've cost maybe two hundred thousand dollars to get that done, if I had to hire one of the big law firms to do it in the District of Columbia.  But it didn't cost me a dime, because Paul Volcker--I knew him, and he knew me, and so we got it done.  I went to Bill Seidman and told him I need a banking examiner that had experience.  And he let me have--he delegated a guy that had twenty-two years of bank examination experience to me.  He detailed him to me for a year; he can help me get that function going.  So, I organized the--then I began to hire the people that I needed to staff the agency, and that's the way I got the agency off the ground.  I had the most experienced and respected people in the banking regulatory system working with me.  And I got it down.
Story_ID: 237744
Speaker 1: And the reason I was interested in taking the job [banking commissioner, Office of Banking and Financial Institutions for the District of Columbia] in the first place--if it could be organized effectively--was the major banks of the country wanted to come into the District [of Columbia; Washington, D.C.].  Citicorp [Citigroup], Chemical [Bank], Manufacturers Hanover [Corporation]; all the major banks wanted to a branch presence in the District.  Well, that's what's exciting to me, to have the nation's major banks, you know, wanting to come in and establish a presence in the District of Columbia.  But, as it developed, the local banks didn't want them in there (laughter) and the lady [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis who was the daughter of Charles [R.] Drew, the outstanding surgeon had created blood plasma.  She was chairman of that function and the city council, and she was in bed with the local bankers.  So, here I was trying to create a viable banking industry for this District to serve the population on a competitive basis, with all the services that they should have.  And she was in bed with the bankers locally, and she was blocking everything that I was trying to do.  And she could do that because she was the legislative oversight and could block whatever anyone did that came under her jurisdiction.  Well, I struggled with that for four years, 'cause they didn't actually accomplish the changing of the law.  'Cause she didn't want it changed; she wanted the ambiguity there, and when the mayor [HistoryMaker Marion Barry] and his crew sought to get the law changed, and she blocked it.  Well, that meant the ambiguity was going to prevail, and so I struggled with it for four years, which was--I had a statutory appointment for four years.  And I would've had to been reappointed for another four years. Well, as fate would have it--and I was in the news all the time.  The Washington Post covered what was going on in the banking industry, and I have the clippings today.  Generally, they editorialized in my favor, saying that I was correct in what I was trying to do.  And, but as fate would have it, I just was tired of that kind of tug of war, and I decided I didn't want to be reappointed.  And I would just--my wife was teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], so she was happy and wanted to stay in Washington [D.C.].  She said, "Well, why don't you just take a job at one of the local universities?" either Howard or any of the rest of them out there--quite a number of them that I could've got a job from.  And that's what I was going to do, 'cause she was happy.  And then as fate would have it, the provost of Atlanta University [(AU), Atlanta, Georgia]--which by that time had become Clark Atlanta University [(CAU), Atlanta, Georgia] had merged with the undergraduate school which was Clark College [Atlanta, Georgia], and had become Clark Atlanta University--came up to see me and asked if I would consider coming back to, to CAU as the dean of the business school [Clark Atlanta University School of Business Administration; Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia].  And, of course, I was kind of reluctant, but I said I would consider it under the right conditions, and I had listed those, and so they invited me to come down. I went down to talk to the students, the faculty and the president [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole], and some members of the board.  And when I talked to the president, I told him these are the conditions I would want to prevail if I'm gone be dean.  And he seem reluctant, but he agreed.  To make a long story short, he finally sent me--I told him the only way I would really accept--write it--sign a contract, is that he would send me a letter corroborating the things that we agreed to orally.  And then if we're together, send me a contract, I'll sign it, and that's unusual, but that's what I did.  I knew, I knew the political and administrative climate of AU, and I wanted to make sure I had a clear hand to do what I needed to do.
Story_ID: 237745
Speaker 1: And so he [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole] sent the letter, I went down came back to CAU [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] as dean of the business school [Clark Atlanta University School of Business Administration; Clark Atlanta University School of Business, Atlanta, Georgia].  And as that, as it developed, it was my students that were out there, throughout the country, that had importuned the board to insist that I come back, not to insist but to invite me to come back and be dean.  I didn't know that until it was just about a deal; the students from all over the country had gotten together and importuned the board to do that.  So, I'm now back at Clark Atlanta University as the dean of business school.
Speaker 2: Now, what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was 1990; I had left in 1986, and 1990, I came back as dean of the business school.  And the challenge was to get both the graduate and the undergraduate school accredited.  The graduate school had become the first graduate school of business among HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] to be accredited in the United States.  Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1974 got accredited, I led that, that accreditation drive, I wasn't dean but I was chairman of that group that led that.  We got accredited in 1974, and now I'm dean and will have an undergraduate division that is not accredited.  Didn't have any Ph.D.s--brought eight hundred students over and didn't have any Ph.D.s, and the AACSB [Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business; American Association of Collegiate Schools of Business] has a formula that you have to have so many Ph.D.s for so many students.  A Ph.D. for so many students, and we didn't have those for the undergraduate division.  And as fate would have it again, the university salary scale wasn't attractive, so that was pushing the rock up the rough side of the mountain, trying to hire people without competitive salaries, but to make a long story short, I did it by begging and talking about a vision what we were gonna do with this school.  And I was able to get Ph.D.s to come and join us, and we got it accredited.  It was a five year process.  We got it accredited in 1995, but it was such an arduous process trying to do that without sufficient funds.  That it was--it just drained me, and so I retired from the deanship as soon as I got my--the accreditation, because I didn't want the stress of it any longer.  And the president [HistoryMaker Thomas W. Cole] then asked if I would stay on as distinguished professor of finance, which is what I was before I went to Washington [D.C.].  And I was surprised, because we had to struggle with each other during the five years trying to make sure I had enough resources to do what I was charged to do.  And often it was pushing the rock up the rough side of the mountain, that's what I--that was my slogan.  And I thought that he would be happier that I would be stepping down, but he said he would like me to stay on as distinguished professor of finance and banking [Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking and Finance].  So, I agreed, but I told him I wanted to take a year off, and he agreed, he said, "Will you come back at the end of the year?  Take a leave and come back."  So he paid me while I was off, and I started then teaching in fall of '96 [1996].  I started back to teaching--I was on leave--and I've been teaching entrepreneurship since that, since--that's what I started teaching when I got back.
Story_ID: 237746
Speaker 1: And while my discipline is finance, my passion is entrepreneurship.  It's my judgment that black people will never be able to compete at the table that--where decisions are made that control their lives until they get an economic base.  You can only get an economic base when you control the economics that control your life.  As long as somebody else controls the economics that controls our life you have to dance to their music, and so I jumped at the opportunity to teach entrepreneurship.  I feel we ought to be building viable businesses in this community, in this nation, that employ people.  And so that's what I've been teaching now since 1996.  And to just to give you an idea of what my philosophy is based on, I require my students every semester to research the average, no, to research the profile of the average African American-controlled business in this country.  The profile of the other ethnic groups, like Asians and Hispanics, and also the BE 100 [Black Enterprise 100], and then I wanted them to contrast the profiles of the average African American with the other ethnic groups and also with the BE 100.  And for example, just to give you an idea of where we try to get them to aspire, the BE 100 firms, in 1972 when they started, had a total of $42 million in sales.
Speaker 2: The whole?
Speaker 1: One hundred, 100.
Speaker 2: A whole 100?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1972.  In 2000 they had [$]13 billion, 13 billion.  They had an average of ninety employees in 1972 and they had an average of approximately 350 employees in 2000.  So you contrast that with the average African American business in this country of about ninety thousand dollars a year for sales and six employees, on an average.
Speaker 2: That's now?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's now; we do this every semester [at Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I tell them that as long as we languish at that level of business, we're never going to compete at the bargaining tables where the decisions are made that control our lives.  So we've got to be like the BE 100, and they're no different from those of you who are sitting in this class.  They are absolutely no different from those of you sitting in this class; you can be that kind of person.  So I'm selling inspiration, the know-how, the skills so they can read and learn--but I'm selling inspiration.  And so, that's what I do every day.
Speaker 2: So you really believe, then, that that's really the key factor that's missing is the inspiration--the understanding or the belief that this can be done?
Speaker 1: That's correct.  I mean, as long as we believe we can't do it, we won't do it.  And now that we have role models, and I'm writing a book on that anyway.  That will be a textbook that will feature some of my most successful businesses across industries, across gender lines, and, of course, we hope that will become a standard, where young men and women will see that it can be done.  And now that I've got it to this stage, I've got about ten at various stages of completion, and I talked to one of the editors of one of the major publishing houses--
Speaker 2: Oh, go ahead finish your sentence.
Speaker 1: --one of the executives at one of the major publishing houses said he likes the idea and wants to publish it.  All we have to do is get it done.
Story_ID: 237747
Speaker 1: Well, [HistoryMaker] Andrew [F.] Brimmer clearly, as you would guess, should be--if he isn't already--one of The HistoryMakers, because he became the first African American to serve on the Federal Reserve Board [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System].  And while he was a member of the Federal Reserve Board--I believe he was appointed in 1968 [sic. 1966] or somewhere along in there.  I forgotten what specific year, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was during the [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson--
Speaker 1: Johnson administration, Johnson administration.  And he became the spokesperson for economics for African Americans, although he was to the far right of the economic thinking of most black economists and most black people at that time.  And he took the position that the black financial institutions couldn't become viable entities for economic development in the black community.  And I took the opposite position, and I wrote a piece which I shared with The HistoryMakers, in 1968, I believe it was, or '69 [1969], taking the position that Andrew Brimmer's position was flawed even his numbers were flawed when he was evaluating them.  And The Washington Post made it their lead story in their business section, all across the page.  And I shared it with, you have it in your file, that's one the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is the time just to, just for the sake of history.  This is the time that, I think the [President Richard Milhous] Nixon administration had come out with this policy of aiding the black community--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Black capitalism.
Speaker 1: Yeah, black capitalism.
Speaker 2: They coined the phrase--
Speaker 1: That's correct, they--he did that.
Speaker 2: Small Business Administration [SBA].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes, that's correct.  But that was mutually exclusive from the specific dispute which Andy and I were part of.
Story_ID: 237748
Speaker 1: I was trying to advocate development of black financial institutions, black-controlled financial institutions, as a part of our economic base.  And I'm fully aware and fully cognizant of the fact that we aren't likely to create banks that will meet our full needs.  But if we have them as alternatives in an economic base, we give the black community citizens more options, and we build businesses that would never be able to get off the ground or to flourish.  Because the major banks wouldn't make the loans, and that's been historically true, and it's still largely true today.  So, the need for financial institutions to be controlled by the black community is still a viable need in my opinion.  The reason Atlanta [Georgia] became a mecca for what was considered black successful economic institutions was because we were the first American city that had a black-controlled bank.  Black-controlled insurance corporation, black-controlled savings and loan association, black-controlled fire and casualty insurance; all those financial institutions were a part of the dynamic of creating economic businesses.  And at that time Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] before segregation was destroyed, had a very viable black business, they called it the Black Wall Street, in those days.  For example, there was a chain of drugstores back in those days, a guy owned ten drugstores.  Those kinds of things, all kinds of businesses were viable.  We had a radio station back in those days, and there were none across the country.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, Atlanta had--
Speaker 1: We had our own controlled hotel which at that time was the only hotel that black people could live in.
Speaker 2: That was a Paschal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before segregation, yes, before segregation.
Speaker 2: Paschal's Motor [Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 1: That's right; that's what it was.  So, all I'm suggesting is that we have to become a part of the decision power that controls our economic lives; we have to become a part.  Now, I don't advocate that we pull off in the corner, and nobody work for major institutions--I don't do that.
Story_ID: 237749
Speaker 1: I train bankers.  I teach bankers to become bankers that can manage banks of any hue, and they work all across this nation in major banks, from Citicorp [Citigroup] down.
Speaker 2: Now what--the message you delivered just before we changed tape was that the skills are skills, these are the business skills the banking skills that, that you learned at Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and can be learned by anybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anybody. Anybody.
Speaker 2: It doesn't--there's no magic with--
Speaker 1: No, you don't have to be an [Albert] Einstein in intellect to learn banking.  When I was studying banking, only six percent of the people who were in the banking industry had college degrees.  Six percent of the people working in the banking industry in those days had college degrees.  Banking is a simple business.
Speaker 2: Now but the tough part--now, correct me if I'm wrong, now.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think, and I don't know a lot about this, but I think the tough part is having the connections and the relationships that grease the skids of-or, keep the wheels rolling.
Speaker 1: Well, that's--you're absolutely correct, but that cuts across all business.  Business is organization of relationships, no matter what business it is.  Whether it's banking, whether it's janitorial service, or whether it's TV, radio.  No matter what it is, it's relationships.
Speaker 2: Do you think--is it your opinion that today--'cause it's been said in the past now, I know--well, for instance, a friend of mine always used to complain.  He had his own construction company, a self-employed contractor.  He said that he can get--go to any bank and get a loan to buy an [Cadillac] Eldorado (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Is that right? But if he wanted buy a truck, or a piece of moving equipment.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Um-hm.  For a business?
Speaker 2: For a business.  He couldn't get that, it's hard--
Speaker 1: And that's been largely true; that's been largely true.  The banks would lend you money for what I call depreciating assets, assets that can only go down in value, but if you're trying to build a business, it was like pulling hen's teeth, so to speak.
Speaker 2: It was his impression that this was because he was black, that they would loan Eldorado money and not, you know?
Speaker 1: Well, and you know, you can't measure that definitively, after the laws were put on the books, it's illegal to do all these things that they did during the segregation era.  The majority population has learned to do it subtly but, the matter of fact, it's the same.  You can't--banks are still discriminating, and but they can hide their hand in ways that you can't prove that there discriminating.  When it was legal to discriminate, it was easy, but when it's against the law, they can create all kinds of systems that obscure the real reason for public consumption, but the fundamental reason is always there: it's racism.
Story_ID: 237750
Speaker 1: What I would suggest then is that the real challenge that you have in teaching your philosophy to black students is to get them to believe that they can overcome, you know, the systematic racism and lack of--without a history of relationships in business.  It's hard to establish them, but I guess it can be done, 'cause we have people that do it.
Speaker 2: That's absolutely correct.  First, you have to have a mindset that you can do it; you have to start with that mindset.  'Cause the minute--if you think you can't, you can't, and if you think you can, then you find a way.  So, you're correct in saying that that you have to develop an attitude that, "I'm gonna make it in spite of the racism."  You have to develop that attitude, and that isn't easy.  I--high self-image young men catch hell when they go into industry.  If a young man believes in himself, has a high self-concept, he displays that as he deports himself, as he walks, as he talks.  And those kind of young black males catch hell in industry; I've seen it over the thirty-three years I have been teaching M.B.A.s and B.A.s.  Give you an example.  I think I can just go ahead and call the name, because I don't think it's--I don't think it's wrong to do that.  Barry [F.] Sullivan was passed over at Chase Manhattan Bank [Chase Bank] to become its president, in the '80s [1980s].  And he became president of First Chicago [Bank], [The] First National Bank of Chicago [JP Morgan Chase Bank].  You might have remembered that era, but you may not have known him, because you aren't in the banking industry.  Well, I was, and he called me.  At that time, I was the Mills B. Lane Professor of Banking [and Finance, Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and I was writing, so the people in industry knew me.  Called me and said, "Look, I'm president of First Chicago [Corporation, Chicago, Illinois], and we got a turnaround situation.  A guy named [A. Robert] Abboud had been the president, and he had kind of created a lot of problems and got fired.  He took his, Abboud's, place and said, "I got a turnaround situation; I need the best minds I can find; I want the best you got."  I said, "Okay," so he came down, came down in the fall, brought his human resource people, and they interviewed a bunch of graduates and undergraduate students in the AU [Atlanta University] Center.  See, we have, at that time Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  All those are undergraduate schools.  So I assembled a group from those four universities, and he talked to them, told them that he need the best he could find, and then went on back to Chicago [Illinois].  In the spring, he brought his--he sent his human resource people down here to interview them for the actual jobs and selected six to come back to Chicago to interview.  Those were six of my best M.B.A.s: three men, three women.  The three men, one already had a C.P.A. [license], had been working for one of the big six accounting firms before he came to get his M.B.A.  One had taken a year's training in management at Bankers Trust [Deutsche Bank] in New York, and one had passed two parts of his C.P.A. examination, needed one before he could become a C.P.A.  And all of them experience; these were the three men.  The three women: very attractive physically; very smart intellectually; all of them had good grades.  I sent them up there.  Guess who they took?  The three young women.  Rejected the three young men.  I've seen that happened repeatedly throughout my thirty-three years, so I'm not talking from the top of my head, I'm talking from empirical, documented experience.  High achieving young black males catch hell in the industrial world at this place--time in our history.
Story_ID: 237751
Speaker 1: How does that [racial and gender discrimination] impact the need for more entrepreneurs?
Speaker 2: Well, it does impact, it does impact, because it impacts it in, I guess, a negative way.  It prevents our strong high achievers from getting a job like they would get if they weren't black, and so they have to do something as an alternative.  But often they aren't ready, one of the things--
Speaker 1: Okay, so they may start a business too early.
Speaker 2: Yeah, too early.  One of the things--one of the principal criteria for success in business is experience, that's one of the principal.  And the other criterion is perseverance: most entrepreneurs fail before they succeed, and sometimes more than once.  So, perseverance is one of the primary criteria for success for entrepreneurs.  So that's been the experience that I have had as a professor of entrepreneurship and finance at the graduate level and at the undergraduate level.
Story_ID: 237752
Speaker 1: Now, we were going to talk about some of the affiliations I've had as my career has advanced, and as I indicated earlier, in the '70s [1970s] I was president of the National Economic Association, and in 1985 I published a book called 'Black Managers: The Case of the Banking Industry' [Edward D. Irons and Gilbert W. Moore] which was a book that detailed the challenges and opportunities of black managers and professionals in the banking industry.  And it won the book of the year award for the National Economic Association.  And I was appointed--these aren't in order, I'm just--'cause I'm not doing this chronologically.
Speaker 2: What, what year did you write 'Black Managers'?
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was moving into the various affiliations that I've had in my lifetime, and I indicated that I was president of the National Economic Association in the '80s [1980s]. They recruited me to become president of the New York Urban Coalition, Venture Capital Corporation [sic. Coalition Venture Corporation] in the '60s [1960s].  I was still at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at the time. And I travelled to New York two days a week.  I organized that, Venture Capital Corporation, established its policies and procedures and hired its personnel and recruited my successor.  I didn't want to move to New York.  The vice chairman of Citicorp [Citigroup] was the chairman of the board of that group.  And he--they tried to get me to move to New York and told me to name my salary, and of course I obviously didn't want to move to New York, so the salary wasn't the issue.  But that was a great experience; he would meet me with a limousine, 'cause that's what he--that was his transportation.  As vice chairman of Citicorp, he always rode in a limousine with a driver.  He would come to the airport, pick me up or something like that, 'cause I commuted two days a week from Washington [D.C.].  And so, it was a great experience, but I still--I could've named my salary, but I didn't want to move to New York.  I enjoyed being mentored, so to speak, by the vice chairman of Citicorp, which at that time was the largest bank in the country.  And to see the climate within which the officers at Citicorp function, I was able to see all of that at Chase [Bank; JP Morgan Chase] and all the rest of those major banks.
Story_ID: 237753
Speaker 1: I became chairman of the Herndon Foundation here in Atlanta [Georgia]; the Alonzo [F. and Norris B.] Herndon Foundation was created by Alonzo Herndon who created Atlanta Life Insurance Corporation [Atlanta Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], which became the largest private capitalized insurance corporation in the country.  I became chairman of that group that controlled Atlanta Life, and then I served on the Atlanta Life corporate board.  Continued to do serve on both those boards, and I served on the board of 100 Black Men of Atlanta which is the premiere civic organization in this city, one of the most influential and powerful.  I was appointed by George Busbee at that time governor of Georgia to the Georgia health commission which managed Medicare and Medicaid; at that time, it had $40 million that it managed, and I was the first and only black person on that board.  And I was appointed by Maynard Jackson when he was mayor to the Atlanta Economic Development Corporation which sought to create economic development in the city.  I was appointed by the governor of Georgia, at that time was Zell Miller, to the Georgia Institute for Community Business Development, which is a state-wide organization seeking to stimulate business development in the developing areas of the state.  That's sort of a cross-section of the kinds of organizations that I've been affiliated with, and I'm an Alpha, [Alpha] Phi Alpha Fraternity person, and I'm married.  I have five kids.  Three [Trisha L. Alexander, Edward Irons, Jr., Tamara J. Irons] by my first marriage, two [Tony Morrows, Brigitte Killings] by my second marriage; all grown.  And I live here in Atlanta, Georgia and have for thirty-three years, still active: teaching [at Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and doing the things I enjoy doing.
Story_ID: 237754
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?  And I think I know what you're gonna say (laughter) on some level, but, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, you probably have discerned that my interest is in economic development.  I teach in my classes [at Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] that all the various decisions that control African American life are made outside the African American community.  Until we change that structure, we will continue to be less than free.  And so my concern is to build a generation of successful entrepreneurs that helps us to build an economic base that gives us bargaining power and political power.  Because economics and political power go hand in hand.  Political power is transitory when you don't have economic power.
Story_ID: 237755
Speaker 1: Do you think that we're really using our political power, say in cities like Atlanta [Georgia] and--well, you know, there are a lot of different examples.  There's Atlanta, there's Detroit [Michigan] where we have political power, but it doesn't seem like it's working out that well.  The other places where we've had like black mayors like Houston [Texas] and Chicago [Illinois], New York City [New York, New York], Los Angeles [California] even, where it seems to have worked on some level and some not, is there a--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, like I said, economic and political power go together, and you will find that people who have economic power generally control the political power.  And what has happened in the cities where we've gotten political power, we're still controlled by the economic power.  And so all--and there isn't much change because the same people are calling the shots.  In Atlanta, Maynard Jackson changed that.  Atlanta's probably done more for the black community than any other city that has a black mayor.  We had a very strong man in Maynard Jackson; he was the first black mayor of any major city in the United States, and he was probably one of the most brilliant men I've ever met.  He was as near a replica of [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy in eloquence and in intellect that I've ever seen.  He was tall, handsome, articulate guy that--the kind that I talked about; high self-image, believed in himself, and that's the way he deported himself.   And when he was mayor, became mayor, only one percent of the contracts that were issued by the City of Atlanta went to black people.  He said, "That has to change," so they were gonna build a $400 million airport [William B. Hartfield Atlanta International Airport domestic terminal; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport domestic terminal, Atlanta, Georgia], and that's part of the city.  So he said, "Before we start building that, we will have a contract saying that black contractors will get at least 25 percent of this $400 million."  That meant engineers, architects, contractors, business people who would be in the airport once it built.  So they get a piece of all of it.  That's just 25 percent now; we were probably 40, 50 percent of the population.  But he said 25 percent.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, some would argue and say well why shouldn't we get 50 percent?
Speaker 2: Well, but you have to start.  They weren't getting but one percent, you see what I'm saying?  So you get twenty-five times what you were getting--that's a big step.  And the white business community fought him tooth and nail; they fought him tooth and nail.  And he held up the airport, said, "We won't build it until we get this agreement."  And he held it up for two years, and they finally agreed, and when they agreed, and the airport was complete, they had the big opening.  The governor, the mayor, the senators, the representative from the--Washington [D.C.], all here, and when he got up to speak the first word he uttered was, "And they said it couldn't be done."  'Cause that's what they white business committee had said, "Black people don't know how to do that.  They have no experience; it'll be cost overruns, and it won't be correct."  So, when he finished it, he said, "And they said it couldn't be done."  I was there.  That was his first word at the press conference.  "And they said it couldn't be done.  I'm here to tell you that it is complete, on time and under budget, and black people got 25 percent of it."
Story_ID: 237756
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, of all the things that you've done, volunteer and professionally, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the answer is largely no, except there are times when my decisions were made--in retrospect, is debatable whether or not I might've been wise in making that decision. I'll give you an example.  The Mead Corporation, in the '80s [1980s] came to me, I guess it was in the mid-'80s [1980s] before I went to Washington [D.C.].  And just came to my office one day and came in, and I invited them in, and they sat down, and I said, "What can I do for you?"  And they said, "Well, we are looking for someone to manage our management development of our management team of the Mead Corporation."  And I said, "You are?" and he said, "Yes," and I said, "Well, how did you get my name?  Well, I hadn't applied or anything."  He said, "Well, that's our business," and they never did tell me how they got my name, but they said that's our business to find out who we're looking for.  And they went on to describe the Mead Corporation: "We have thirty subsidiaries around the world, and each of them have a president.  And we know that the world is changing, and we're gonna have to change with it, and I want to make sure that our management staff stays current with the latest management technology, and we need somebody to manage that."  And I said, "Well, what makes you think I could do it?" and he said, "Well, we've checked you out and come to the conclusion that you could do it."  And so, I said, "Well, I'm doing some things here that I enjoy doing, and I don't know that would like to give them up."  And they said, "Well, what if we doubled your salary," and I said, "No, that wouldn't do it." "Tripled your salary?" I said, "No, salary is not the issue."  They said, "What if I said you can name your salary?" I said, "That's not the issue."
Speaker 1: You didn't even scratch your head on that one?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: "No, that's not the issue," he said, "Well, would you come to Dayton [Ohio] and just talk to us?"  I said, "But I don't want you to spin your wheels, and then I say no."  They said, "Well, anyway, if you'll come talk to us, you may decide this is what you would like to do."  So I said, "Okay," and they sent the corporate plane for me to take me to St. Louis [Missouri] and then they--our meeting was on the thirtieth floor of their office building, there in Dayton.  You know it was right downtown (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Mead Tower [Talbott Tower, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 2: The Mead Tower.
Speaker 1: I know; I used to work in there.
Speaker 2: Is that right?  That's where they took me, and they had lunch with the president, the director of human resources and the vice president for, I forget, development or something.  And they gave me the spiel; I said, "Well now, what kind of budget would this organization have?"  "You'd have to tell us; whatever you say is what we'll put there."  And who would you, "Who would that person report to?"  "Report to the president.  So and I--now that's when I began to scratch my head, but I said, "No," and after the interview was over I came back to Atlanta [Georgia].  I wrote them and told them I was flattered with the offer, that I thought I would just remain where I am.  And I thanked them very graciously and that's how that ended, but you know I continued to reflect on that decision.  And it is no telling where that could've taken me if I had taken that job, I kind--been able to make even a greater contribution that I've made over the years.  You know as a result of the stature that I would've gained.  But that's one of the decisions that I might've been wise to done it another way.
Speaker 1: It just makes you wonder.
Speaker 2: Yeah makes you wonder, but, but now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was that?
Speaker 2: That was--it must've been 1985 or '84 [1984], somewhere along there, 1983--
Story_ID: 237757
Speaker 1: One of the things that I think has contributed to my longevity is the fact that I have done the things that I've enjoyed doing all my life.  Many people have asked me what my secret--including medical doctors who examine me physically.  At my age--I'm eighty-one, and most doctors see bodies every day and examine them, and I was surprised at the surprise of the doctors.  One doctor, for example, I went to get a physical, [Emory] Crawford Long Hospital [Emory University Hospital Midtown, Atlanta, Georgia], and he said would you mind coming and talking to my interns?  I said, "What can I talk to them about?"  He said, "Just let them ask you some questions."  And so I did, they asked me all about my life, and then finally got around to the age, and they asked me what my age was.  I think at that time I was seventy-nine, and I was, before I told them what my age was, I said, "Okay, why don't we let you guess what my age is."   And they went around the table, ten of them, and not a one of them at that time guessed over sixty, and I was seventy-nine at that time.  And that's the kind of experience I've had, I don't--right now I don't take any therapeutic medicine; I exercise five days a week, mostly; I'm not this semester, but generally, five days a week.
Speaker 2: What do you do?
Speaker 1: Well, I walk three miles a day, half of which is up a fairly steep hill over where school is up, is called [Benjamin Elijah] Mays High School [Atlanta, Georgia] is up, sits on top of a hill.  It has a one-way street going around and up and around back to the main thoroughfare.  I walk that mile, that mile and a half.  And it's very steep going up one side and the hill is more gradual on the other side; I go up the steep side.  And you really do have to puff by the time you get to the top of that; you really give your heart and lungs a workout.  And then I have an exercise room, you probably saw coming down the stairs right there in the--off the corridor.  That's what I do exercise-wise.  I exercise all the muscle types.  I have the machines that I can exercise all the muscle types. And then my wife [Joyce Irons] is a nutritionist, so we try to eat the proper foods, and you know, increasingly, and I notice the medical professions begin to embrace this.  I believe spirituality has a lot to do with your health.  They've found that people who are spiritual have a--are healthier; they've found that out, they have researched that.  And found that people who have a spiritual base are less likely to have the kind of diseases that are prevalent in the other part of the population.  And so, I think that is a significant part of my longevity, in fact, that you go to bed with a clear conscience at night, sleep well and don't worry about somebody trying to get you back.  I think that, I can't prove that, but I believe that, and so, and I've done the things that I enjoy.  So the fact that I didn't go into industry might've kept me from making a ton of money and being a multimillionaire, but it has given me a peace of mind and a joy of what I do that I think supersedes material assets.  My bank account isn't as big as it could've been, but you might've observed I live comfortably, and what else do you want?
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: That's my philosophy.
Story_ID: 237758
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Jerylean Collins Irons and Jeff Irons] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Neither of my parents were educated; my mother was a domestic, cleaned people's houses, and did their laundry and that sort of stuff; that's my mother.  And my father was a laborer and worked for construction firms and stuff like that.  They died before I was able to achieve.
Story_ID: 237759
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm writing a book ['The Autobiography of Dr. Edward Irons: Only by Grace'] now.  I've been writing it for five years; that means I haven't been writing it for five years, 'cause I could do it in sixty days.  But I got the chapters organized, and I got it on the shelf, and I'm gonna do it, and I just let other things get in the way.  I think my legacy is to set an example that life is a series of choices that involve risk.  And those who are reluctant to take risk never get above the crowd; anything of importance in life usually has a high degree of risk associated with it.  As I outlined the chapters along the milestones of my life and the decisions I had to make at each of those milestones, I was able to reflect on the risk that was implicit or inherent in those decisions.  And I always made them in the face of the risk; I never took the easy way out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so life, if one is to achieve, is fraught with risk that one has to take and manage.
Story_ID: 237760
Speaker 1: The last question we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I've never given a lot of thought to that, but I think I'd like to remember--be remembered as one who tried to help others, 'cause as a teacher that's what you do.  You mold lives, and I have been fortunate enough to help in the molding of a lot of lives that I have seen develop.  And that's a great reward; you can't put it in the bank, but it's in your heart, and in your spirit.  And that's what I would like to be remembered for.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir; it's been a pleasure having you share with us.
Speaker 2: It's my pleasure, thank you.
