Story_ID: 531574
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for us, please, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, Jefferson, J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N, no middle initial.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: November 15, 1921.
Speaker 1: And place of birth?
Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just barely got, my mother [Jane White Jefferson] just barely got out of Atlanta, Georgia--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: --two months before (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the place of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview takes place at the national historic museum of the Tuskegee Airmen [Tuskegee Airmen National Historical Museum] in Detroit, located, the building is located in Historic Fort Wayne in Detroit, Michigan, right on the Detroit River.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation or former occupation?
Speaker 2: Former occupation, elementary school science teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I retired as an assistant principal for ten years, my last, last part ten years.  I hated it.  I wanted to go back into the classroom.  They told that I'd have to take a three thousand dollar cut so that's why I retired.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June the 29th, 19--2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Approximately 9:20, 9:30 a.m.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 531575
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Your usual things (laughter), here we go (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.  Why is, to me it's purdy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: P-U-R-D-Y, purdy.
Speaker 1: Purdy.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: And what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I hate to say it, fried pork chops.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Fried pork chops.
Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, do you have a favorite destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii, every February, ah, February belongs to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I go to February, go to Hawaii, spend the whole month in Honolulu [Hawaii] on the Waikiki Beach at the Hale Koa Hotel [Honolulu, Hawaii].
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?  It's weird, I don't have a favorite because I, everyone talks about summer, winter, I enjoy all four seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spring, when the grass is green and the crappies begin to bite, summer, autumn is beautiful with the colors, and wintertime, I, I enjoy winter.
Story_ID: 531576
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I thought about that.  A phrase that my mother [Jane White Jefferson] taught me when I was very young because, the only black kid in a Polish neighborhood [in Detroit, Michigan].  She said, "Alexander [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], everybody in the world is crazy except you and me, and at certain times I'm not so sure about you."  It prepares me to save my inner soul to keep from being affected by other people saying nasty things about me and me reacting.  My favorite saying, I tell everybody, "Everybody is crazy except you and me, and certain times I'm not so sure about you."
Story_ID: 531577
Speaker 1: Start by talking about your mother.  Can you tell me her name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Janie, she hated the word Janie, (laughter) Jane White Jefferson, J-A-N-E.  Born in 1891 in Atlanta, Georgia.  Her father was Henry Montgomery White [Henry White].  Mother, Emma Nelson [Emma Nelson White], oh, boy, my memory is coming back.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Emma Nelson.  Emma Nelson also graduated from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  My grandfather, Henry Montgomery White, graduated from Clark College [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Gammon Seminary [Gammon Theological Seminary, Atlanta, Georgia].  My mother, 1891, was the second of nine children--or seven, I believe, seven.  She became a school teacher and taught in suburban Atlanta, Newnan, Georgia, so places like that.  And as a school teacher, I remember reading before the age of four or five, 'Les Miserables' [Victor Hugo] and other library books.
Speaker 1: Before we talk about that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did your mother ever, did she have any stories about her growing up in Newnan?
Speaker 2: No.  Mom never talked about, well, she talked about her early childhood and talking about her great-grand- about her grandfather, did we mention the grandfather, yet?  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We didn't--
Speaker 1: --about what she told you about her grandfather.
Speaker 2: She, she remembered seeing a man walking down the street towards, coming towards her house, and her father was short, grandpa was short and dumpy, and I suspect he was about 5'5", and she saw a man just like her pops, she called him papa, just like him, short and dumpy, and her mother told her, "Well, that's your granddaddy, William Jefferson White."  And she remembered seeing him once or twice.
Speaker 1: What do you know about William Jefferson White?
Speaker 2: During my research I found out that William Jefferson White came out of Ohio, very, very fair, always professing himself to be a Negro.  He was a carpenter, worked as a cabinetmaker in Augusta, Georgia, and was a Baptist, had a small Baptist church and along with the church also had a school.  When he moved to Atlanta sometime in the 1850s, 1890s, he went along and took the school with him and the school increased teaching black men how to become Baptist ministers, and became the black assembly, black, I can't remember the name of it, but anyway a seminary for black men becoming Baptist ministers.  And eventually, William Jefferson White was very prominent in politics in Atlanta in the 1900s.  And the school eventually increased in size and became, grew, in 1913 took on the name of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  There were many other people in that endeavor and he was only the beginning of it, that's as far as I know now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about his family.
Speaker 2: His family in Augusta, Georgia, to the best of my research, there were two families, one in the front and one in the back.  The one in the front was the one I found through the [U.S.] Census Bureau, census records of 1910, 1900, 1910, of the legitimate family.  And the one in the back through which my grandfather came out, Grandma Lee [ph.] was short and very dark, and grandpa was the son.  When Grandma Lee moved to Atlanta, she went to south Atlanta where Capitol Avenue runs down to a university, and put her son into Clark, at that time it was Clark University, a Methodist school.  And he graduated from Clark and also went to Gammon Theological Seminary and became a Methodist minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you say--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --legitimate family, tell me what you mean by that.  You said there was one in the back and one in the front.
Speaker 2: Well, this is the usual thing in the South, white men, they were always able to have two families, three families, four, one legitimate and one black, one white, and this was all part of the culture at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he had a white family and a black family?
Speaker 2: The white family was not that white.  I believe she was very fair.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was bl- she was a Negro, very fair, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531578
Speaker 1: And more about Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], or the beginning of Morehouse College.  Do you know of any of the other people who might have been involved in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have read--
Speaker 1: --beginning the school?
Speaker 2: --I, the--Morehouse has a book with all of this in it, and I don't now remember the name of the other men who were very prominent along with William Jefferson White.  There are five or six other men who helped him enlarge the Baptist seminary [Atlanta Baptist College; Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] that he brought--and who were very instrumental in Morehouse becoming Morehouse.  By the way, the Morehouse did not get its name until 1913, when the Baptist seminary was named Morehouse after the secretary of the Baptist church or something, the educational, I believe, it was the educational part of the Baptist church was named after a man named Morehouse [Henry Lyman Morehouse].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know any information about your Grandmother Lee [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Grandma Lee?  Nothing except she died in 1925.  I have a picture of her, simply died in 1925.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all I know about her.
Speaker 1: Do you know about her education?
Speaker 2: Uneducated.  She was part Indian [Native American].  Oh, by the way, I found out that she was part Cherokee and her, well, my memory is coming back.  In 1910, she made application for money from the Cherokee Nation, but found out that her, somebody named, I can't remember the name now, her father or uncle through the Trail of Tears had gone to Oklahoma, received the money and had returned.  I got to go back in my memory, my research, and get that out because Grandma Lee had Indian, black plus Indian heritage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, your [maternal] grandfather [Henry White] was born of that union?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about him.
Speaker 2: Short, stumpy, made sure that all of his girls went through school, graduated from Clark College [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  The boys, my Uncle Henry [Henry White, Jr.], Mace [Maceo White], Charlie [Charles White], were programmed to be carpenters and so forth.  He, he wanted the girls to be educated to keep them out of the white man's kitchen, but elected for the boys to be simply carpenters and tradesmen.  And well, Henry, my Uncle Henry, the oldest boy, was a wood carpenter.  Uncle Mace, the second boy, was a automobile mechanic.  Charlie, he was in Chattanooga [Tennessee], I don't know what he did.  Walter [Walter White] did nothing, but all the women, all the girls were school teachers.
Speaker 1: Do you know where they taught?
Speaker 2: My mother [Jane White Jefferson] taught in Atlanta [Georgia].  My Aunt Lydia [Lydia White] taught in Atlanta and in Detroit [Michigan].  Dorothy [Dorothy White] taught here in Detroit.  One, two, three, that's it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --school teachers.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 531579
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your mother [Jane White Jefferson].  Describe your mother to me.
Speaker 2: Mom was very fair.  And to tell you, if you've ever seen the picture of, who was the woman [Essie Mae Washington-Williams] from South Carolina who Strom Thurmond admitted that was his daughter, the two look like sisters, look like twin sisters.  Ma was very fair, very matronly, and to tell you the truth, a typical schoolteacher.  And--
Speaker 1: What was your relationship like with her?
Speaker 2: I was mama's oldest, no, mama's, I was mama's first little baby boy and always, I think she doted on me a little bit too much, but we were very good friends.  Mom lived with me during the last ten years of her life in my home, so we were very close, very close.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And tell me about her personality.
Speaker 2: Morally, Mom was very straightforward, very straightforward more or less, belonged to the Methodist church.  She didn't allow any cursing, no alcohol, no cigarettes, straightforward Methodist woman.  And I respected that in her presence.  And we got along very well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you take any of her personality traits (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Or characteristics (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Not at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm too boisterous (laughter).
Story_ID: 531580
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Tell me his name.
Speaker 2: Alexander Jefferson.  Dad did not finish the third grade.  Why he came out of South Carolina under certain circumstances, I think he was thrown out or he escaped.  In Atlanta [Georgia], a sharp dresser and he and mom [Jane White Jefferson] hit it off.  He was a drinker, he was a dancer, very sharp dresser, and when he got, he came to Detroit [Michigan] in 1915, 1918, got a job at Detroit Lubricator [Detroit Lubricator Company].
Speaker 1: Well, before we go there--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --tell me about his growing up.  Did he share any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Never heard anything from dad about life in Lynchburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never said a word about Lynchburg, South Carolina.  I've been trying to find out about his father, named Fortune.  All he would mention, Fortune Jefferson had umpteen, eleven children, when I say umpteen, twelve, or thirteen.  His father, his mother was Susan Boone [Susan Boone Jefferson], could not find out anything in the census about Susan Boone.  Very little about his family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Dad came to Detroit in '15 [1915], 1918, got a job as a laborer, in 1921, '22 [1922], he worked on a foundry approximately fifteen or twenty blocks from where we lived named Detroit Lubricator.  Detroit Lubricator was a factory built by the man [Elijah McCoy] who is famous for inventing the lubricator for locomotives.
Speaker 1: And he was also a black man, is that right?
Speaker 2: A black man.  What was the man?  Detroit Lubricator, it'll come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This factory, and he was a, a laborer, hard, sweaty, making five dollars a day, which was a lot of money in 1950- 1921.  And he convinced my mother to come to Detroit, and that's where I was born in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Great-grandparents (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fortune, it would be Fortune Jefferson--
Speaker 2: Fortune, that's all I know is Fortune Jefferson and Susan Boone but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were either one of them slaves?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I don't know.  My research has not turned that up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They might have been because they would have been born in 1810, 1820, 1830.  And the circumstances around Lynchburg and Sumter [South Carolina], but that's where Mary McLeod Bethune lived, Sumter, Mayesville [South Carolina], those places.
Speaker 1: Right.  So that would make you two generations from slavery?
Speaker 2: That's right.  Exactly.
Story_ID: 531581
Speaker 1: Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I had one daughter [Alexis Jefferson].
Speaker 1: No, your brothers or sisters.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, my sister, Emma [Emma Jefferson Cobb], five years younger than me.  Emma died three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She has seven, she had seven children, two boys, five girls.  The two boys are out of town, the five girls still live in Detroit [Michigan] with all of their children, and Dumas [Dumas Cobb], her husband, died a year after she died.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Emma was a school teacher.  She had children, had five children then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --went back to school and became a schoolteacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --Dumas was a bus driver and he died a year after she died.
Story_ID: 531582
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me about how your mother [Jane White Jefferson] and father met.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me the story.
Speaker 2: Well, he was a fast dresser, she did not believe in drinking, she did not believe in dancing, and why the two opposites met, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Excuse me.
Speaker 2: But she, he convinced her to come to Detroit [Michigan] and that's where I was born in Detroit.  Well, they were married in Atlanta [Georgia] and moved to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Did you, do you remember any stories about your growing up during that time?  Excuse me.
Speaker 2: In Detroit, my dad bought a house in a Polish neighborhood, we were the only black family in a Polish neighborhood in Detroit.  All I remember is running the streets with these white kids, I'm the only black kid.  And at that time your life involved literally no more than four or five blocks from home.  Now, remember nobody had an automobile, everybody traveled by streetcar.  And so consequently my life was right around my old home.  And I literally had to fight my way home from second and third and fourth grades, it was a tenuous life.  And but I grew up and I survived, hm.
Speaker 1: So is that your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest memories, mainly I was a reader, reading, mainly about magazines about, I remember, mainly magazines were World War I [WWI] magazines, pilots, airplanes, pilots of the escadrille [Lafayette Escadrille] fighting the Germans and becoming pilots and flying, going to Paris [France], drinking champagne, from five or six or seven, eight years old, wanting to be a pilot.  Although being black at the time, I knew good darn well it would never happen because I understood racism and I knew about racism.  Every summer my uncle would drive to Atlanta, we would drive and take the young, young, all of the, my cousins to Atlanta.  We'd drive down U.S. 25 [U.S. Route 25], U.S. 27 [U.S. Route 27].  We'd have to take our own food because there were no places to stop and eat.  I knew exactly where to buy gas, where not to stop, places to avoid, and I knew racism because every time we went downtown to a shop in Detroit, there were no places to use a bathroom.  I had to many times, my mother told me to hold it until we got home which means I got to ride the Michigan Avenue streetcar to get off and run behind a tree to relieve myself.  I knew about racism and segregation and discrimination even in Detroit as a youngster, yeah.  Second, as I said second and third grade, many times I had to fight my way home from school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: You grew up during the Depression [Great Depression] and your father you said had a job at--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the Detroit Lubricators [Detroit Lubricator Company]?
Speaker 2: He worked three days a week, we ate steak, and to tell you the truth I did not realize that we were, quote, poor because we were never hungry.  My dad, I can remember dad walking home from this, down the block from the streetcar, stop, and the Polish men sitting on their porches waving to him as he passed by, "Hi, Mr. Jefferson [Alexander Jefferson]," he's the only man on the block that had a job.  And I just, I didn't realize this until years later thinking back about the effects of the so-called Depression.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You said you enjoyed reading.  Did your mother have a library at home?
Speaker 2: We had an extensive library.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: We had books, all kinds of books.  Whew, we had dictionaries, we had, I remember the 'Les Miserables' [Victor Hugo], I remember all the, the early on Shakespeare [William Shakespeare], these are books that I was reading before third and fourth and fifth grade.  So consequently when I went to school, I was a nerd.  I was double promoted twice, in fact, I finished high school when I was fifteen.  And my mother didn't, she took me out of one middle school because the school did not offer Latin, out of Condon [Condon Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], she put me into Munger [Munger Junior High School; Munger Middle School, Detroit, Michigan] so that I had Latin in the eighth and ninth grades, yeah, seventh, eighth, and ninth grades, I had Latin because she was making sure that I had a college preparatory education (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Education.
Story_ID: 531583
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the neighborhood in which you lived, you said you lived in a Polish neighborhood.
Speaker 2: All Polish neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the, the other people that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --lived there and the types of jobs that they might have had, and who were your friends.
Speaker 2: All of the, all the kids my age, the parents were from the old country.  Next door the Lewandowskis [ph.] next door, the Pulaskis [ph.], the, all of these people my mother's [Jane White Jefferson] age came from the old country.  They spoke Polish, the kids quite naturally are Americanized.  I ran with all the boys until puberty.  Strange part about until puberty, we were kids out in the, (unclear) I was in the 28th Street gang, the 30th Street gang, the, when I say gang these are simply groups of kids out in the street, we didn't fight, there was no fighting, no animosity, we just had fun.  But I found out that all the Polish kids went to Catholic school, Catholic church, St. Hedwig [St. Hedwig Catholic Church, Detroit, Michigan].  And the priest had told the adults that they were not supposed to associate with Negroes.  The woman next door would tell my mother this either.  But one day we had candied yams, no, the boys would make fires and we would roast potatoes, the Polish kids would bring white potatoes, of course, I brought sweet potatoes.  And after roasting sweet potatoes the kids took 'em home and the mothers and fathers were overwhelmed, they had to come over to find out what these things were.  And we shared sweet potatoes and, of course, the Polish brought potato pancakes, they made fantastic potato pancakes.  And, of course, my mother had plain old-fashioned cornbread and we exchanged foods, it was fantastic, we had a beautiful time, then--
Speaker 1: So, did--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: How did you exchange food, was there a night that everybody got together?
Speaker 2: No, this is just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --over the fence.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Just over the fence, every now and then over the fence.  I learned about Polish foods over the fence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or having to eat dinner at dinnertime, not at a table but a bunch of kids out in the backyard, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So finish telling me about the people in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well, across the street there was a black woman, Mrs. Clark, very, very fair.  And her husband, later on I, I realized he was a barber.  He was always dressed in a tie, coat, and he would leave out in the morning with a little black suitcase with his utensils, the barber, and he was a barber downtown at some hotel, I don't know, I don't realize where, but Mr. Clark would go.  And finally Mr. Clark died, and she has one son [sic. grandson] named Martin [Martin Jenkins].  Martin was older than me, approximately ten or fifteen years, and Martin was the reason why I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I'll get to that later on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Other than that there were no other blacks in the family except--blacks in the neighborhood, well, there was one, a guy on the corner, very weird family, never got to know them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were ostracized, loners.
Speaker 1: The house that your family lived in, did your family own the home?
Speaker 2: Dad [Alexander Jefferson] bought that house, and it was literally two shotgun houses put together with a wall down the middle.  There were three rooms, one, two, three, a front room, a middle room, and a kitchen, with a bathroom built into a corner on each one.  He bought it and then cut doors in between so we used all six rooms.  He bought that house in 1919, 1920.
Speaker 1: Do you know how much he paid for it?
Speaker 2: I have no idea, no idea, no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We kept it until after my mother died, we rented it, and finally it went for taxes, we had to abandon it.
Speaker 1: What were your chores as a young boy?
Speaker 2: Doing errands for everybody.  The only thing I had to do was make sure I bring coal in.  To bring coal in from the barn, make the fire, stroke it, stroke, put coke, coke on it at night and take the ashes out.  I had very little other chores than that.  I don't remember any.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said you put coke on it, tell me about coke, I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stroking coke?  Coke is a variation of coal.  After you take coal, coal and burn it and you remove part of it, and what you have left is coke.  And we used it to bank the fire overnight, it maintained the heat, maintained the heat overnight.  And then in the morning you had to take the ashes off and clean the ashes out and rebuild the fire.  But it was, it was a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a job.
Story_ID: 531584
Speaker 1: And I wanna go back to the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you were describing the neighborhood and the families--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that lived in your neighborhood.  And you had mentioned about another black family who was ostracized.  And or that the fact that they were odd.  What was odd about them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they were the, it was the Watts, oh, the name Watts comes.  Watts was right on the corner, right across the street from me.  Very light skinned but they ostracized themselves, wouldn't have anything to do with us, would not speak, and I have no idea why, no idea why.  There was a father, two sons, the father, the mother, and two sons.  I lost contact with them, we never talked to them, they wouldn't even speak as we passed by on the street, so I have no idea.  The last name were Watts, W-A-T-T-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you also talked about reading different books at home--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --before you went to school.
Speaker 2: We had an extensive library.
Story_ID: 531585
Speaker 1: I wanted you to tell me how you were drawn to certain books that you read.
Speaker 2: Curiosity of, curiosity to how things happen.  I, the only thing I remember, I was interested in science, why things happen the way they do, and mainly airplanes.  I made model airplanes out of balsa wood, interested in machines, interested in how the principles of flight, why things happen, the sun, the moon, all of these things, they were interesting to me.  I was literally a nerd, let's face it.  By the time I got to high school [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan], I was, in high school I remember operating on frogs and toads and catfish and things in high school, I was ready for it.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But particular books, I cannot remember the titles of particular books, all I remember it was a fantastic library.
Speaker 1: In your neighborhood, if I were asked to ask you what sounds, sights, and smells take you back to that time, what would you say?
Speaker 2: Sounds and smells in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sights.
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: And sights.
Speaker 2: Sights.  On the corner, one, two, two houses, two doors away, was a corner store with a butcher, a small grocery, run by a Polish butcher.  I can remember him cutting off T-bone steaks.  And also there's a large barrel of dill pickles, hm, sawdust on the floor, sawdust on the floor of the butcher shop.  It's fantastic to think about it.  And him reaching up with a thing getting, small, it was a small grocery store, things off a shelf with a pick.  What was the butcher's name?  His last name was Parson, we called him Butch Parson.  Standing out there on a summertime, on the corner, eight, nine, ten year olds doing nothing, simply hanging out on the corner watching for the police to come by, the big four, riding in the open phaeton, and they would run us home.  It was a joke realistically, they knew where we lived, they knew everyone, but it was just a joke, here come the cops and we would run.  Get in the backyards soon as they went, we'd go back out on the corner, hanging out on the corner.  Skating up and down the street with roller skates, well, putting, putting a roller skate on a two by four and making, making a cart, yeah.  Those are days I think about it now, hm.
Speaker 1: What about smells?
Speaker 2: I don't have memory of any smells.  I don't remember any smells, any particular smells that would affect me.  I don't remember 'em.  Sights, yes, smells, no.
Speaker 1: Sounds?
Speaker 2: Only thing, no, no, oh, sounds?  The guy coming along for sharpening knives.  Cling, cling, he would cling, cling, cling, cling, cling, cling, the, he would come through the neighborhood with his machinery and he would sharpen knives.  I can remember him cling his bell as he walked, and he'd pull down, he pulled along a small scooter with a grinding wheel, with a small grinding wheel, hand operated grinding wheel, where he sharpened knives.  And in the summertime, the ice cream, what's the ice cream man?  I think it's the same thing you hear today going down the street.  No, these were waffles, these were waffles.  Powdered, sugar powdered waffles, I can't remember, darn it, I got to go back and think about this, sugar powdered waffles.  And all the time I had to be on the front porch when the lights went on, when the street lights went on, I had to be sitting on the porch, front porch.
Story_ID: 531586
Speaker 1: What school, what elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: First went to Newberry [John S. Newberry School, Detroit, Michigan], a block away, one block, I was on 28th [Street], Newberry School was on 29th [Street], an old-fashioned school.  They tore the school down during my first, first year.  I went to kindergarten at Newberry.  For first and second, first and second grades I had to walk to Craft, C-R-A-F-T, C-R-A-F-T, Craft Elementary [Craft Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], approximately three quarters of a mile away on Michigan Avenue and I can't remember where.  As a seven, seven year old, eight year old, I had to walk these, for two years.  And then Newberry was built in 1929, I went back to Newberry in '29 [1929], '28 [1928] and '29 [1929], something like that.  Brand new school.  Had fourth, fifth, and sixth grades at Newberry.  Third grade teacher, fourth grade teacher, Laidlaw, was crippled, I remember her, Laidlaw was crippled, walked with a limp.  Sixth grade teacher was Miss Simpson.  Simpson was a typical, harsh type old maid, straight laced, firm, school teacher.  Very crisp, speech was very crisp, made me adhere to every word I said, made me talk and get away from my southern, slow language.  I had to increase my speech, my, cut my speech, I remember Miss Simpson.  Hm, remember, from Newberry, sixth grade I went to Condon [Condon Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk a little bit more about your elementary school days.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about the different teachers and the classes that you really enjoyed.
Speaker 2: I don't remember--
Speaker 1: Science, you said science was one of your favorite subjects.
Speaker 2: Science.  School was almost addictive.  I don't remember anything except Laidlaw, who was crippled, and Simpson my sixth grade teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Other than that I don't remember any of the teachers or anything that went on.  I wasn't affected by the school very much.  I suspect I was reading, making model airplanes, spending a lot of time making model airplanes with balsa wood and glue and making model boats, out in the garage making model boats, carving, I was working with my hands.  We'd take, after making the model boat, take it out to Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan] and sail it.  That in itself took a lot of time.  Elementary school, other than walking to Craft during, and playing along the railroad at the time, that's another thing, I had to cross underneath the railroad.  I remember playing on the railroad, up and down the railroad.  Hell, I was only seven or eight or nine years old.  I get scared when I think about it now.  Because we walked the railroad from the boulevard [Grand Boulevard] to Michigan.
Speaker 1: Who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's crazy (laughter) excuse me, when you think about it.  Here was a seven or eight year old, I remember walking the railroad and playing, throwing rocks at empty factories, hooking a ride on the boxcars, riding all the way down to, oh, my god, down to Fort Street.  Then hooking a ride coming back.  We were, we were crazy.  In the wintertime, talking about the railroad track now, my dad [Alexander Jefferson] bought coal by the ton and it was put in the barn and my job was to go out to get the coal.  But the Polish kids did not, their families were poor, they, they couldn't afford to buy coal.  So during the wintertime we were eight, nine, ten years old, we'd go up on the railroad and we'd throw coal off the railroad cars, gather it up and bring it home for these kids, these Polish kids in the neighborhood.  And many times the railroad dicks, the detectives would catch us, run us, god, we'd run like hell, getting away from the detectives on the railroad.  Oh, such memories, such memories.  Up and down the railroad track between the boulevard and Michigan Avenue, Scotton [Street], and riding the, riding all the way down to Fort Street throwing the coal off the coal cars and then the kids walking along with gunnysacks picking it up and bringing it back home.  When they brought it back home they took it to their house, they didn't have to take it to my house because we already had coal.  I'll be darned.
Story_ID: 531587
Speaker 1: You talked about making model airplanes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, we'd make, I made model airplanes all my life.  Mainly SPADs because I'm a World War I [WWI] kid.  Making SPADs and Nieuports, the trimotor, the tri, three wing, the Fokker, Fokker V.7s, out of balsa wood and with a rubber band you, for a propeller, to propel it you had a rubber band, coat it with paper, with, oh, god, with tissue paper, paints, god, razor blade, the paint, the paper, it was fantastic, I think about it now.  Had all types of model airplanes.  Then I had 'em hanging in the ceiling in my bedroom, hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Magazines, because literally I was by myself.  Now, my sister [Emma Jefferson Cobb] came along five years later, I don't even remember playing with my sister because during the day I'm out in the street running around with kids or at night sitting, making model airplanes, reading, or out in the garage, or the barn, with, you know, it was a barn, making model boats.  Made all kinds of model airplanes.
Speaker 1: You made boats also?
Speaker 2: Model boats, yeah, approximately a foot and a half, two foot long, with a sail, and you take 'em out to Belle Isle [Belle Isle Park, Detroit, Michigan] and sail 'em out at Belle Isle, um-hm.  God, I tell you.
Story_ID: 531588
Speaker 1: So tell me more about school.
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What school did you--
Speaker 2: --when I went to Condon Middle School [Condon Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], had a couple of teachers who wanted to put, put me into trades, my mother [Jane White Jefferson] took me out of Condon, put me to another school [Munger Junior High School; Munger Middle School, Detroit, Michigan] so that I could take Latin to make sure I had a college preparatory course.  Getting ready to go into high school as a college preparatory where I took physics, chemistry, biology, and Latin at Chadsey High School [Detroit, Michigan], getting ready to go to college.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: Don't remember any of the teachers because I never came in contact with 'em.  I was always somewhere else.  I took no part in after school activities because the school was mainly Polish.  There were five black kids at Chadsey High School when I was there.  When I came out, I would say two black kids in my class.  Automatically, the class went to Bob-Lo boats.  Automatically, I knew I wasn't going because blacks did not go to Bob-Lo at that time. That's that excursion boat that went up and down the Detroit River.  I just automatically, I didn't take part in any debate, I took part in no activities because things were separate, Polish kids, we just didn't, I simply went to class at Chadsey High School and attended class, that's all.
Speaker 1: When did you feel that you wanted to or did you think that you would be able to ever fly a plane?
Speaker 2: Oh, never.
Speaker 1: You never thought that you would be able to do that?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was only a dream.
Speaker 1: Was this one of your dreams while you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --making the--
Speaker 2: Always a dream--
Speaker 1: --model airplanes?
Speaker 2: --always a dream, always a dream.  It didn't occur to me until Clark College, Clark University [Clark Atlanta University] then, in Atlanta, Georgia, and after the war [World War II, WWII], the war had started, and the war had begun, and the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] was going through black schools trying to enlist men, black men, college graduates into the Army Air Corps, that's when it became apparent that I might be able to be a pilot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything, anything else about high school, well, during, outside of school, say extracurricular activities, did you belong to maybe the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --was there--
Speaker 2: I tried, we tried to belong to the Boy Scouts but at that time Boy Scouts was segregated.  They had a Boy Scout building on Livernois [Avenue], I couldn't attend.  The only Boy Scouts we could go to was at St.--we were segregated, St. Antoine [Street] and Elizabeth [ph.], were Boy Scouts we went to.  Other than, even churches, things were segregated and you automatically took it and didn't fight it.  That's the way it was.
Story_ID: 531589
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about church.
Speaker 2: Scott Methodist Church [Scott Memorial United Methodist Church, Detroit, Michigan], St. Antoine [Street], Kirby [Street], separate, see the Methodist church at that time was separate from the, from the white church, it was called the Lexington Conference, segregated from top to bottom.  The black church, Methodist church united with the white Methodist, white Methodist church about ten years ago, unification.  But at that time all the black churches were separate unto themselves.  And we attended Scott Methodist Church on St. Antoine and Kirby.  And I knew all the ministers of the Methodist church because they all came out of Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], oh, no, out of Gammon Theological Seminary [Atlanta, Georgia].  Gammon Theological Seminary was on the same campus with Clark and I knew most of the Methodist ministers and was all part of it.
Speaker 1: Were there activities that you participated in at, at the church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At, no, because I only went to, went to church on Sundays.  Nothing during the week because it was too far away, you had to get on a streetcar and, and travel two or three miles, so I only went to church on Sunday morning to, to Scott Church.   And--
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Jane White Jefferson] and father [Alexander Jefferson] both attend with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father sang in the choir, my mother was a member.  They had, the women had small, what do you call these small groups?  Friendship groups.  My mother belonged to a small friendship group of the women.  My dad simply sang in the choir, that's all he did.  But other than that, I only attended church on Sunday morning.
Story_ID: 531590
Speaker 1: How did you prepare for college?  How (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't.  To me automatically, automatically I was gonna go to Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  Didn't think about it.  Today we have to tell these young, you must be prepared, you've got to go to school, you've got to, to me, automatically during all my entire life, I was gonna go to Clark College.  And when I finished, when I finished high school [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan] at fifteen and a half [sic.], June, 'cause I was born in November, my uncle, my mother's brother, had given her a Model A Ford [Ford Model A].  My father [Alexander Jefferson] didn't drive, my mother [Jane White Jefferson] didn't drive and the darn thing was sitting in the barn jacked up on bricks.  So I asked my mother, "Can I have the car?"  She said, "Of course."  Put air in the tires, put gas in it, put oil, and I drove that car to Atlanta [Georgia] in July of '42 [1942], '38 [1938], 1938, because already I knew where to buy gas, where to stop, and I knew racism and segregation.  And automatically I was gonna go to Clark, no question, nobody had to brainwash me and beat me over the head.  And I got a job with NYA, what does NYA stand for?  National Youth Administration, where they paid you to go to school.  I worked in the kitchen but I lived with my grandfather off-campus, four or five blocks off campus.
Speaker 1: Which grandfather?
Speaker 2: My mother's father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --Henry Montgomery White [Henry White].  He was a, he was the minister of the local church in south Atlanta.  The local church that all the students went to Sunday morning.  I lived in his house, so therefore I didn't have to live in the dormitory.  I had a car and I cruised Atlanta, god, did I have fun.  Oh, boy, I had fun.  I think I weighed about ninety pounds dripping wet.  I couldn't play baseball, I couldn't, I couldn't play basketball, I couldn't play football, so what did I do?  I joined the cheerleaders.  With a car and all the pretty girls, oh, god, I had a ball, I had a ball.  But still I majored in chemistry and biology.
Speaker 1: So you said you drove from Detroit [Michigan] to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you knew where to stop and where not to stop because of your travels earlier with your family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because every summer, my uncle would take us down to Atlanta and we had to take our own food, our own chicken, we couldn't, there were no, no McDonald's at that time, no Wendy's, no place to stop, so we took our own, we knew exactly which, where to buy gas, so I knew about racism.  And I was well prepared to cope with the situation, to survive.  You don't fight the system, you survive.
Story_ID: 531591
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first year at Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  Your freshmen year?
Speaker 2: Freshmen year, don't remember very much.  Freshmen year, my years at Clark were idyllic.  I enjoyed every year because I lived off-campus and I drove all the time.  I'd go to school, well, for the first three years I could walk to school because we were three blocks off campus.  My first year I got in trouble with the English teacher, Stella Brooks.  Stella Brooks was a, well, I should say an English major, she was a tactician, strict, I had had four or five years of Latin and I thought that I knew my English.  And she started asking me questions about ablative, and data, and all these things, she set me on my heels.  I therefore, I was slated towards chemistry anyway.  Her husband was Old Man Brooks [E. Luther Brooks], and I, when I got into chemistry, that was my answer.  And I loved chemistry, that's why I majored in chemistry and minored in biology.  But I spent my major years in the chemistry lab.  Very, I took sociology and math but chemistry was my major, that's why I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Clark at that time?
Speaker 2: The president was Davage [Matthew Simpson Davage], oh, my god.  You ask me these things right off the top of my head, Davage, Davage.  The last name I remember, Davage, hm.  I can't remember who it was after that.  This is sixty years ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I wish I'd have boned up on this.  Yeah, Davage.  In fact, Davage Hall [sic. Davage Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia] is named after him, I think about that now when I go back, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Davage, McPheeters [A.A. McPheeters], no, Brawley [James P. Brawley], after that it was President Brawley, but it was Davage.
Speaker 1: That was in '38 [1938]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you got there?
Speaker 2: Thirty-eight [1938], '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when we moved from the old campus to the new campus under President Davage, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the old campus and where it was located.
Speaker 2: The old campus was absolutely beautiful, idyllic.  I think approximately three hundred acres of south Atlanta, actually south Atlanta, Georgia.  Capitol Avenue ran down to the railroad track across the, across the railroad track, across the university, and that's where original Clark College was, it was Clark University before then, out on four or five hundred acres of rolling green, beautiful campus with five or six buildings.  I was there for three years, when Annie Merner Pfeiffer gave millions of dollars to Clark University on the premise that it would move over into Atlanta, Georgia, across from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], right across from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse that's where they moved.  And I was in the first class that graduated from the new campus in 1942.  But three years out at the beautiful, rolling hills, it was fantastic, hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your fun times in Atlanta.  You had a car--
Speaker 2: I had a car.
Speaker 1: --and you were a cheerleader.
Speaker 2: Drove all over Detroit [Michigan], all over Atlanta, had much, much time, played golf, they had a small golf course out at the old, old campus, right next to the railroad track.  But I had an opportunity to drive all over the, Atlanta, all over to different places, found many, many places to go, many places to enjoy.  I'll just leave it at that, I won't go any further (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1940--
Speaker 2: Two [1942] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two [1942]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 531592
Speaker 1: So twenty-five graduated out of--
Speaker 2: A hundred and twenty-five.  We, now some of them, admittedly, had no coordination.  They could not fly.  Some men washed out because they had a bad attitude, they were not military, they were not soldiers, they could not follow directions, they were anti-military.  Some men could fly, some men were good soldiers, and why they washed out we have no idea.  We have found out later, we surmised that there might have been a quota system, only a certain number of men allowed to graduate because there is one instance that comes to mind and everybody tells me about it.  When the men's names were posted on the board the night before, they wake up in the morning and one man has a line through his name, and they have this in writing, eliminated while passing for the benefit of the government.  Can you imagine?
Speaker 1: Nobody knew what that meant?
Speaker 2: Nobody knew what it meant.  But it meant, now, here, here's some, here's a man, he bought his uniform, his girlfriend is there for the graduation that morning, his parents are there for the graduation, he wakes up in the morning with a line through his name, eliminated while passing for the benefit of the government.  We suspect that there was a quota, we don't know, we surmise there might have been a quota for the system.
Speaker 1: Tell me more about your training.
Speaker 2: The training itself, we believe, was exactly the training that any person would receive as a white, the training, our training was exactly as the whites.  We had primary training in the morning.  At Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] there was a classroom where you'd have classroom study in the morning and we would fly in the afternoon, go out to Moton Field [Tuskegee, Alabama].  And there were two classes at that time.  One class would fly in the morning, and they'd go to class in the afternoon, so we alternated.  Classes at Moton at Tuskegee Institute was usual.  By the way, there was washout during flying training at Moton Field, primarily at Tuskegee Institute.  Washout was fantastic because many of the men, that's the first indication on training, and many of the men could not fly, had bad coordination.  Basic training at Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] in the BT-13 [Vultee BT-13 Valiant].  All of our white instructor, flight instructors were white.  Classroom instructors were white and black because some of the men were, the black men were, no, they were not officers, they were in civilian, civilians.  But the training, it was exciting, learning how to fly, and ground looping, marching, ground school, it was all exciting, it was exciting.
Story_ID: 531593
Speaker 1: What was exciting about it?  Tell me.
Speaker 2: The idea that the government would spend forty thousand dollars on an airplane and have me fly that airplane.  Just the business of flying was exciting.  Ground school was exciting also because there were new things being taught, principles of flight, military discipline, things that we didn't, had no idea.  How to be a good officer.  How the [U.S.] military was run and what you had to do in order to become a pilot, um-hm.
Speaker 1: You mentioned ground looping, tell me what that is.
Speaker 2: Well, that's when you came in, and off the ball, if you're not taking care of business and playing heads, it drops off on a wing and you ground loop.  Many of the guys were washed out for ground looping because they were inattentive, damaged the airplane.  I did it, and, of course, afterwards you have a check ride, instructor comes over and he give you a check ride to find out whether your flying was up to standard and I always passed the check ride so I graduated.  I passed those tests.
Speaker 1: What happened to the men who washed out?
Speaker 2: The men who washed out went back into the [U.S.] Army as buck privates, very degrading because if you graduate, you become a second lieutenant with wings and bars and all the privileges of an officer.  If you washed out you became a buck private, went back to twenty-one dollars a month.  Now, some of those men later on were allowed to go into school to become bombardiers and navigators, they were allowed to go to Hondo, Texas, Chanute, Illinois [Chanute Air Force Base, Champaign County, Illinois], and be trained as bombardiers and navigators for the B-25 [North American B-25 Mitchell] outfit.  We were segregated there, a B-25 outfit started for blacks.  Some of the pilots who graduated with me went into B-25s, I went into AT-6s [North American Aviation T-6 Texan], I went into P-40s [Curtiss P-40 Warhawk], that's a single engine.  The B, some of those guys who graduated with me, went into B-25s for the B-25 outfit.  Of course, they needed navigators and bombardiers.
Speaker 1: And tell me the difference.
Speaker 2: A bombardier, a bomber carries bombs with four or five, six men in the plane, you open the bomb, they have a mission to drop bombs on a certain target.  You have a bombardier who pressed the button, you have a navigator sits there with a map and tells the pilot which way to go.  You have enlisted persons on the guns, on the plane to shoot the guns at opposing fighters, enemy fighters.  I'm in a single engine, I'm fighting a single engine plane by myself, flying escort, escorting, flying on top of the bombers to protect the bombers from being shot down by German fighters.
Speaker 1: I see.  Do you remember some of the instructors?
Speaker 2: Only my primary instructor, my black instructor who was, who, who, my first, first instructor was Perry Young [Perry Young, Jr.].  Perry Young came out of New York and after the war [World War II, WWII] he was very instrumental in being the first black helicopter pilot for the Port of New York [Port of New York and New Jersey].  He was also instrumental in blacks getting into the airlines later on.  And blacks did not become members of, pilots of the airlines until 1960, and Perry Young was instrumental in, in that some kind of way, some, I don't remember exactly how.  But other than that I don't remember any other instructors in primary, I mean, in basic and advanced, I don't remember my white instructors at all.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you remember about the training?
Speaker 2: Training was to me was a joy, I enjoyed it.  Glad I didn't get washed out.  There was always that fear but academically I passed my flying proficiency, I passed.  And I was honored to graduate in January of 1944.
Story_ID: 531594
Speaker 1: Now, tell me what happens after graduation.
Speaker 2: At graduation you have, the band comes by, you march, you're presented your wings, your bars, your, your, your, my mother [Jane White Jefferson] was there, my, her father [Henry White] was there, my grandfather was there, my sister [Emma Jefferson Cobb] and my cousin and great times were had by all.  We were graduated as second lieutenants and we stayed at the base for another month flying the P-40 [Curtiss P-40 Warhawk].  Those P-40s, Warhawks came from the Flying Tigers [First American Volunteer Group].  The Flying Tigers were famous for flying under General Chennault [Claire Lee Chennault] against the Japanese in China, before World War II [WWII] started.  We inherited those old P-40s, they were beat and battered, paint scrapped off but they flew well, and we flew for ten hours in the P-40, meanwhile, as an officer on Tuskegee Army Air Base [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  That was exciting at that time to walk around as a second lieutenant, brand new with the wings.  After one month there we were transferred up to Selfridge Air Force Base [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base] in, north of Detroit [Michigan], twenty-five miles north of Detroit where we in, were in P-39s [Bell P-39 Airacobra], the Airacobra, overseas training, getting ready to go overseas.  Had two hundred hours in a P-39.  That's that crazy airplane that has an Allison engine [Allison V-1710] that sits behind you with a long drive rod, drive shaft underneath the seat to the propeller.  And there's a thirty-seven millimeter cannon that fires out through the hub of the propeller.  We had, now our instructors at Selfridge were Tuskegee Airmen of the 99th [99th Fighter Squadron], who had already gone over to North Africa, had put in twenty-five missions in North Africa and come back to Selfridge, and they were our overseas instructors.
Speaker 1: Who, who were some of those instructors?
Speaker 2: There was Charles, Charlie Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden], Spann Watson, oh, boy, here I go again, there was four, there was four men, see these are the men who went into the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] way back in 1940, '41 [1941], and they had, the 99th, oh, let me, let me back up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The 99th Fighter Squadron was made up of sixteen airplanes and twenty-five to thirty pilots, with all the complimentary enlisted men, washers, cooks, washers, truck drivers, officers who were headquarters, doctors, nurses, the whole, the whole kit and caboodle of squadron had gone over in Christmas of '43 [1943] to North Africa.  And the 99th had performed close ground support for, for American troops from North Africa around to Morocco, all the way around to Pantelleria [Italy] up through Sicily [Italy].  And by that time I was graduated and I went over as a replacement pilot by the time I got there.  Now, I was at Selfridge, flying the P-39 because other members of the 100th Squadron [100th Fighter Squadron], 301st Squadron [301st Fighter Squadron], 302nd Squadron [302nd Fighter Squadron], sixteen airplanes, twenty-five pilots had all amassed and they were flying out of Naples [Italy], Capodichino [Capodichino U.S. Navy Base] and another base near Naples.  They were flying coast patrol up and down Italy, flying P-39s.  That's why when I went to Selfridge, I was flying a P-39 getting ready to join them with Charlie Dryden, Spann Watson, god, I can't remember the other two guys.  They had come back and they were our overseas instructors.  We would fly during the day, there was ground school, even at Selfridge, ground school.
Story_ID: 531595
Speaker 1: And on the weekends we'd drive into Detroit [Michigan], enjoy the Valley [Paradise Valley, Detroit, Michigan], the Three Sixes [Club Three Sixes, Detroit, Michigan], all the nightclubs.  Some of the guys would drive in at night because it's only a twenty-five, thirty minute drive down Gratiot Avenue.  Some of the men lived in Detroit and would drive back and forth morning and night.  We enjoyed Detroit with all of its--but after, was that after the riots or before the riots, I can't remember, I can't remember.
Speaker 2: What, what--
Speaker 1: We'll get into that later on.
Speaker 2: So right, we're, we are in, still in 1942?
Speaker 1: Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Forty-two [1942].
Speaker 2: In Detroit?  You talked about the Valley, and what was going on in downtown, or in the Valley, in Detroit.
Speaker 1: At that time, the Valley, the black district of the Valley was at its peak.  Black businesses, black restaurants, black nightclubs, the music, the jazz was at its peak.  All but--I don't know.  Adams, East Adams [Street], Hastings [Street], St. Antoine [Street], John R [Street], all of these places were black nightclubs, they were at its peak.  The riots had occurred in 1943, afterwards, I can't remember when now because I was not here, can't remember.
Story_ID: 531596
Speaker 1: Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, you--
Speaker 1: We're at Selfridge?
Speaker 2: Right.  And--
Speaker 1: And we're flying at Selfridge.  One day I'm out over Lake Huron.  Well, we'd been trying to get into the officers' club, the colonel at the base said, "Heck, no, you cannot go into the officers' club."  NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] got to it.  The Michigan Chronicle got to it.  Urban League was in it.  All of our parents knew about it.  We were, the newspapers got it.  One day I'm out over Lake Huron flying gunnery where I'm firing at a target pulled by another plane and the radio says, "All officers, report to the post theater on the double, as you are," which means, you turned around, dropped everything, as you are.  Got to the post theater, and at that time there were 120 white officers on post.  Approximately forty-five or fifty black officers on post, with all of our enlisted men.  And we're standing in the post theater, milling around, and somebody says attention.  We stood up and down the aisle strolls a two star general, we're all second lieutenants, so we're saying, what in the heck is going on?
Story_ID: 531597
Speaker 1: White colonel says, well, this is colonel, damn it, these names, blacks, blacks cannot go to the officers' club.  And NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], everybody knew about it.  We're milling around and a two star general walks down the aisle.  "At ease."  So we sit down.  He rambled on for about four or five minutes and these are the words I remember him saying, quote, gentlemen--oh, O'D. Hunter [Frank O'Driscoll Hunter], General O'D. Hunter.  "Gentlemen, this is my airfield, as long I'm in command there will be no socialization between white and colored officers.  Are there any questions?  If there are, I'll deal with that man personally."  At ease.  We stood up, he walked out.  That was Thursday afternoon.  They locked the gates.  And when you lock the gates and prevent an officer from leaving post, he's under arrest.  Black officers could not leave the post, white officers could leave.  Saturday morning they backed in a Pullman train, loaded the black officers and all of our enlisted men on this Pullman train.  That train left Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan], went to Port Huron [Michigan], through the tunnel into Canada, across Ontario [Canada] to Niagara Falls and proceeded to go south.  We wound up three days later at Walterboro, South Carolina, a small airfield built along the eastern seaboard in the event of an invasion.  When the train stopped, we jumped off and pinks and greens these new uniforms, you know, brand new, every ten feet there was a white soldier with a rifle, hand grenades because they had been told a bad bunch of N, used the N word, had rioted at Selfridge.  Our introduction to Walterboro Air Force base, South Carolina [Walterboro Army Airfield, South Carolina], down behind the cotton curtain.  I was there only two weeks.  I was, my class, twenty-five of us, were shipped overseas to join the 332nd Fighter Group [332nd Expeditionary Operations Group].
Story_ID: 531598
Speaker 1: Let's go back just a little bit, back--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan].  And you were talking about your training along with Charles Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden] and Spann Watson, and I wanna know about the fighter training and how you flew with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: --their training, they trained us to formation fly, and air tactics because we didn't, we got none of that at Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Tuskegee Army Airfield only taught us basically how to fly the airplane.  Charlie Dryden, Spann Watson, darn, I can't remember the other guy's name, taught us air, aerobatics, formation flying, and how to deal with the airplane in, in combat.  Well, the white instructors didn't know this because the white instructors were not combat veterans.  And Charlie Dryden, Spann Watson, the other name will come to me later.
Speaker 1: It'll come to you later.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your position.  Now, you're an escort, tell me what that means in, in the formation?
Speaker 2: Escorting means that you fly above the bombers and protect the bombers from being shot down by German fighters.  Sixteen airplanes in a squadron, four flights of four, one, two, that's the element, a leader and his wingman, one, number one, and number two.  Number three and number four, he's the leader and he's, that's an element, two elements in a flight, one, two, three, four, four flights of four.  And we would fly above the bombers, the bomber is going from Italy to Germany to bomb certain targets.  We'd fly above the bombers back and forth over them, weaving back, because the bombers only flew at 160 miles an hour.  Ten men and a bomber, pilot, copilot, navigator, bombardier.  Navigator tells the pilot which way to go.  Takes two guys to fly it.  The bombardier opens the bomb bay doors and drops the bomb.  You've got six enlisted men firing guns, top gun, side, waist gun, tail gun, belly gun, ten men, and a bomber, B-17 [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress].  Twelve ships and a group, twelve B-17s and a group.  And we escorted three groups, there would be three groups, no, three square, twelve ships and a, I'm sorry, twelve ships and a squadron, and three squadrons and a group.  We would escort this group on the way, sometimes we'd pick 'em up before the target, into the target area and bring 'em back out of the target area.  The, three, the 332nd Fighter Group [332nd Expeditionary Operations Group], four squadrons, fighter squadrons, sixteen airplanes to a squadron, 99th [99th Fighter Squadron], 100th [100th Fighter Squadron], 301st [301st Fighter Squadron], 302nd [302nd Fighter Squadron], sixty-four airplanes together.  And we would escort the group, sometimes up to the IP, which is the initial point, where they drop the bombs or turn around and bring them out of the target area.  That was our job, to fly top cover to protect them from the German fighters coming in trying to shoot them down.
Speaker 1: So you were a wingman?
Speaker 2: I was a wingman.  I was number four.  I was number four of the sixteen when we went in to strafe radar stations.  Ground fire came up, got me, we'll talk about that later.
Story_ID: 531599
Speaker 1: So you get off this train--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you are, when you left Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan] you went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, get off the train.  We spent, we were at Walterboro [Walterboro Army Airfield, South Carolina]--
Speaker 1: --Walterboro.
Speaker 2: Walterboro.  We were there for, I was only there for two weeks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And no, no confrontation, except we buzzed the hell out of Walterboro.  Our first, our first flight took off a week later and Charlie Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden] was leading the P-39 [Bell P-39 Airacobra], I'm sitting on his right, I'm the, flying number two, I'm number two, Red Driver [Clarence Driver] is number three, O'Neil [Robert O'Neil] is number four.  And we, first flight Sunday morning, we buzzed the heck out of Walterboro.  Charlie Dryden went on one side of the church steeple, I went on the other side of the church steeple, this shows you how close we were, we came back with tree limbs in our radiators, went through trees, props through trees, but we buzzed the heck out of Walterboro.  That's, by the way that's why he was court martialed.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: The twenty-five of us went overseas the next week.  Charlie Dryden was the instructor and he was court martialed, part of the court martial that he went through the following three or four weeks.  And he's the only man that we know, who was a first lieutenant, court martialed by the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force], stayed in the service, and retired as a lieutenant colonel.  He went from second lieutenant, first lieutenant, captain, major, lieutenant colonel.  How lieutenant, how Charlie Dryden, by the way, Charlie Dryden is still living today in Atlanta, Georgia.  He's had a stroke but he's still kicking.  And in the movie he's A-Train because Charlie Dryden was originally from New York City [New York, New York], and New York City has a subway called the A Train.  And in the movie, he was depicted as A-Train, Charlie Dryden.  Now, when we got overseas, oh, we were at Walterboro, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Spent only one week there.
Story_ID: 531600
Speaker 1: We were issued Thompson subs [Thompson submachine gun], Thompson subs, go and get ready to go overseas.  We're not supposed to have any ammunition but we had ammunition.
Speaker 2: So Thompson sub is a sub (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tom, a machine gun.
Speaker 2: --a machine gun.
Speaker 1: And we were issued those, we went over, went overseas with them.  And they caught the train from Walterboro [Walterboro Army Airfield, South Carolina] at Yemassee [South Carolina], and went up to Patrick Henry [Camp Patrick Henry, Virginia] and went overseas, a boat that went overseas and plagued the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] by itself, seven days, we had a ball, had a good time.
Speaker 2: So you said you weren't supposed to have any ammunition, did you have--
Speaker 1: But we did.
Speaker 2: You did, okay.
Speaker 1: Because the, some of the guys were, some of the men in the depot, we had ammo.  But we went overseas and went into Oran [Algeria], North Africa, and from Oran, we stayed two or three days, transferred on an Indian vessel from India, and I can still smell, what's that fragrance?  Not chili.
Speaker 2: Curry.
Speaker 1: Curry.  Oh, curry and that rice, oh, my god, I can still, from Oran to Naples [Italy].  And we got to Naples, spent one day or two days and then went by truck across Italy to Ramitelli [Ramitelli Air Base, Italy] where the 332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] was stationed.  The fifteen of us on six by six trucks, across Ramitelli, across Italy to Ramitelli.  We joined Ramitelli, we joined the 332nd on the last mission that they flew in P-47s [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt].  P-47s, jugs, we called 'em a jug, a big radial engine.  And they took off in the morning.  As these trucks came into the field, we sat there on the edge of the field watching these planes take off and we watched one take off, and it went up like this, he shivered and he went in, the guy killed himself.  Our introduction to the 332nd Fighter Group.  His name was Laird [Edward Laird], L-A-I-R-D.  Had trim tabs or something on takeoff and he went in and killed himself.  My class, the twenty, the twenty-five of us got there, we were replacement pilots for the 332nd Fighter Group.  We were there to begin with, we went into the P-51s [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang] and we were there starting the P-51s.  I was in a, I was in a tent with Faulkner [William Faulkner], Elsberry [Joseph D. Elsberry], and me in a tent.  They were, these guys were, who had four or five month ahead of me, they, they were veterans, they had been flying twenty-five and thirty missions, Faulkner, and I was a new one.  I joined in as everybody transferred from the P-47s into the P-51s.
Speaker 2: Well, tell me the difference between the P-47s and P-51s.
Speaker 1: P-47 was a big heavy radial engine, was very--gas guzzler, had only a range, range of about two hundred miles, that's all it could, it was a gas guzzler but it was heavily armed, had four machine guns on each wing, formidable fighter, could not turn as in competition air worthy as a P--as a Mustang, a P-51.  P-51 Mustang was an inline engine, 1700 horsepower, Merlin [Packard V-1650 Merlin], could turn and maneuver fantastically well, with belly tanks the range was anywhere from 1500 miles, therefore we were able to escort the B-17s [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress] from Italy all the way to Berlin [Germany] and back with two hundred gallon tanks, one underneath each wing.  You had a hundred gallons underneath each wing, 110 gallons underneath each wing, ninety-two gallons, inside of each wing, and an eighty-five gallon tank sitting behind you, therefore we could escort B-17s from Italy all the way up to Berlin and back.  That's why they got out of the P-47s, they were too short range.
Story_ID: 531601
Speaker 1: Tell me about your first flight flying a P-57, you called it a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) P-51 [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang].
Speaker 1: --a (unclear) tank.
Speaker 2: I only went in P-51s, Mustangs.
Speaker 1: P-51, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: P-51 Mustangs.  It was adventurous, escorting.  First of all, you, first of all went in, and you were, you had initiation to fly three or four hours around the field to associate yourself with the plane.  And the first mission escorting B-17s [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress] and B-24s [Consolidated B-24 Liberator] to Wiener Neustadt [Austria] or somewhere in the Adriatic [Adriatic Sea] up above Austria.  And exciting to have sixty-four airplanes, all the engines going in the morning, four different squadrons, engines going, guys running around, and you're starting up your plane and trying to keep that sucker from moving because once you start that prop going it wants to move, you're sitting with your feet on the brakes.  Sitting at the end of the runway, your sixteen planes at the end of the runway, it's either, oh, one squadron at each end, only had one runway, and one squadron at each end.  So when this squadron takes off down the runway towards you, you're sitting off in, sitting there waiting.  The first one or two guys get through okay.  The second two, they start hitting that turbulence, fourth, fifth, and sixth, and seventh, they starting hitting turbulence.  And we've had planes, we had planes flying over our heads, missing us by fifteen or twenty feet.  That's the only time I really got scared 'cause you're sitting there with your plane loaded with gas, your, all your guns are loaded and (slaps hands) ironically, nobody got hit.  But it was exciting, taking off in the morning, sixty-four airplanes led by Benjamin O. Davis, Jr., our commanding officer, and we escorted the B-17s.  If the B-24s or B-17s are at 20,000, we would have one squadron at 21,000, the ships would, the bombers would only be at 100, 150 miles an hour, 150, 150.  If we did 150 at altitude we'd stall out, so we had to do 220, they did 150.  And all sixteen airplanes, all four flights of four would do 220 back and forth.  Now, the 99th [99th Fighter Squadron] would be at 21,000, the 100th [100th Fighter Squadron] would be at 22,000, the 301st [301st Fighter Squadron], 23,000, 302nd [302nd Fighter Squadron], 24, 25,000.  So you'd have this, bombers going along this way, and you got sixty-four airplanes back and forth across the top.  Maybe it's the reason why the 332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] has a myth going that we never lost a bomber to enemy fighters because many times the German fighters couldn't get through, and if they did, we fought them off.  I believe also that we did lose some bombers because the bombers stream was sometimes fifteen and twenty and thirty miles long, you couldn't keep all those bombers together.  And somewhere during the line, who can say where a bomber was shot down.  Now, while we had this particular group of bombers, this group was also connected with another group and that group was supposed to be escorted by another fighter wing, another fighter squadron, white squadron, fighter squadron.  Sometimes those ships got intermingled with ours, who knows?  In the frustration of combat these are things that are happen, these are things that happened.
Story_ID: 531602
Speaker 1: You talked about Benjamin O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] as a commander (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, yes.
Speaker 1: --tell me, tell me more about him.
Speaker 2: A soldier, a real soldier.  A man whom we respected.  His father [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.] was a general.  His father was an enlisted man in World War I [WWI], became an officer, stayed in the Officer Corps [U.S. Army Officer Corps] up through, and was a colonel, [President] Franklin Delano Roosevelt needed help in being elected and promoted him to a one star general in the '40s [1940s].  Ben Davis, Jr. went to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  He graduated in 1936.  During his four years at West Point he was treated as an outcast and nobody spoke to him unless it was official.  He slept by himself, ate by himself.  Now, when he went to dinner, and he had to ask permission to sit at the table, many times he did not, they didn't give him permission until the dinner was half over.  He still finished number seventeen in a class of five hundred.  When he graduated in 1936, he made application for the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force].  The Army Air Corps told him that since no blacks were in the Army Air Corps there was no place for him to go.  So therefore he was, for, from '36 [1936] until '40 [1940], '41 [1941], he was an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] instructor, various, various, various places.  He was also an ROTC instructor with his father at Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  When the Army Air Corps opened up, he was slated to be the commander of the 99th Fighter Squadron and he went through and graduated as in the first class.  There were five men in the first class, B.O. Davis, Custis [Lemuel R. Custis], DeBow [Charles H. DeBow, Jr.], DeBow, god, my memory is, but there were five.  And he went through as a, he was promoted, he went through as a captain by the way.  And he was slated to be the commander of the 99th, when the 99th formed and he went overseas as their commander.  And when the 302nd [302nd Fighter Squadron], when the 332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] was formed, he was commander of the four squadrons.  He was a soldier and everyone respected him.  He retired as a three star, should have been a four star, racism denied it.
Story_ID: 531603
Speaker 1: Tell me about that, tell me about racism at this point.
Speaker 2: Racism in 1941, 1942, the [U.S.] Army said that black men could receive no more than what they experienced in civilian life.  The War Department [U.S. Department of War] said that the Army and the War Department was not a matter of social change, and therefore we expected nothing more than what, if we were in Mississippi we had to abide by Mississippi laws.  Just like, before they, well everybody understands this, before the Civil Rights Movement, this is the reason why the Civil Rights Movement, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Medgar Evers and all the rest of 'em came about, we suffered as everyone else.  And it was only through 1948 when President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] signed the Executive Order 9981 that desegregated the [U.S.] Armed Forces.  That's when the Armed Forces were desegregated.  Whenever I say this to a bunch of high school youngsters, I ask them, what happened six years later?  And it would take them five or ten minutes to finally come up with Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  Then after that came Rosa Parks, Medgar Evers, Fannie Lou Hamer, Martin Luther King.  Of course, and all of this time Malcolm [Malcolm X] was right there all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When you desegregate your armed forces, then you desegregate your society, and Tuskegee Airmen and all the rest of the black men in World War II [WWII] were a part of it.  And don't forget, blacks who were in World War I [WWI].  Blacks in war, in the War of 1812.  Blacks who helped Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] go up San Juan Hill [Battle of San Juan Hill].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The 9th [9th Cavalry Regiment] and 10th Cavalry [10th Cavalry Regiment].  How many black men were in the Civil War?  I didn't find out until 1954 the number of black men who fought, a hundred thousand in the Civil War.  Why they kept the 9th and 10th Cavalry out of fifteen or twenty or thirty, they kept the 9th and 10th, what did they do with 'em?  They sent them out west.  To do what?  To kill Indians [Native American].  Isn't that ironic?  To protect Germans, Irish, Italians, stealing this land from the American Indians.  Ironically, racism, discrimination, the American Indian is the one who really got shafted through it all but that's another story.
Speaker 1: You were talking about your first mission.  Now, tell me what happened.
Speaker 2: All my missions were escorting--
Speaker 1: How many missions?
Speaker 2: I had eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Eighteen long range missions, escorting bombers to Germany, escorting bombers to Ploiesti [Romania] oil fields, escorting to France, to Greece, eighteen missions.  They were uneventful.  Well, not uneventful because a couple of times, Elsberry [Joseph D. Elsberry], I was flying Elsberry's wing, Elsberry shot down two Germans, I didn't even see 'em because I'm back here watching the backend, protecting him and he fight, he's got two Germans.  Other than that, my escorting was simply flying, and enjoying.  But that nineteenth mission, that's the one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, let's talk about the nineteenth mission.
Speaker 2: --where I got blown away.
Story_ID: 531604
Speaker 1: 332nd Fighter Group [332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] has a job because August 15, 1944 was the invasion of southern France.  And we had the job, the 332nd was given the job of knocking out radar stations on the coast of southern France, previous to the invasion.  Now, why the 332nd had this job, I have no idea.  But somebody's often said, it was, what, somebody said it, it might have been racial, I don't know.  But other than that, before that, all of our missions were long range escorting up at twenty-five and thirty thousand feet.  A couple of times I stalled out at oh, I'm up there at thirty, thirty-one, and went to a violent maneuver and all of a sudden my wings stalled and I went right straight down through the formation, down to about twelve thousand feet to recover and come back up through, that's how, because it was tenuous.  Many times guys did this.  But escorting it was fun, it was exciting because you look to the horizon, contrails, every airplane is pulling off like contrails, contrails, and you look behind you, six o'clock to the horizon, bombers going to Germany.  And it'll never happen again because today you take one bomb and boom.  Out of the whole squadron, maybe one bomb would hit the target, and it was surprising but the tremendous number of bombers going to Berlin [Germany] or going to Ploiesti [Romania].  Some of the bombs dropped indiscriminately because just through malpractice, that's--it was frustrating.  Back to August the 12th (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before you go there, I want you to tell me about the Red Tails.  What were the difference, each tail--
Speaker 1: We had--
Speaker 2: --on the planes had different colors?
Speaker 1: --we had four, four fighters, fighter groups in Italy, fighter groups, three white groups and one black.  Our tails are painted red for air identification.  One, one group was painted yellow, air identification.  One group was checkerboard, black and yellow squares just like a checkerboard.  The other group was red and white stripe.  So if you saw a red and white stripe over Germany, you knew it was the 31st Fighter Group.  It was checkerboard, 325th Fighter Group [325th Fighter Wing].  Yellow tails, 52nd Fighter Group [52nd Fighter Wing].  Red tail, 332nd Fighter Group.  Air identification.  That's why we were called Red Tails.
Story_ID: 531605
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You--
Speaker 2: --mission number nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] had the job of knocking out radar stations on the coast of southern France.  And these radar stations would detect ships coming across the horizon for the invasion.  The 301st [301st Fighter Squadron] had the target of Toulon [France], radar station sitting right on the cliff outside the City of Toulon.  The 99th [99th Fighter Squadron] had a different station.  The 99th had Montpellier [France].  The 302nd [302nd Fighter Squadron] had another one, all along the coast.  And I'm number sixteen, four flights of four.  We took off in the morning, flight from Ramitelli [Ramitelli Air Base, Italy], across Italy, across the gulf [Gulf of Taranto], the Mediterranean [Mediterranean Sea], past Corsica, out at Capri [Italy], and turn into the coast of southern France.  We start in at about fifteen thousand feet, four flights of four, one right behind the other.  And the first guys turn in, fifteen thousand feet, push everything to the wall, try to get some speed, had to go in and start firing with their fifty calibers, you went and pressed the trigger on the stick, and the fifty calibers would, they told us, oh, by the way we didn't understand what in the heck radar was, we didn't know what radar was.  They simply said some buildings, some great big long towers, you go over and you shoot 'em up, that's it.  This is before ballpoint pens, before nylons, before TV, before 45s by the way, 45 records [45 rpm record] hadn't even come out, don't talk about LPs.  The first four guys go in and when they turn in, the whole side of the cliff becomes red with little black, red specks, anti-aircraft, twenty men over here, twenty, and twenty men over here, and 37mm.  And the radio is alive.  Second guy has followed, the fourth, first four guys get through, the second guys get through, the third get through and last of all, when we turn in, by that time, we had gone out so far to port, when we turn in we have to push everything to the wall to catch up.  Run everything, we're doing about 420, fourth, we're maximum, and everything is red lined.  Oil pressure, heat, and prop, instead of running at 1700 or 1800 rpm, I'm churning 2600 and 2700 rpm trying to catch up.  The needle is bumping, I'm doing 420, 420, red line, what I'm not supposed to do.  And by the time we get, I'm in, back in position, I saw number two, which is Danny [Robert T. Daniels], he got hit approximately a thousand yards off, maybe five hundred yards, little black speck, and out the corner of my eye I see him go off to the side.  And I'm concentrating on aiming at a target, great big long towers, see these towers, and as I come in I start pressing trigger, and as I fire, going right across the top of the target, oh, hell, treetop height, something said boom, look up and there's a hole right there in the top of the canopy.  I said, "What the hell?" And fire came up out of the floor.  And naturally, as I tell young people, out of the nine months of training, you have not one minute on how to get out of an airplane.  Instinctively today, I say, you pull back on the stick to get some altitude because I know I'm too low to bail out.  Plus if I'm going too damn fast, you know, 420, 420, 420.  Pull back on the stick to get some altitude, and as I pull up, reach up and on the instrument panel pull the little red knob and the canopy went off.  Now, I don't know how high I got although I know I had gloves, your face's covered with oxygen mask, helmet, goggles and but it got hot, gloves were scorched, and I pulled up and you have straps here, straps here with a big buckle, when you hit it, they come loose, well, when I turned the stick loose, the nose popped, when you go up like this, you turn the stick loose, the nose wants to go back, so when the nose popped, I hit the buckle and I came out, and when the nose, I came out, centrifugal force.  I remember the tail going by and I pulled the D ring, big D ring, because it connected with a cable.  The parachute, we're sitting on the parachute, the parachute came out with me.  And I remember looking at it, somebody stole the silk, god damn it.  There was a rumor that somebody was taking the silk out of the parachutes, selling it to the Italians and stuffing the parachute with paper, by the way they finally caught him, it was happening.  He did, I forgot who he was, some enlisted man.  But I remember looking at it and (claps hands) boom, the parachute popped, when it popped, I'm in the trees.  Number one and number three they get through, and I found out about a year ago, I forgot who my element leader was.  Now, Ballard [Alton F. Ballard] was leading, Robert Daniels was number two, I forgot who number three was, that's my leader.  Virgil Richardson wrote a book and he died about a year ago, in his book he says, he remembers Jefferson [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], he looked back and Jefferson was gone, that's me, Virgil Richardson.  When he got back to the squadron, he reported me as dead, he saw Robert Daniels go down in the water because Daniels was, he was scared to bail out.
Story_ID: 531606
Speaker 1: KIA [killed in action] telegram went to my parents [Jane White Jefferson and Alexander Jefferson] because they thought I was dead, they didn't see me get out, didn't see the parachute because when the parachute popped, it was in, I was in the trees.  My parents got a POW [prisoner of war] telegram a month and a half later when the International Red Cross [International Committee of the Red Cross] had been into the POW camp and listed me as a POW.  I landed in the trees and scrambled, I was trying to get down, by that time the damn Germans were all around me, they caught me.  The enlisted Germans treated me as an officer, (speaking German).  I thought they called me a nigger and I was getting ready to fight because in those words, calling you black or calling you a nigger was fighting words.  Now, they had guns, to me it didn't make a damn bit of difference.  I found out later, it was supposed to be Negro.  Well, the enlisted men took me to an airfield close by and then took me to their commanding officer who was at a villa about two miles down the road, down the beach.  He was sitting on a porch overlooking, overlooking the water with a glass table.  And when they escorted me in to him, under guard, I saw this guy sitting there with some stuff on his shoulders, so I knew he was an officer and I saluted.  And in perfect English he says, "Lieutenant, have a seat."  My mouth dropped.  What the hell is going on?  These Germans, you know, they, they must--I had, I sat.  The first thing he did, he took my cigarettes, I was smoking Camels or something, took my Parker pen, and my watch.  "First cigarettes I've had in sometime."  I said, huh?  We went on and on, I'm sitting, because you're supposed to name, rank, serial number.  I'm being a good soldier, "[HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson, second lieutenant, A01, no, A0819461, 0819461."  "You ever been to Atlanta [Georgia]?"  "No, no, sir."  He described Auburn Avenue to me where the jazz clubs were, where the restaurants were.  I said, "Well, these Germans are good."  No, by the way, I knew nothing about radar, I knew nothing about the mission, the official, I knew nothing, I'm simply a soldier.  He describes, he said, "You ever been to Washington, D.C.?"  I said no.  Went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He described 7th Avenue, the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], the Crystal Caverns [Washington, D.C.], the joints where I used to get drunk.  I'm sitting there saying, these Germans must know everything.  Finally he said, "You ever been to Detroit [Michigan]?"  And I said yeah.  He said, oh, then you know how to join, get the open streetcar behind the library, which is right behind J.L. Hudson [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building, Detroit, Michigan] and it goes out East Adams [Street] past the Three Sixes [Club Three Sixes, Detroit, Michigan], the Horse Shoe Bar [606 Horse Shoe Bar and Lounge, Detroit, Michigan].  He knew about the hotel across the street from the Three Sixes where the girls worked.  Turns out the guy had graduated from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in 1936, had gone back to Germany, they put him in the army in charge of this artillery ground.  He was waiting for the war [World War II, WWII] to get over so he can get back to the states and enjoy the jazz and all the things that he left in the United States.  Didn't see him anymore because--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --they transferred me from him to going up the Rhone Valley on the back end of a wagon and a truck with Daniels [Robert T. Daniels], they went out and picked up Daniels by the way, picked him up, brought him in, and he and I by truck and trailer and train went up the Rhone Valley.
Story_ID: 531607
Speaker 1: We stopped at Marseille [France], no Valence [France], we stopped at Valence, Valence, that's where we saw Richard Macon [Richard D. Macon].  Richard Macon was in the 99th [99th Fighter Squadron], he went down at Montpellier [France], he doesn't remember getting out of his airplane, he was firing at radar stations.  West, Shelby Westbrook from Chicago [Illinois] told us after we got back, he was flying on Macon's wing, he said Macon's, the shell hit the top of his canopy, another blew off his wing, his right wing, his airplane made a half roll and an outside loop, he doesn't remember getting out of his plane but when we saw him his eyes were bloodshot red from outside loop.  He had a broken collarbone, every time we'd shake him, he'd pass out because we found out later two vertebrae of his neck were cracked.  We had to take a towel and wrap a towel around his neck to keep his head straight.  And we rode up the Rhone Valley on the backend of trucks and trailers and trains to Frankfurt-on-the-Main [Frankfurt am Main, Germany], that's where we were interrogated and where he was put into a hospital.  And we got to Wetzlar [Germany], first time we had a shower and halfway decent food.  Otherwise we were eating grapes and drinking wine going up to Rhone Valley with these two German guards.  And the German guards treated us as officers.  They respected us as, because we were officers.
Speaker 2: Now, where you met the first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The first German officer?
Speaker 2: --the first German officer, where was that?
Speaker 1: That's right outside the City of Toulon [France].  He was at a villa four or five miles down, right on the Mediterranean [Mediterranean Sea] overlooking, overlooking the water.  He was in charge of the ground artillery that shot me down.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were not hurt at all?
Speaker 1: Scratches and bruises down through the trees.  Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  I had scratches, bruises, and no broken bones but arms, nothing on, luckily nothing on my face but on my legs and thighs and back.
Story_ID: 531608
Speaker 1: What was your thought when you had to bail out that plane (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody's asked me that.  You don't think.  You rise to the occasion, you do what you got to do.  You don't get scared until two weeks later when you sit down and say, now, wait a minute, that damn shell came up through floor, yeah, uh-huh, I came out, damn I almost got killed.  That's when you start shivering.  You, you say--
Speaker 1: Well, what were your thoughts about being captured, did you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --know that you would be captured?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, well, I knew I was being captured, no, no big deal.  To tell you the truth, you take it as a matter of fact, it's an adventure, something new, it was new. Ironically, I never got scared.
Speaker 1: You were not even afraid when you said that your first entrance, I mean, you went overseas is that you actually saw someone (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Get killed?
Speaker 1: --get killed.
Speaker 2: You come with the attitude--
Speaker 1: At that point were you, were you afraid--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --at that point that this might happen?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  War is hell and you make up your mind that if somebody else gets killed that's his fault.  You don't let it turn inward because when you let it turn inward then you are affected and you do something that's detrimental to yourself.  So you're gonna survive, your survival, men get killed all the time.  We sit here and we can Monday morning quarterback, mama sits here, "Oh, my gosh, they got killed."  Yeah, that's Monday morning quarterbacking, you're not there.  But if you're there and you experience it, you gird yourself on the inside and you're not affected.  Momentarily you feel bad about it, yes, the guy, it wasn't, you're glad it wasn't me but you see guys get killed all the time in combat.  Now that's war.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Out here on the street that's a different story.
Story_ID: 531609
Speaker 1: Tell me about interrogation.  What happened during the interrogation?
Speaker 2: Frankfurt-on-the-Main [Frankfurt am Main, Germany], ushered into a room, this is the official German interrogator, this guy was adept at English and he had a big book.  Walked into a room, table, he's on the other side of the table, "Have, have a seat lieutenant," I sit down.  And on this big book, I could see it, 332nd Fighter Group [332nd Expeditionary Operations Group], Negroes, Red Tails.  He opened it up and he's thumbing through and I see pictures.  Every month there's a graduation class at Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], and they take pictures, every month.  The first month was '42 [1942] C, January A, February B, March C, '42 [1942] C, March '42 [1942] is B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], and the four, the first class.  Forty-two [1942] C is the first class, '42 [1942] C, D, E, F, G, every one of these classes, I see the pictures, I know these guys.  I see them, I recognize them.  Finally he turns around and says, has my picture, my class picture, the ones in my book, "Lieutenant, isn't that you?"  What could I say?  He knew, by the way, he had all my marks in high school, Chadsey High School [Detroit, Michigan], had all my marks at Clark University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], had all my marks at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He even knew how much taxes my dad [Alexander Jefferson] paid on his house.  At the time all I could do was sit there and say, um-hm.  He knew more about me than I knew about myself.  He did not ask me about the mission because he knew that I didn't know a damn thing about the mission, the military strategy about those radar stations.  He simply said it to prove that the Germans knew more about us than we knew about ourselves.  I finally found out when I got back home, you can go down to the county office and look at the tax record and you can find out how much you pay on your taxes, how much anybody else, the guy across the street, all these things are available.  Because the German Bund [German American Bund], it was a political party officially recognized in 1940, 1941 in the United States.  Somebody was here funneling all this stuff back to Germany.  When I got to Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany], five thousand white officers.  Information was on every one of those men also, which means the Germans were funneling a lot of material back to Germany.  The way things happen.
Speaker 1: The first place that you were, what, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Where I was interrogated?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That was in Frankfurt, that was Wetzlar [Germany], Frankfurt-on-the-Main.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wetzlar, oh, god, I can't remember the darn names.
Story_ID: 531610
Speaker 1: And then when you got to--
Speaker 2: Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stalag--
Speaker 2: On the way.
Speaker 1: How many people, you said five thousand?
Speaker 2: Five thousand officers, when a B-17 [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress] went down you had four officers.  Some of those raids they knocked down fifty and sixty B-17s.  Go back the next day, lose fifty or sixty more.  Tremendous number of B-17s and B-24s [Consolidated B-24 Liberator] went down over Germany.  German occupied territory, not Germany, German occupied territory, some in France, some in Hungary, Greece, so forth, Ploiesti [Romania].
Speaker 1: Was there a story you were gonna say, tell us about on the way there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On the way, Danny [Robert T. Daniels] and I were being, by, by rail, by railcar, these typical German railcars where every door opened up onto the siding.  We stopped in a, we were being transferred from Wetzlar [Germany], from Frankfurt [Germany] to Stalag Luft III, eighty miles east of Berlin [Germany], a town called Sagan [Germany], Sagan, S-A-G-A-N.   That's Stalag Luft, Stalag is camp, Luft, L-U-F-T, means air, this camp is controlled by the Luftwaffe, Luft means air, Waffe is army.  Luftwaffe is air army.  The Luftwaffe is politically much more democratic than the SS [Schutzstaffel], the stormtroopers, they were cutthroat or the Wehrmacht, the army.  On the way we stopped at a small place, don't know where it was, momentarily the train stopped, and up and down the platform were marching the Hitler Youth, these youngsters, ten, eleven, twelve, yippity yah, hey, heil Hitler [Adolf Hitler], and they saw us and they started tirades.  And they were infuriated then, the civilian people in the station.  And these people became agitated and the guards had actually lowered their rifles and threatened to shoot to keep these people from getting to us.  Then the train started up and they slammed the doors and we escaped.  The only time I ever got scared, only time I ever got scared.  Because see, I am a youngster of the United States during the 1930s.  I remember the Scottsboro Boys, who were almost threatened.  I remember pictures of black men hanging, lynching, and that's the time I said, well, here I am, here I'm in the middle of Germany to be lynched.  I got out of the United States, out of all those threats, the only time I ever got scared, really gut level scared.  But other than that, hell, life was a, the whole experience to me was a good adventure.  We got to Stalag Luft III.  And meanwhile, 150 or 200 men had been gathered up all over Germany, or German occupied territory, into Stalag Luft III.  We're standing along to get into the camp, the barracks were crowded.  It was a hall down the middle, rooms on each side and each room had double bunks.  You take out a double bunk and put in a triple bunk to take an extra man.  So they send a man from each room to pick out the guy going into that room.  I'm standing there with all these other hundred guys and these guys are coming down around picking out, I'll take him, I'll take him, I'll take him.  And all of a sudden, long, tall, great big tall, skinny hillbilly, "By crikey, I think I'll take this boy."  I said, oh, hell, here we go again.  Standing behind him was the senior American officer of the camp, guy with a chicken on his, full bird colonel, he said, "Lieutenant?"  "Yes, sir."  "You go with him."  "Yes, sir."  Apprehension, you better believe it.  Finally get to the room, it's fantastic, the guys are great.  One guy is from Connecticut, another is from Mississippi, another one, Illinois, great room.  But this is the room I find out, has all the escape material in it.  The room where they make out fake IDs, fake passports.  The Germans have been trying to find this room.  Now, it occurs to me why they pick me.  Because I could not be a German.  Into room 128, barracks 128, room A.
Speaker 1: You, by you saying you couldn't be a German, so they knew you couldn't be a spy trying, a plant in other words?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 531611
Speaker 1: My time at Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany] was, I simply sat the war [World War II, WWII] out.  No beatings, no torture, see it's different from the Hanoi Hilton in Vietnam [Hoa Lo Prison, Hanoi, Vietnam], or the Japanese, because of the Geneva Convention.  Geneva Convention was signed between the United States, France, England, Germany, on how you treat POWs [prisoner of war].  You put your officers in a camp and you do not make them work, you can put the enlisted in a separate camp and you could make them work, you chop, chop trees, or work, whatever but officers, I sat the war out.  The International Red Cross [International Committee of the Red Cross] was there.  We had paper, crayons, ink, supplies, baseball equipment, football equipment, ice hockey, everything.  Only thing we didn't have, food.  The Germans treated us great, they gave us what they had.  They gave us potatoes each day and that German bread.  The bread was, had 50 percent sawdust, you, the date was stamped on the bottom, they kept the bread stashed in straw.  Some of the bread was six or seven years old.  It was 50 percent sawdust, you could slice it an eighth of an inch thick, it kept its consistency.  They'd give us potatoes each day.  And every other day was something like a gruel soup or something, I don't know what it was, but we had ersatz, excuse me, ersatz jam and ersatz--and we had cheese.
Speaker 2: Ersatz?
Speaker 1: False, ersatz, made up, synthetic, synthetic jam, chemically synthetic jam.  How they made it, it was sweet but it was good.  If it hadn't been for International Red Cross food parcels, we would have died.  I lost four or five pounds.  I went from 125 to about 120.  Some of the guys lost fifteen, twenty pounds, they had been in there longer.  Some of the guys had been in from, had been in North Africa and had been in POW camp for three years.  International food croft, food, food parcels, small cans of Spam, liverwurst, a small bar of cheese, a small bar of chocolate, a box of raisins, box of prunes, five and six packs of cigarettes, they made smokers out of us.  The reason why cancer among World War II [WWII] veterans is so high, everybody smoked, everybody smoked.  But powdered can of, powdered milk, milk spelled backwards, KLIM, K-L-I-M.  We were supposed to get one of these packages of food, one box per man, one package per man.  It turned out we were only getting a half, due to transportation, trucks not being able to come in, and the Germans eating the damn things themselves.  We found out the German guards didn't get enough food, they were eating our rations.  But other than that we sat the war out but, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanna talk about, I wanna go back--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and we kind of skipped over, you said you were in the barracks with the escape materials. I wanna talk about that.
Speaker 1: Oh.  This is interesting because this is the place, if the men wanted to escape out through the tunnel or any escape, they had to be dressed in civilian clothes, they had to have papers, passports to validate themselves as legitimate travelers and these are things that they made inside the camp, the escape materials.  It was all relegated, escape committee, it was controlled, you just didn't do this on your own, you did it according, under the auspices of the escape committee, it gave you permission to go and you had papers and uniform and so forth and so on.  By the way, civilian dress, because you couldn't go out as an officer, so that's all part of that room.
Story_ID: 531612
Speaker 1: There was a famous movie called 'The Great Escape'--
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: --during that time.
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: Is this in relationship to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that camp was the camp I was in [Stalag Luft III, Sagan, Germany].  That camp that, they escaped in May, well, first, first of all, the camp was so large, the camp was consisted of five different areas, North Camp, which contained something like 2500 men, East Camp, 2500 men, West Camp, 2500 men, South Camp, which I was in, and Center Camp.  Each of these camps had escape committees.  Tunnels were dug from the North Camp for that movie.  George, named George, and so forth and so on.  Most of those men were British, a few Americans.  In South Camp, mainly Americans.  I think there was one, one tunnel out of South Camp going the other way.  You did not attempt to escape individually.  You did it under the auspices of the escape committee because this was coordinated to keep things under control, to keep the Germans from knowing what the heck's going on.  And you only did it with their, with the escape committee's permission.  The uniforms, papers, time, all of these things were coordinated through the escape committee of each particular camp.  And I was in South Camp, so therefore if anybody in South Camp wanted to escape or attempted to escape, either subterfuge or digging underneath the fence or ostensibly getting out through some refuge to the garbage detail or at night through a tunnel, you had to do it through the escape committee, with their authority, that's why it all happened.
Speaker 1: Did you see men escape?
Speaker 2: Through South Camp, no.  We heard about them going out through East Camp and North Camp but out of South Camp, I don't think anybody attempted.  First place, we were, South Camp was situated towards the city.  North Camp was situated towards the trees towards the Polish, therefore it's easier for them to get out.
Speaker 1: So these men that escaped in this movie--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --most of them were, they were officers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were officers.
Speaker 1: And they were the only officers that were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all officers and they were British and American and they dug the tunnel and the tunnel came up short and fifty of them, fifty of them were, only three men really got back to American or Allied, Allied arms.  All of the rest were captured.  I don't remember exactly, seventy-five or eighty.  Fifty of them were executed by the SS [Schutzstaffel].
Speaker 1: These were the only off- I mean, officers that were executed during the war [World War II, WWII] is that right?
Speaker 2: Well, well these fifty guys were all officers out of the camp.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Now, there may be other instances where some officers were executed by the SS, I don't remember that.  But out of this instance, they were.  And they were executed because of the SS, orders by Hitler [Adolf Hitler] or I don't know who but--
Story_ID: 531613
Speaker 1: Did you hear from home while you were--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  We didn't have time because of time of mail, time to go.  I wrote letters in September, October, but by the time the mail got home, I was transferred somewhere else and the mail never caught up to me.  I never got any mail from home.  I wrote home all the time but I never got any mail from home.
Speaker 1: So tell me about your, your daily routine in--
Speaker 2: Well, you got up in the morning.
Speaker 1: --what's, what are some of the things that you learned (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were ten men in a room.  So you got up in the morning and you, you went to the john, you washed, you shaved, and you had breakfast, which meant you had your slice of bread and your cup of tea.  Oh, one guy by the way, one guy had to be the workhorse.  His job for the week was to go get the hot water to make tea.  We had tea, very little coffee, we had a slice of bread, and this ersatz jam, the potatoes, a couple slices of potatoes, and we had breakfast and then the rest of the day, you, I did drawing, or if there was a library, extensive library, many of them guys had been there two and a half, three years, and books had been sent from home.  International Red Cross [International Committee of the Red Cross] also had books.  We did a lot of walking, walked the perimeter, with nothing else to do you walked the perimeter, you spent time walking the perimeter.  You visited, that's about all you did, walk.  I literally sat the war [World War II, WWII] out.  When I say sat the war out, I literally sat the war out.  That's why I spent my time drawing.  And exchanging cartoons and ideas with other men.  Some of the guys sat there and did it, we learned how to knit because we knew winter was coming and International Red Cross had a lot of wool, knitting, we did a lot of knitting, we made socks, scarves, gloves, getting ready for the winter.  Very little cooking.  We didn't do any cooking.  But--
Speaker 1: How did you all get along together?
Speaker 2: No animosity, everybody's in the same, in this soup together.  Now, of course, there might have been some personal, individual, estrangement.  But I never had any trouble with the guys in my room, we got along together.  We exchanged ideas, of course, we, we exchanged ideas of where we lived, how we get along, how we were raised, our education, and so forth and so on.  In fact, Gil [ph.], one of the guys in the room still lives right here in Detroit [Michigan].  I see him every first Tuesdays at Veterans Hospital [John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, Michigan], I joined a group of POWs [prisoner of war].  Veterans Hospital has a, a session where we get together and talk about our, it's a therapeutic type of assembly.  And Gil and I see each other, he was my roommate in POW camp.  We get along great.
Speaker 1: So you watched the seasons change there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It got cold, temperature at, at Sagan [Stalag Luft III, Sagan, Germany] was twenty [degrees] below zero.  That's when it got cold in January and we got kicked out of, when the Russians started coming west and to keep us from being liberated by the Russians, the Germans put us out on the road and we walked eighty kilometers west.  And the guards were German, the old men, sixty-five and seventy and eighty.  They, they didn't wanna be captured by the Russians anyway.  And they, many of them couldn't walk, we had to carry their rifles.  We put them on the, some of the guys had small wagons and we put some of the German guards on these wagons and pulled them along with us as we walked eighty kilometers west.  Cold as hell, twenty below zero, that's where the gloves and scarves came in handy until we got to a train, they put us on a train and we went to Stalag VII-A [Moosburg, Germany].
Story_ID: 531614
Speaker 1: You talked about different POW [prisoner of war] camps--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you talked about the difference in Vietnam and different places, even for enlisted men who were captured, what do you think the difference was and how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the first place--
Speaker 1: --where they lived?
Speaker 2: --being a POW in Germany, in a German POW camp was not all that bad.  As an enlisted man, there were, they could make you chop wood or work on a, some kind of work detail.  It was, it was not like Vietnam or Korea.  It was a different attitude completely.  They were beaten, just like the Bataan Death March when the Japanese beat them, and--completely different.  In the Geneva Convention men were treated humanely.  Enlisted were just like the military, if you're an officer, RHIP, Rank Has Its Privileges.  The enlisted men were a little less.  Officers didn't do any work at all and that's the way it was.  Now, there were many, many, POW camps, literally hundreds.  I remember Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany], the big one that I was in, and Stalag Luft I on Barth [Germany].  Now, there were some black POWs out of my group at Barth up on the Baltic [Baltic Sea].  A.Q. Carroll [Alfred Q. Carroll, Jr.], Penn, Starling Penn [Starling B. Penn], A.Q. Carroll, Gene Browne [Gene C. Browne], Will Griffin [William E. Griffin], Willie Griffin, they were at Barth.  They were shot down, and why the Germans put them at Barth, I have no idea (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was Will Long [Wilbur Long] with you or somewhere else?  Do you know Will Long?
Speaker 2: Wilbur Long?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Wilbur Long was with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wilbur Long was with me.  He, when he went down, he went down at Blechhammer [Germany], he was, went in, he crash landed and forgot to tighten his seatbelt and his nose went up and busted his nose on the gun camera, Wilbur Long.  His sister by the way lives here in Detroit [Michigan].  What's her name?
Speaker 1: Naomi [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 2: Naomi Maddock, yeah, Naomi Madgett.
Speaker 1: Madgett.
Speaker 2: Madgett, yeah.  I've known her for years, years, years, yeah.  Wilbur Long an old buddy, hm, hm, hm.  When the, at Stalag Luft III, there were approximately five or six black officers in that camp, Macon [Richard D. Macon], Daniels [Robert T. Daniels], Jefferson [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], Hathcock [Lloyd "Scotty" Hathcock], let's see, Morgan [Woodrow F. Morgan], Morgan, yeah, five or six of us.  Great majority of us were shot down during the later months of the war [World War II, WWII] at Stalag VII-A [Moosburg, Germany], when the, when the war was going down many of the guys were shot down, strafing, thirty-two men wound up as POWs, as to my counting.  I think I'm the only guy who actually counted and kept track of the number of guys at, of the 332nd Fighter Group [332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] who were POWs.  And many of them came in at Stalag VII-A, near, at Moosburg [Germany].
Speaker 1: So the different camps, as long as you were an officer then you were treated, you know, treated well because of the rank?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, that camp, now where these other camps by the Germans or that SS [Schutzstaffel] or the Wehrmacht, I have no idea.  But at Stalag Luft III you were treated great.  Even at Stalag VII-A where we wound up, we were treated great because across the fence, there was a barbed wire fence, they had Russians and Germans over, Russians and, Russians and Poles, and the Germans treated them like dirt, we could see that.  The Germans were beating them with their rifle butts.  When we, we were tossing cigarettes over the, over the fence to them, and if the Germans saw it, the Germans would confiscate the cigarettes and beat the guys, beat the Russians.  You talk about ethnic hatred, that's when I found out about ethnic hatred where Russians hated Germans, Germans hated Ukrainians, Ukrainians, oh god, here we go, see, that ethnic hatred.
Speaker 1: Liberation day.
Speaker 2: Well, we were there at Stalag VII-A, many, many, many POWs were funneled into this place during the end of the war, the war was coming to an end.  And a couple of days before that, somebody said, "Hey Jeff, there's a bunch of P-51s [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang] out there."  Red Tail P-51s were shooting up the little railroad town, four P-51s, you see 'em, coming in shooting, they go up and circle on, they had a ball.  Everybody knew they were Red Tails.  Now, by that time there were fifteen to twenty Tuskegee Airmen in that camp.  Wilbur Long, Red Driver [Clarence Driver], no, that's when Red Driver came in because he was shot down, strafing one, strafing that town, he came in later.
Speaker 1: What does, excuse me, what does strafing mean?
Speaker 2: Strafing means you take your airplane down and you, and fire your guns, and shoot up the ground target, that's strafing.
Story_ID: 531615
Speaker 1: Liberation day came, we knew, by the way we knew where the American uniform, officers, our forces were because we had radios, small radios.
Speaker 2: They were brought in by the Red Cross [International Committee of the Red Cross]?
Speaker 1: Well, they were smuggled in, let's say, they were smuggled in.  We could, we kept track of the American forces where things were happening all of the time.  We knew the war [World War II, WWII] was coming to an end.  And the day it happened, when the tanks busted in through the main gate [of Stalag VII-A, Moosburg, Germany] and the second or third camp tank was General Patton [George S. Patton], riding on that tank with his pearl handles, all hell broke loose, all hell broke loose.  We could hear some skirmish, gun fire out in the--you hear things going on.  But Patton came in, not with the first tanks through the main gate, crashed into the main gate and through the barbed wire, were members of the tank corps.  But he came in later on, inspected, and walked on, I remember him walking down through and saying, "Where's the officers' quarters?"  "Sir, these are the officers' quarters."  Of course, Patton with his expletive deleted words.  He described, well, put in, he brought in a food, a food kitchen, brought in the kitchen, we had hot food within five hours but it was liberation day (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did it--
Speaker 1: --the American flag flying.
Speaker 2: Did the Red Cross have a big part in what happened during that time?
Speaker 1: Well, the Red Cross, the Red Cross was in, the [U.S.] Army was in, they were both together.  When I say Red Cross and the Army, kitchen, food kitchen, they brought food and food and the whole shebang.  In fact, the Army came in about the next day or the next morning with payroll.  Walk through, sign your name, or he'd say something, they paid you eighty bucks, eight ten dollar bills, yeah.  So I go through the first time, eighty bucks.  The guy didn't even look up.  Here's your eighty bucks, you walk by, you take it.  I said, well, well, well.  Go through the second time, eighty bucks, he didn't even look up.  I said, "That's enough, I'm not gonna try it a third time."
Speaker 2: When you said that the radios were smuggled in--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --smuggled in how?
Speaker 1: In certain parts of the food parcels, through the, through--
Speaker 2: Through the Red Cross?
Speaker 1: --through the Red Cross food parcels.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And also, I've described this, I've got to go back and find out how to make a small radio with a razor blade, a razor blade and a cat whisker which means a little wire hooked up to an ear phone.  We listened to the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], British broadcasting, and they broadcast the status of the war, and we listened to it all the time, with a, with a razor blade and a cat whisker.  I'm gonna, I've got to go back and find out how to make one of those.  You see the BBC was very, very, very powerful.  You could hear it all the way across France.  All the way across Germany.
Story_ID: 531616
Speaker 1: It's hard to understand because you've heard of Hanoi Hilton [Hoa Lo Prison, Hanoi, Vietnam], you've heard of, who was the guy who got beaten, senator, who's the senator, he's, he's up for, what's his name?
Speaker 2: McCain [John McCain] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) McCain.
Speaker 2: McCain.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The Japanese had a different attitude.  You heard about the Japanese Bataan Death March where they beat and killed Americans, the Hanoi Hilton, how the guys were denied food, it's different.  There, west, that eastern attitude was different.  The Germans and American, the Germans, Germans liked England, they knew about England, they respected England, the white.  I literally sat the war out.
Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  But you're saying that ten thousand people sat the war out?
Speaker 1: In Germany--
Speaker 2: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  In Germany.  You said there were--
Speaker 1: --five thousand, five thousand men at Stalag Luft, well, now I may mean not five thousand, at Stalag, if you go back and read the books and, punch in, pull up Google, and punch in Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany], Roman numeral three, look about the history, there are books about it.  How we were treated as officers and gentlemen.  I'm black, I went along with the program.  No beatings, no, hell, they knew more about me than I knew about myself, why are they gonna torture me?  The only thing we didn't have was food.  And the only reason why we didn't have food because the trucks couldn't get in there.  We bombed out the railroad system.  You moved things in Germany by rail.  We bombed out the rail system.  Any time trucks moved, you had P-47s [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt] and strafing the roads.  The trucks had white crosses on their tops so you, and sometimes they were stopped.  It's all part of the war, World War II [WWII].  And as a black man, I survived.
Story_ID: 531617
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Now, was there any tension between blacks and whites in the camp, no tension?  You already went over that, okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) When the guys saw those wings, there may be a little animosity, he may be a white racist but when he saw your wings, he knew you were a pilot and there's a certain thing about pilots, we respect each other.
Speaker 1: Were there pilots there that you actually escorted, and they found out who you were?
Speaker 2: Later on.
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, later on.
Speaker 1: But while you were still there in the camp?
Speaker 2: While we were there, no, no.
Speaker 1: Not while you were in the camp?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Until later on.  About four or five weeks after I was captured, a bomber crew came in from the 15th Air Force [15th Expeditionary Mobility Task Force], they were escorted by a white group, they said, damn it, they saw me, ran over and grabbed me, "God damn it if you had been, if we had been escorted by the Red Tails we wouldn't have been shot down."  It spread throughout the whole camp.  Ah, Jeff [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson] was a Red Tail escorting the 15th Air Force, well, what do you know?  And the word spread, if you're escorted by a Red Tail, they'll bring you home, that's how it spread.  But that's what life is all about.  And literally I wouldn't say I enjoyed it but I endured it.  It was an experience and I think I'm the only one who ever wrote a book, only black POW [prisoner of war] who wrote a book and kept a record, no other guy kept a record but when the guys came in, that's where they were.  And I, the list in my book is not absolutely accurate, there may be a little mistake.  But only (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me the name of your book since you mentioned it.
Speaker 2: Oh, 'Red Tail Captured, Red Tail Free' ['Red Tail Captured, Red Tail Free: The Memories of a Tuskegee Airman and POW,' Alexander Jefferson with Lewis H. Carlson], 'Red Tail Captured, Red Tail Free,' and the life of a black POW, how I survived, enjoyed, survived, and still endured, hm.
Speaker 1: So, let's go back to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --General Patton [George S. Patton] coming [to Stalag VII-A, Moosburg, Germany].
Speaker 2: I only saw him momentarily.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Came in, surrounded by all of these, these POWs came in surrounded by all the POWs and everybody's yelling and screaming and I just saw him at fifteen or twenty feet away, but at least I saw him.  And didn't see him after that.
Story_ID: 531618
Speaker 1: So where did you leave to go after that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sat around, we sat around Stalag VII-A [Moosburg, Germany].  That's, the next day when I took a trip down I saw Dachau.  Somebody said, "Hey, Jeff [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], there's a place down there with a lot of dead people."  "What in the hell are you talking about?"  "Man, they got people down there stacked up like up cordwood."  So I'm curious.  We got a jeep, we liberated the jeep, didn't steal it, we liberated it, we requisitioned it, (laughter) midnight requisition.  And we went down to see this place where they had a lot of dead people.  You could smell it a mile before you got to it.  The ovens were still warm.  The odor of burned human flesh, I'll never forget it.  I remember pictures where they opened the oven, had a table covered with hair because before they burned the bodies, they had somebody cutting off the hair, great big long table, fifteen or twenty feet long, piled with hair, they used the hair for seat cushions.  Long table covered with rings, before they burned the bodies they took the rings off, diamonds and gold.  Table covered with dentures, somebody with a pair of pliers pulling the gold and amalgam out of these dead bodies.  So many dead bodies they couldn't bury them all, so they took a bulldozer and dug a big trench, then you took and shoved all these dead bodies, arms and legs all over in the trench, covered it up with lime.  Man's inhuman, I saw it, and somebody's gonna tell me that Dachau never happened, then I have to use some expletive deleted words to really express myself.  Man's inhumanity to man.  When I relate this to high school kids, "Oh, Mr. Jefferson, the Jews, the Germans killed so many Jews."  I say, "Hey, wait a minute."  Back up baby.  What's going on today?  You sit here fat, dumb, and happy, what happened in Bosnia?  The kids look at me real funny.  I don't know.  Why is Milosevic [Slobodan Milosevic] prosecuted?  What did the Bosnians do to the Serbs?  What happened in Darfur [Sudan]?  What happened in Burundi?  Black kids have no idea what happened in Burundi, Tutsis and Hutus.  Man's inhumanity to man.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts?  How did you feel when you, when you saw this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Horrendous.  I had no idea, you know, we were fat, dumb, and happy.  Nineteen forty-four [1944], nobody knew about Dachau.  People in the United States didn't know about Dachau.  Now, some of the officials did, but plain, ordinary common Joe, we didn't know about Dachau, how the Germans were being, killing the Jews, the Hungarians, the Serbs.  Today, well, when I was there, it was mind boggling, literally mind boggling, I couldn't believe it.
Speaker 1: Who were burying the bodies?
Speaker 2: The German, whoever the Germans were, burning the bodies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said there were bodies stacked up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, this was after--
Speaker 2: They had been gassed and the bodies thrown out there, literally just like cordwood.  And before they could take 'em and put 'em in the furnace and, and burn the bodies and get rid of 'em, the Germans had left, quite naturally they had left.  They weren't there when we got there.  But it's all part of, part of the story.  And somebody was trying to tell me Dachau never happened, Belsen [Bergen-Belsen], Auschwitz, Buchenwald, da, horrendous, horrendous, horrendous.  We stayed at Stalag VII for about four or five days, waiting for transportation to take us by air, we, four or five miles away to an air field, being flown to, up on the Baltic [Baltic Sea] to Le Havre [France] for transportation back by boat.  And we went C-47s [Douglas C-47 Skytrain], I was in the group, C-47s.  We landed at Verdun [France], and I got off, went to Paris [France], stayed in Paris for two weeks, I was AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave], until I went up to Le Havre and turned myself in.  When I got to Le Havre, he said, have a seat.  Nobody knew I was there.
Story_ID: 531619
Speaker 1: Stalag VII-A [Moosburg, Germany], to Stalag VII, a long train ride, you're along with thousands of other guys, you know, you're along with a whole bunch of guys, you're surviving, nobody got scared except when we were in that, in the marshaling yards in Nuremburg [Germany] on the, with the train ride from the marshaling yards and the RAF [Royal Air Force] came over and bombed the marshaling yards and the damn train was, the boxcar was knocked off the rails.  You're talking about scared, yeah, it's closer than, it's fireworks going off but get scared, no, nobody got scared, too many guys around you all going through the same experience.
Speaker 2: So now we're in Paris [France].  You're in France (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two weeks in Paris, (unclear), bingo.
Speaker 2: Did you literally go AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave]?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not really?
Speaker 1: Nobody, oh, by the way, I am not on anybody's record, I'm simply in Paris.  I'm not on, officially on anybody's record, so when I go to Le Havre [France], and Patrick Henry [Camp Patrick Henry, Virginia], they said, take, take a bunk, okay, you're here, they finally write my name down and put me on the manifest to get on the boat in three days to go to London [England], to get on another boat to go to the United States, bingo.  Literally I just had two weeks off to have a good time.
Speaker 2: And when you arrived into the United States--
Speaker 1: Coming down the gangplank?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Boat enters the New York Harbor, you pass the Statue of Liberty [New York, New York], around a bridge and so forth and so on, everybody's whooping, the toots, and there all the bells are ringing, all the toots are going, walk down the gangplank with all the rest of the guys, whites, blacks, and when you get there, whites to the right, niggers to the left.  Coming back home, gangplank, New York City [New York, New York].  I said it's a dark shame, back home, whites to the right and niggers, little white soldier at the bottom of the gangplank.  So you go to the left and you're, go through registration, find out who, when, where, what, and then find out that you have orders, orders were already cut to thirty days leave, so I go, first of all you, you're sent to Atlantic City [New Jersey] for indoctrination for three days, three days, four days, and then thirty days leave.  Thirty days leave, go home, meet your parents, take care, have a ball.  I then transferred immediately from there to Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  Records, records go back to Tuskegee Army Airfield.  When I get there I'm assigned as an instrument instructor for cadets.  See we still have cadets coming through training.  And the last month in advance, you have the cadets fly instrument instructors, instruments in the AT-6 [North American Aviation T-6 Texan] and I become an instrument instructor in the AT-6.  That's my indoctrination, back to Tuskegee Army Airfield, and had a great time.
Speaker 2: As an instructor?
Speaker 1: Being an instructor with cadets coming through.  I was an instructor from August, August '45 [1945], July, August, forty--August '45 [1945], until the place closed in, a year later, I think.  I can't get my figures together, whenever it closed.  Closed, and we were sent to Lockbourne, Lockbourne Air Force Base [Lockbourne Army Airfield; Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Where is that?
Speaker 1: Ohio.  Lockbourne is, Lockbourne Air Force Base, south of Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 2: What happened to the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All these other men?
Speaker 2: --the, yeah, the ones that you were close to that was, that were in your--
Speaker 1: They all came back to Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: They, I (unclear), they all came back to either Tuskegee or they, they all came back to Godman Field, Kentucky [Godman Army Airfield, Fort Knox, Kentucky], to the B-25 [North American B-25 Mitchell] outfit.  Some of them came back to the B-25 outfit at, at, they didn't come back to Walterboro [Walterboro Army Airfield, South Carolina], I don't, I don't remember but most of them came back to Tuskegee Army Airfield.
Speaker 2: Did any of them fly again?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, a lot of them did.
Speaker 2: And was that a choice of yours not to?
Speaker 1: Well, I flew, I was still flying instrument instructor, flying, flying instructor at Tuskegee Army Airfield.  I was the flying instructor when the guys, when the kids fly instruments.  That's where you have to, you put a canopy over them and they're in the dark and they have to fly by their instruments, you take 'em up and they have to fly and navigate by instruments, I was the instructor showing them how to do that for a year at Tuskegee Army Airfield.
Story_ID: 531620
Speaker 1: That's where I met my wife, she was a parachute rigger, packing parachutes at Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  I met her, we started going together and when I was kicked out of, they closed down Tuskegee Army Airfield, I was transferred to Lockbourne [Lockbourne Army Airfield; Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Ohio] and she went along with me, we got to Lockbourne, we were married at Lockbourne.  We were married for about six months then I was released from, from the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force].  We were married by then, we came to Detroit [Michigan], and that's where I started my career as a teacher, in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Tell me your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Adella, A, (laughter) I used to, I get my, I used to get her mad, I would call her Idella.  Her name was Adella, A-D-E-L-L-A, Adella Tucker, her maiden name was Tucker, she had remarried once before and divorced, with McDonald, M-C-D-O-N-A-L-D, Adella Tucker McDonald Jefferson [Adella Tucker Jefferson].  And we were married in October '46 [1946], I believe.  Don't get me wrong, it's--
Speaker 2: How long were you married?
Speaker 1: Until she passed, she, she passed in 1970, she passed in 1970.  How long was that?  Forty-six [1946], '70 [1970] (unclear) forty-five, fifty years [sic.].
Speaker 2: You said she, tell me her occupation again.
Speaker 1: Actually, when she was here, she was strictly a housewife.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Strictly a housewife.  She had done, she had done, she had worked at Tuskegee Army Airfield as a parachute packer, but when she came to Detroit, oh, she had a job in down in, at an apron factory, I'm sorry, wait a minute, at an apron factory for about a year.  That's while I was, while I was going to, while I was taking my first year at Wayne State [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  I was taking practice teaching, she worked at an apron factory for about a year.  And then she was pregnant and my daughter [Alexis Jefferson] was born in '49 [1949], um-hm.  I had started teaching in '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: You went back to school first, is that right?
Speaker 1: I had to go back to school for a semester of practice teaching, learning how to teach, which was to me, bull (laughter).  I was dealing with kids and I like dealing with kids.
Speaker 2: And this was at Wayne State?
Speaker 1: Wayne State University, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then you got your teaching certificate?
Speaker 1: Got a teachers certificate.  And, ironically, when I started in 1948 there were only four or five schools that a black person could teach in Detroit.  Duffield [D. Bethune Duffield Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], Bishop [Bishop School, Detroit, Michigan], Alger [Alger Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], Sampson [William T. Sampson Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], and one school out on Ohio [Street], Duffield, Bishop, Alger, Sampson, I think Wingert [Fanny E. Wingert Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].  So I started at Duffield in 1948, elementary science.  When I came back to Wayne State, I wanted to be a research scientist.  I found out that I had been out of the chemistry field for three or four years, I was behind the times, I'd have to go back to school for four or five years to get back on status to be able to be a chemist.  Walking around campus, I saw a friend of mine, Leonard Sain, Leonard said, "Hey, buddy, what are you doing?"  I said, "I don't know what the hell I'm doing."  He said "Well, go up and talk to Dr. Billock [ph.]," who's a science, elementary science supervisor.  When you--she looked at my transcript, she said, "Well, Mr. Jefferson [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], with your chemistry, your biology, your physics, and your math, with a half year of practice teaching, I can guarantee you a job."  That's why I became a schoolteacher.  Bingo, just like that.  With a wife, knowing a baby is gonna be on the way, mortgage, house, I became a school teacher.  And to tell you the truth it might have been the best damn thing that ever happened to me.
Speaker 2: Why is that?
Speaker 1: Greatest experience in the world.  You look at a kid, trying to get him to get to the station and all of a sudden you explain something to him and his eyes get big it's oh, yeah, understanding, the best thing that ever happened.  I have four, I've got five, I have five high school kids that I have counseled through the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado] and they've become officers.  One has just retired from the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] last October as a full bird colonel.  I've got ministers and teachers who are my former students.  Carlyle, Carlyle Stewart III [Carlyle Fielding Stewart III] is a pastor of the largest Methodist church [Hope United Methodist Church, Southfield, Michigan] in Detroit, who was my former student, sixth grade student.  My urologist is my former sixth grade student.  I had prostate radiation ten years ago, my sixth grade student is my doctor.  God is good.  It gets better and better and better.  Life has been darn good to me.  I've enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 531621
Speaker 1: Tell me about the transition from military life to civilian life and this transition, you know, to go back to school and then to, to teach.
Speaker 2: It was nothing.  You just simply go from one to another.  It's like a roller coaster, you become, you become eligible and you simply change hats, like getting up in the morning.  By the way, I stayed in the [U.S.] military, I stayed in the reserves [U.S. Army Reserve], so therefore a weekend warrior, once, one month a year, one weekend a month I'd go out to Selfridge [Selfridge Air Force Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan] and put on the uniform.  I became squadron commander, administrative officer.  I went, I went off my status by the way.  I got to the place where my flying, I, I couldn't, my depth perception went blooey, I couldn't tell how close I was to another airplane, so voluntarily I went off my status.  Stayed in the military, stayed in the reserves, made rank, and eventually I became the squadron administrative officer.  I was not the commander.  The commander was a full bird colonel.  He didn't know any, he didn't know what the hell he was doing.  I'm the administrative officer, I write all the regulars, I'm the only officer with a set of wings in flying.  Also I'm an officer who has a teaching certificate, therefore I am in charge of all the enlisted men's on the job training.  See, and enlisted men are in relative, they're in school.  I'm in charge of them.  Like the principal of their school.  So therefore I make rank, I went from a first lieutenant to a captain, captain to a major, major to a lieutenant colonel.  And by the time I retired in 1969, I was a lieutenant colonel with my years still military, and I still enjoy the military.  Go out to Selfridge all the time, take advantage of the commissary, take advantage of the PX [post exchange], it's all military.  So my life, relatively, military and civilian is much the same, it's all intertwined.  They're not separate at all.
Story_ID: 531622
Speaker 1: So tell me about the first school that you taught at.
Speaker 2: Duffield [D. Bethune Duffield Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]?  Duffield was right down in the middle of Black Bottom [Detroit, Michigan], 100 percent black.  It was an experience.  But that was a time when teachers were teachers and the kids were kids.  My job sometimes was to go out in the neighborhood and round up absentee kids, kids who were tardy, my job was to go down and walk into the house and tell the parents, get your kids to school tomorrow morning.  Today you can't do that.  I was at Pattengill [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] for, I mean at Duffield for possibly five or six years, then I went to a school and Pattengill was half white, half black and the neighborhood was changing.  That was just after Reginald McGhee [sic. Orsel McGhee] in that neighborhood had bought a house and could not live in it because of a restrictive covenant.  It went in 1949, 1950, it had gone to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court gave him permission to live in that house.  When he moved into the house, the rest of the people in the neighborhood, the white people started moving out, that's when Detroit [Michigan] started changing.
Speaker 1: And you said that was in 1959?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-nine [1949], 1950.
Speaker 1: You went to Duffield in '48 [1948], forty--
Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948], '49 [1949].  I went into Pattengill in 1955, '54 [1954], it was still half white, half black.  And within four years it was boom, completely black.  Whites moved out to the suburbs.  In fact, all of Detroit was doing, doing that way.
Speaker 1: You were still teaching science?
Speaker 2: Elementary science.  I moved out on Brinker [Avenue] in '51 [1951].  Could not buy a house on the other side of 7 Mile.  7 Mile Road was about three blocks north of me.  Could not buy a house north of 7 Mile because in the deed of the land it says, could not be sold to a person of color, 1949, 1950.  Racism, segregation, why Detroit had so called Black Bottom during World War II [WWII] because blacks could not live in certain places, they were relegated to certain places in Detroit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's where the first school was in Black Bottom, that you--
Speaker 2: Black Bottom down at--
Speaker 1: --that you taught?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And so what part of Detroit, the history of Detroit, hm, hm, hm.  So I've been out on Brinker, house is paid for, I'm still there.
Speaker 1: And this is close to 7 Mile?
Speaker 2: North, northeast Detroit, near Pershing High School [John J. Pershing High School], northeast Detroit.  8 Mile Road is the northern border, 7 Mile, one mile south, 7 Mile, I live three blacks from 7 Mile.
Speaker 1: Did you actually try to buy a house on the other side where, and that's when you found out that the covenant said that you could not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Couldn't--
Speaker 1: --purchase?
Speaker 2: I tried, we tried to buy a house on Outer Drive, people here, Outer Drive near Farwell School [Farwell Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], somebody who's gonna hear this will find out where Farwell Junior High, Farwell Field [Detroit, Michigan], where the east armory, there's an armory, National Guard armory near Farwell Field.  On East Outer Drive there are a string of houses, beautiful homes, I tried to buy one in 1949, 1950, couldn't do it.  Other places, if I tried to go to Warren [Avenue] and Michigan [Avenue], Central [Avenue], Birmingham [Michigan], of course not, in 1950 and '51 [1951], heck no.  Bloomfield Hills [Michigan], these are suburbs around Detroit, heck no.  Even some places in Detroit it was absolutely unheard of, but that's all part of things that opened up later.
Story_ID: 531623
Speaker 1: Now, you went on to be an administrator?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that transition (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took the exam to be an administrator for the, to be an assistant principal.  And--
Speaker 1: What, what year was this?
Speaker 2: Let me go back and think now.  I became an administrator in 1970, yeah, 1960, '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], I took the exam, passed the exam with a 98 plus.  But the written exam only counts for 50 percent of your exam because you have to take an oral, an oral exam, 50 percent.  I passed the written, every time I took the oral, I'd flunk it, too damn controversial, too outspoken.  And until 1970, they came to me and said, "Hey, Jeff [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], we need you as assistant principal."  I said, "Hell no."  Oh, yeah, we go, they had a school that was in controversy in a brand new neighborhood called Halley [P.J.M. Halley Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].  Halley was near Parkside [Street], where blacks had started moving in, and these black people were in controversy with the principal, Venticinque [Gabriel Venticinque].  He was, well, they needed to have a black assistant principal, so I said, "Hell no," until they said, "Well, it's about a three thousand dollar raise."  Oh, well, what do you know.  Now, meanwhile my wife [Adella Tucker Jefferson] had passed, 1970.  I took the job, Halley Elementary School.  I was there for one year, Venticinque was sent home.  They bring in a principal, a black principal [Bernard Dent], but at that time there was a decision among the board of education that the administration had to be diverse, had to be black and white.  So since he came in as principal, I had to go.  So they sent me to Ferry Elementary [Dexter Ferry Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] to a woman, a white woman.  What the hell was her name?  Lee, Wanda Lee.  I was the assistant principal at Ferry Elementary, a neighborhood of Polish, black, Chinese, West Virginia hillbillies, diverse school, near Chene [Street] and Palmer [Street], on Ferry [Street], near Chene, between Chene and, between Ferry and Palmer near Chene.  I was there for ten years as assistant principal.
Story_ID: 531624
Speaker 1: Before we go forward--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I wanna go back a little bit and, and talk about Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] because now you're an educator during this time.  Can you speak to that time?
Speaker 2: In Detroit [Michigan], I didn't feel it too much because I'm always in a black neighborhood.  I'm teaching at Duffield [D. Bethune Duffield Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], Duffield is solid black, that's where Joe Louis comes from, all the black folks.  Brown versus Board of, it didn't even affect me.  When I got to Pattengill [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], Pattengill is half white, half black, and during the four or five years that I'm there, the whites are starting to move out.  The school becomes all black.  So consequently, Brown versus Board of Education doesn't mean a darn thing to me.  I'm simply teaching, having a good time, kids are learning, I'm still in the reserves [U.S. Army Reserve] on the weekends, still making money on the weekends, and money, and Brown versus Board of Education didn't affect me at all.  Maybe it's, maybe I'm just not in a place for it because there was no controversy, no controversy at all (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And during the '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --during the Civil Rights Movement, were you involved in--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --any political organizations?
Speaker 2: Oh, we all belonged to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], we helped Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] walk down Woodward Avenue.  I'm still, oh, Malcolm [Malcolm X], I remember being at Cobo, Cobo Arena [Cobo Center] in downtown Detroit, the couple of days or the day after Malcolm's house was bombed, Malcolm shows up in the same clothes, I believe, I don't know they tell me this, but anyway, I remember listening to him and somebody made a record of his speeches, of Malcolm's speaking.  I remember those records and I bought a record.  And I used to play those records for my sixth grade class.  "Freedom by any means necessary."  Some of the kids, some of the young, some of the grownups today, remind me that they remember hearing Malcolm's records in my classroom.  I had airplanes hanging all in the ceiling, still air, airplane orientated.  Cutting open frogs, you take a frog and you take a sharp needle probing behind the head, immobilize him, but he's still living so you can open him up and show the kids, the heart is still beating, all the organs working, interesting elementary science class, interesting.  And Brown versus Board of Education never affected me, I don't think.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was too involved in teaching.
Speaker 1: So the NAACP was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they were--
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: --there.  The Urban League, I mean, all of these organizations.  Plus at the same time, the CAP [Civil Air Patrol], no, I wasn't in the CAP, Civilian Pilot Training [Civilian Pilot Training Program], CPA--CAP.  But there were other organizations, homeowners associations.  I helped start the Graysdale Park property owners association [Graysdale Homeowners' Association] in 1951 in that area.  I was the president for the first two or three years.  That was all time consuming.  Young people moving in, and all the black, young people, black, young people moving in, built brick homes on these empty spaces.  The only place where we would build at that time.  Couldn't go to Birmingham, Birmingham, Michigan by the way, or Bloomfield Hills [Michigan] or St. Clair Shores [Michigan], those places.  So realistically, Brown versus Board of Education, it might have affected me but unconsciously I wasn't aware of it, not outwardly.
Story_ID: 531625
Speaker 1: You're assistant principal and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you have--
Speaker 2: Hm.
Speaker 1: --a white principal [Wanda Lee]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --how is the relationship working there at the school [Dexter Ferry Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: She's the principal, I'm the assistant.  I have certain duties.  My responsibilities are over the teachers who are absent, they call me in the morning.  I have discipline of absent teachers.  Also I have, she's got the responsibility of requisitioning supplies, later on I do that.  But there's certain responsibilities that I have, certainly she has, and there's no conflict.  She's the principal, I'm the assistant, she respects what I do, I respect what she does, we get along together.
Speaker 1: Did you miss teaching students?
Speaker 2: In a certain way, yes.  I remember, I missed the contact of young people learning new things.  I'd love to teach science today with the all the new things happening, the iPod.
Speaker 1: Had--
Speaker 2: Digital, digital knowledge doubles every eighteen months, realize this?  I, I started out with a Commodore 64, 64 megs [sic. kilobytes] of memory, then we went to something else.  And I, my computer that I bought four years ago for $2500, today it's four hundred dollars and it's got to, and today you got a sixty gig [gigabyte] hard drive, oh, my god.  See how, whew, staying together with life today, I'd enjoy teaching today, it's fantastic.  Where do we go from here?  I hope, kids ask me, "Mr. Jefferson [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], how old are you?"  First thing I say, "World War II [WWII] is how many years ago?"  They finally come to sixty.  I said, "I had to be a college graduate to go to pilot training.  How old am I?"  They finally get to eighty-five.  Then look at 'em, especially black youngsters, I will be here in ten years, you are my future, you are my future.  What do I look forward to?  Somebody's got to take my place and all the rest of these Tuskegee Airmen, all the rest of the black men, doctors, lawyers, Kwame Kilpatrick, the mayor, somebody's got to take his place.  Will you be qualified?  I challenge young people today every time I see them.  Get up off your knees and hustle.  Nobody's gonna give you a darn thing.  You've got to earn whatever you get.  And your, you don't get anything out of life until you put something good into it.  The only way you get something out of it, I tell 'em every day, God is good only if you put something into it.
Story_ID: 531626
Speaker 1: Let's go back and clarify the date of your teaching.
Speaker 2: Dates of my teaching.  I started off at Duffield Elementary School [D. Bethune Duffield Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] in 1948, '49 [1949].  Stayed until 1954 when I went to Pattengill, P-A-T-T-E-N-G-I-L-L, Pattengill Elementary [Pattengill Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] on Northfield [Street].  Stayed at Pattengill as an elementary science teacher until 1970.  I believe, until I was appointed at Pattengill as an assistant principal at Halley, Halley Elementary [P.J.M. Halley Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] on Linwood [Street].  And stayed at Halley for one year.  That's when Bernard Dent came in as a black--and there was an edict in Detroit [Michigan] that the administration should be biracial, so I had to go.  I was sent to Ferry Elementary [Dexter Ferry Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan], F-E-R-R-Y.  Between Ferry [Street] and Palmer [Street] off of Chene [Street], under Miss Wanda Lee.  And I stayed there until I retired in 1980, when I told 'em I quit.
Speaker 1: You actually retired?
Speaker 2: That's when I retired.
Speaker 1: Also I'd like you to talk about, in 1954 you get your master's degree?
Speaker 2: After afternoon and evening classes at Wayne State University [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].  I got a master's degree in education, not in science but in education.  And put in thirty hours towards the doctorate and after thirty hours I said to heck with it, that's enough, I didn't go any further.  But the thirty hours by the way meant an extra $3500 in pay, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  All right.  Now, what--
Speaker 2: Then later on I received a, a doctorate, honorary doctorate from the University of Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], last year, or was it this year?  Last year, this year.
Story_ID: 531627
Speaker 1: What's going on with the Tuskegee Airmen during this time?
Speaker 2: During that time?  During that time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, actually, not in 1980 but in--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 2: Oh, no, let's, let's take it on from World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All those times here in Detroit [Michigan], we Tuskegee Airmen knew each other as friends, as family.  Colin Hoyt [ph.], Polk [Wardell A. Polk], Holloman [William H. Holloman], Charlie Hill [Charles A. Hill, Jr.], Robert Walker, all of us knew each other, we were friends.  In 1972, Arielle Dixsonie [ph.] from Los Angeles [California] came through.  He was a friend of Wardell Polk, and Walk, Bob Walker, said, "Let's get together and have a reunion."  Okay.  Where are we gonna get together?  "Let's go to Jeff's [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson] house.  Jeff doesn't have any old lady," my wife [Adella Tucker Jefferson] had passed.  So they go to my basement, drink up my liquor, and we make all the arrangements for the first Tuskegee Airmen reunion at the Tuller Hotel [Hotel Tuller] in downtown Detroit in August of 1972, first unofficial reunion.  The Detroit chapter was organized at that time also, first chapter.  Now, there had been other efforts by Tuskegee Airmen in different cities to have certain organizations.  There was one in Chicago [Illinois], what the heck was the name?  There was one in Chicago but it didn't persist.  And after Detroit, the successful reunion, there was a reunion organization started in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], one in Chicago again, the DODOs in Chicago.  Philadelphia, Washington [D.C.], each city started to organize their own organizations.  And today we have close to forty different chapters and plus some overseas.  Two or three years later Bob Walker, Wardell Polk, Nathaniel Holloway [sic. Lorenzo W. Holloway, Jr.] and I said we need a museum [Tuskegee Airmen National Historical Museum, Detroit, Michigan], a museum.  Coleman Young was the mayor of the City of Detroit.  This place was available, this is Detroit, Historic Fort Wayne [Detroit, Michigan], sitting on the river.  Historic Fort Wayne originated in 1850, 1850 or '60 [1860], or something like that, to defend Detroit against the British in 1830, maybe earlier than that.  Because one gun can shoot up the river towards Detroit the other shoots down the river towards Toledo [Ohio], controlling the river.  And this place was put in control of Detroit and this building was available.  It's inside the main gate.  It's a duplex for enlisted men.  And as the Detroit chapter was, it's available, we obtained it from the City of Detroit from the city council, gave us permission, we came in and renovated it, we spent $250,000 renovating it, turning it into the national museum for the Tuskegee Airmen, for the national organization.  It's been here, a repository for the artifacts and it's open every day except Monday from ten to three.
Speaker 1: And who mans the museum (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We man it by volunteers of the Detroit chapter as docents.
Story_ID: 531628
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned Coleman Young--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --talk to me about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Coleman Young--
Speaker 1: --he was also a Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: Ah.
Speaker 1: --Airman.
Speaker 2: He was a rough one.  Coleman is a second lieutenant in the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] as a navigator, he went through navigation training at Hondo, Texas, or somewhere like that, and he was part of the 477th Bombardment Group [477th Fighter Group], the black group that was supposed to go to South Pacific, but they dropped the atomic bomb and they didn't go.  Meanwhile, as a, he was, oh, by the way, he was arrested for, quote, refusing to sign his name, the colonel told him, the colonel depicted two different officer clubs at Freeman Field, Indiana [Freeman Army Airfield, Jackson County, Indiana], one for black, one for white.  And the colonel put us, put all the black officers listed says sign your name indicating you have read my order.  Coleman was one of the 101 officers who refused to sign their names.  They were arrested, reprimands went into their records, and these reprimands were not rescinded until four or five years before he died.  He said, "Leave it in there, when I die I want them to see that reprimand and the reason why it's there, it's still there."  Coleman was the mayor, and we were able to get this building and replicate it into the museum, that's why we're here.
Story_ID: 531629
Speaker 1: I also would like you to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --talk about Chappie James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Good old Chappie.  Chappie was about 6'2", weighed about 220 [pounds], too large to fit into a P-51 [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang] but he, he stayed in the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force].  Chappie graduated four or five years, four or five months before me, he was my upperclassman.  He never went overseas with the fighter group, he was with the B-25s [North American B-25 Mitchell], he was bigger and the B-25 outfit.  Stayed in the, the Army Air Corps through '48 [1948], '49 [1949], Korean War, stayed in through, made rank, and was a full bird colonel in Vietnam.  Flew with Robin Olds through the Vietnam, through that force.  Stayed in, later on made brigadier general, finally made four stars, he was a four star brigadier general.  And his famous words are, this is my country, I am an American, I'm not an African American, I am an American, this is my country, I'll fight for her, I'll protect her but will make her treat me the way she should, those are his words and my words ever since.  The reason why I'm an American and this is my country.  Good old Chappie James.
Story_ID: 531630
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  There was a period of time when the Tuskegee Airmen were sort of operating, you know, unknown, and you know, had sort of fallen off the radar screen and you talked about, you know, off camera the beginning of the organizations and you talk about, you know, what, what, and you, and you addressed, you know, it being in your basement but can you talk about how everyone sort of came together to really, you know, bring notoriety to--
Speaker 2: Well, okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  --(simultaneous) the group again.
Speaker 2: First of all, when we got out of the [U.S.] Army, we were twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five.  We were not the ruling class, we were still youngsters compared to our parents, grandparents, we were still young people.  We were not spokesmen, we were not taken as spokesmen, only when we became forty-five, fifty, and fifty-five and sixty when we became part of the ruling class, did we become, quote, Tuskegee Airmen, and people start to look up to us.  This is all part of human nature.  When we got to 1970, I'm fifty years old, then I start to become part of the speaking world.  We are, then people listened to us, we are part of society.  Until then, we're simply young people.  We happened to go to the war [World War II, WWII], we fought the war, so what, you don't have any, you know, voting, well, you may be voters but you don't, you're not the ruling class.  You see the people fifty-five and sixty are the old people who control things, they're the people who send young people to war.  They sit back and equate.  When we became fifty and sixty, then we start thinking about our heritage, are we gonna leave something to young people, that's when we start thinking, hey, we're getting old, then we start, we better start thinking of what we're going to do as a reunion.  When we're, when we're twenty-five and twenty-six, twenty-eight and thirty and thirty-five, we're too busy working, taking care of kids, staying up all night, partying, to think about reunions.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  So what did you put in motion, sir?
Speaker 2: When did we put it in motion?
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  I mean, what did you put in motion?  What was the plan, what was the group's plan?
Speaker 2: Starting in 1972 when we organized the first reunion for Tuskegee Airmen here in the Tuller Hotel [Hotel Tuller, Detroit, Michigan].  Now, there had been other instances in Chicago [Illinois] and places of that, like that but it was not long standing.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  So who was at that meeting at the Tuller Hotel--
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  --in 1972?
Speaker 2: All the Tuskegee Airmen that I can name.  All the ones in Detroit [Michigan], plus Coleman Young, and I got a picture hanging on my wall of the people, it was a picture taken then.  Ernie, Ernest Browne [Ernest C. Browne, Jr.], Ernie Browne, who is one of our first, first councilmen, I can't name 'em.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Okay.  Who, what was set out as the mission for the organization at that point?
Speaker 2: The mission was to, first of all, we had a mission of young people, young people, we were mainly teachers and thinking about young people, to promote young people to join this society, train them how to speak, how to think, how to become involved.  The background, we still, that's the main thing of, main purpose of this museum [Tuskegee Airmen National Historical Museum, Detroit, Michigan], one of the big pictures on the other, big portraits, how we can promote young people to take their stance as citizens in this country.  See you just don't come in and join, you have to learn, we often tell them you don't join a baseball game with football rules.  Learn how to be an American.  Family, vote, all the other things that go along with it.  Education, we promote education.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  So, so--
Speaker 2: Because we said education is a stick in your hand to fight the bear.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON)  I see.
Speaker 2: The bear is ignorance, that it'll eat you up.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Sir, but what were some of the programs that you put in place?
Speaker 2: We've had, we have ACE Academy right here in Detroit.  During the summer we have ACE Academy, where we have high school youngsters, we give them four weeks of ground training and four weeks of, we take 'em up and fly them.  In the summer of June, no, July and, June and July at City Airport [Detroit City Airport; Coleman A. Young International Airport, Detroit, Michigan], high school youngsters from the age of fourteen to seventeen.  The national organization has a scholarship where they give out five thousand dollar scholarships, I don't know how many.  Each, each individual, each individual chapter has a scholarship fund.  There are different programs that we have as Tuskegee Airmen, I can't relate 'em all here, we have 'em written down somewhere.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 531631
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  This year you received, the Tuskegee Airmen had the honor of receiving the Congressional Medal of Honor.
Speaker 2: Nope, Congressional Gold Medal (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  (Simultaneous) The Gold Medal, sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Okay.  Can you talk about what that honor meant to you?
Speaker 2: Basically, down deep inside, it should have gone to us fifty years ago but racism and discrimination kept it away from us, for the record that we have had, that we have shown, protecting this country.  We still say this is our country, and unfailingly, we have remained faithful to this country.  This country has not remained faithful to us, denied us privileges, as black people, as black men, down through the years and it's still doing so.  Congressional Gold Medal was given to us as a, for distinguished service to this country above and beyond.  And I shook the president's [President George Walker Bush] hand, had to put my hand over my mouth to keep from asking him why he got us into a religious war with combatants who have been killing each other for a thousand years, idiotic.  Congressional Gold Medal, yes, we deserve it.  Tell you in a minute, above and beyond for the service that we have done for this country, from World War II [WWII] to Vietnam [Vietnam War] to Korea [Korean War] and Iraq [Iraq War] because there is an F-16 unit in Iraq today, the 332nd Expeditionary Force [332nd Air Expeditionary Wing] has been reenacted with the 332nd, named in honor and so forth.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  And you may not have an answer to this question but, you know, I was struck by when you said that you came off the plank, coming back, you know, from, you know, through--
Speaker 2: From Germany?
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  --from Germany.
Speaker 2: Coming back to racism?
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Yeah, yes, and I, I was--
Speaker 2: Because the United States is a racist, well, at that time a racist country--
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Right.
Speaker 2: --let's face it.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  But I was wondering how you felt that day?
Speaker 2: I felt like hell.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  No, no, the day that you received (laughter)--
Speaker 2: The Congressional Gold Medal?
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Right.  Did you--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  --think about the time--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  --that you came back?  No?
Speaker 2: That's all, that's all in context.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Okay.
Speaker 2: I think about that, just the reason, exactly the same reason why we survive in this country.  We have endured insults time after time after time, and this award simply doesn't erase anything, it doesn't erase a doggone thing that's happened to me in my life.  Somebody, don't you feel better?  Hell, no, I don't feel any better.  Why should it?  Does it erase me seeing black men hung?  Does it erase black people being abused?  Does it erase being last hired, first fired?  I've experienced all of this.  I've seen this happen.  It is still happening today.  And to deny it, is a lie.  Let's face it.  Racism is here and it's rampant and it's still running.
Story_ID: 531632
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  What do you think the legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen are?
Speaker 2: The legacy is gonna be here and we're still proving to this world that black men can do it.  You see in 1925, the War Department [U.S. Department of War] said that Negroes didn't have brains enough to fly an airplane.  It said that Negroes were inept, incoordinate--uncoordinated, we were afraid of the dark, what a lie.  After World War I [WWI], where you had the 369th [369th Infantry Regiment] out of the New York National Guard, black, went to Germany, fought against the Germans, did not lose an inch of ground to the Germans but could not fight in American uniform, had to fight in French uniforms.  Then when they returned to the states, marching down 5th Avenue, the [U.S.] Army put them back into American uniforms.  My country.  And then in World War II [WWII], the same Hap Arnold [Henry H. Arnold], said he didn't want any Negroes, the great Hap Arnold, head of the whole Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force].  Said that we were uncoordinated.  Negro baseball going on at the same time.  They would go down to Cuba during the summer, during the, yeah, during the winter, play the New York Yankees, beat 'em every time but couldn't play in the National League until Jackie Robinson started.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  So--
Speaker 2: You see the irony?
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Yes.  But so--
Speaker 2: And to have me say, I'm overwhelmed and glad that we got the Congressional Gold Medal, bull.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  Now, but sir, that's not what I was asking.  I was asking if you could in short form answer what is the legacy, do you, as you see it today of the, those, the legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: The legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen means that we can prove we can do anything anybody else can do.
Story_ID: 531633
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  And then I wanna ask you what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Take what I have said, what I have lived, and what I have learned, some of it's good, some of it's bad, and as I said before, I'm the type of, I've always told my, oh, by the way, did I say this, everybody is crazy except you and me?  Inside, I tell every person to protect your own inside guts, to keep from being reactive to somebody insulting you and swaying you, maintain your own identity, maintain your own individuality and forever don't forget God is good, all the time.  Sometimes I get very radical but I don't care.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  And Denise [Denise Gines] was at--
Speaker 2: I've gone this life eighty-six years as a black man, sometimes it gets kind of rough, I get kind of crude sometimes but let's face it, I have been through hell and still survived.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  And, and Denise was asking whether there was any other question, any other--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (JULIEANNA RICHARDSON):  --statement you would like to make, sir?
Speaker 2: Hm.  Simply, maintain your own individuality, maintain your own pride, everybody's gonna call you a so and so and a so and so, by the way, somebody, most overwhelming, undermining remarks come from people of my own race.  White people call me nasty, dirty names, doesn't affect me because that's the same old thing, it's his fault he doesn't, he's ignorant, he doesn't know what the hell he's talking about, but when people of my own race who are close to me say things that negate and talk about me and bring me down, those are things that really hurt.  But as, but again, I still maintain my own individuality, how I be me, very crudely, I is me and ain't nobody else but me.  Um-hm.  I hate to end up that, I is me, that's a bad way to do it.  (Laughter) I don't wanna end up, I is me.
Speaker 1: Oh, what do you wanna say?
Speaker 2: I, I am myself, one and only, the only one, [HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson, Tuskegee Airmen, this is 19--no, 2007, I am here, I survived, God is good.
Story_ID: 531634
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson at the age of six months, Detroit, Michigan, Herman Kiefer Hospital, born November the 15th, 1921.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Next.  All right.  You wanna go (unclear).
Speaker 1: You're two.
Speaker 2: Ah, this is Alexander Jefferson, age two years on the tricycle on the porch at 4014, 4014 28th Street, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Both?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  We'll start with the top ones.
Speaker 2: My father, picture taken approximately 1920, 1921, Alex, Alex Jefferson [Alexander Jefferson], my father, in Detroit, Michigan.  And right next to it--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Alex Jefferson.  Why he said Alex instead of Alexander, I don't know but there's my mother, Jane White Jefferson, with a pensive 1910 posture with the hand on the cheek.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's about 1915.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Why I went back to high school.  I was flunking high school, making Ds, had to take my father his lunch, when I got there, Detroit Lubricator [Detroit Lubricator Company], he was on the end of a ladle, pouring hot aluminum making carburetors, I said, Lord, you let me get out of this place I'll never get in a foundry again.  I went back to high school and started making A's and Bs.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Chadsey High School in Detroit.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: My days when I was, this is that college picture (laughter), 1942.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a Model A Ford [Ford Model A], a 1932, 1932 Model A--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: --with a rumble seat.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Now, is that you in the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no, ideally, no, it was not me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Doing that one with, okay.  And this one.
Speaker 2: As a cadet.  Aviation cadet, Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], 1943.  Notice the old cigarette.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: That's Chehaw.
Speaker 1: That's Chehaw that you talked about.
Speaker 2: That's the train station, Chehaw [Chehaw Train Station], C-H-E-H-A-W, it's a, it's an Indian [Native American] name.  Purposely eight or nine miles away from Tuskegee Army Airfield where they dumped you off at dark, at night to start you off, to make you, to break your discipline.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this one.
Speaker 2: This is my graduation.  I graduated from Tuskegee Army Airfield, accompanied by my mother.
Speaker 1: Tell us where they are in the picture.
Speaker 2: Oh, my left--
Speaker 1: Left.
Speaker 2: --starting on the left, Emma [Emma Jefferson Cobb], my sister, and on the far right my cousin, Gwendy, first cousin, Gwendolyn Coffee.  On the second from the left my grandfather, my mother's father, Henry Montgomery White [Henry White], he was one hundred years old when that picture was taken, he died ten years later.  I'm in the middle and my mother immediately--in the, in the black, that's my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the advanced training, it's the whole class, single engine and twin engine advanced training class at Tuskegee Army Airfield just--
Speaker 1: Where are you?
Speaker 2: I'm fifth from the left, standing, one, two, three, four, yeah, fifth from the left, standing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well, there's Margo.
Speaker 1: We didn't even talk about Margo.
Speaker 2: No Margo?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Way in the back.  Day of liberation.  Ready?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: April 29, 1945, day of reparation at Stalag Luft A [sic. Stalag VII-A, Moosburg, Germany].  There I am on the left hand side of the picture, the guy with the boots and a cap.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Tuskegee Army Airfield when I came back from overseas, I'm assigned as a first lieutenant, an instructor in advance.  Captain Hood, is the boss, Clarence Dart [Clarence W. Dart, Sr.], he, we were three instructors with the enlisted men on each side.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Next.
Speaker 2: This is Adella.
Speaker 1: Your wife?
Speaker 2: My wife, Adella McDonald-Tucker Jefferson [Adella Tucker Jefferson].  This is my wife, Adella.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: These are the four remaining men who were shot down on the same mission.  I'm on the left, this is done in 1972, I believe, at Selfridge Air Force Base [Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan].  Alex Jefferson and Robert McDaniel- Robert Daniels [Robert T. Daniels], he was number two in the flight.  Richard Macon [Richard D. Macon], number three, Richard Macon was at a different location.  And Bob O'Neil [Robert O'Neil], Bob O'Neil was rescued by the free, he went down, bailed out, and with the Free French he got back.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Lillian Eustace and Alexander Jefferson, my significant other.  We've been together for twenty-six years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good.
Speaker 1: I think that, was that the last one?
Speaker 2: I, no, one more, my, my daughter (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with your daughter.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Tell me about this one.
Speaker 1: That's Alexis Jefferson, my daughter.  It was taken in 1965, no, 1995, the year I was enshrined into the Michigan Aviation Hall of Fame.  Alexis died ten years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Did you want this last picture?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yeah, that's almost the same.  Well, this is the one--
Speaker 1: Is this you with the medal [Congressional Gold Medal]?
Speaker 2: With the medal.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Over this way.  Yeah, that's it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's when I was enshrined into the Michigan Aviation Hall of Fame in 1995.
Story_ID: 531635
Speaker 1: We'll begin by slating the interview.  My name is Larry Crowe, I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson, lieutenant colonel, United States Air Force, retired here in Detroit, Michigan.  All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Retired from thirty-five years of teaching in the City of Detroit as an elementary science teacher and ten years as an assistant principal.  I retired in 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what we're doing, oh, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is 6/11, June 11, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're now in the Historic Fort Wayne in Detroit, Michigan, at the Tuskegee Airmen museum [Tuskegee Airmen National Historical Museum].  And it's now approximately 10 a.m., and good.
Story_ID: 531636
Speaker 1: So we're going back to shoot, to talk about the portion of the interview where you described your departure from Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and your train ride to Tuskegee [Alabama], so--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --so.
Speaker 2: Previous to that I was gonna be drafted.  If you're drafted in 1942, '43 [1943] as a black man, you would go to the Quartermaster [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps], heavy, nasty dirty work.  The opportunity came to go to pilot training because through the efforts of Eleanor Roosevelt, Mary McLeod Bethune, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League [National Urban League], they put pressure on [U.S.] Congress to spend $4 million to build Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], approximately ten miles from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  It was a, an honor to go to pilot training.  I was at Clark College, I finished Clark College and went, came home--
Speaker 1: This is in what year, this is--
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-two [1942].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: In June of '42 [1942] I came to Detroit [Michigan], by the way I drove because I had a Model A Ford [Ford Model A], I was a big man on campus, a Model A Ford with a rumble seat and a single seat (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the kind with the big wheels on the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the big balloon tires, big man on campus.  By the way, I, I didn't join the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], I didn't join the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], I didn't go join the Sigmas [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity], I was big man on campus.  So when I came home in June of 1942, went down to the federal building and took the exam, passed the exam for the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force], Army Air Corps because flying was under the control of the [U.S.] Army officers.  They told me to go home and wait my turn.  And I went home and in July decided to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  So I enrolled in Howard and I was enrolled in the chemistry, I was gonna make a, get a master's degree in research chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, just for the record, I know it's probably on the earlier part of the tape but where--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --where, where was home, when you say you went home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, home is in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Detroit, okay.
Speaker 2: My Michigan, 28th [Street] and Michigan Avenue, about a block and a half north of Michigan Avenue.  Howard University--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was there until April of '43 [1943] when I got a notice to go to Tuskegee Army Airfield.  Drove the car back to Detroit, parked the car in the backyard and took a train to Chehaw [Chehaw Train Station], that's right outside of the Army air base.  That train was okay until you got to Cincinnati [Ohio].  As a black person you got on, you changed trains, and you went to the first car behind the coal bearing locomotive where all the soot and the dust and the dirt and the grime and the stale odor of the latrines, from Cincinnati down to Chehaw.
Speaker 1: Now, this was a car they reserved just for black people, just for African Americans (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is always the black people in that first car right behind the smoking, we could not go to the dining car.
Speaker 1: Did they call it the colored car or something, or--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --do they have a name for it?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any name, it's just a place automatically that you went to.  Always you arrived at Chehaw, the orders made it possible that you arrived approximately at 9:30 or 10:00 because that was the one train that left Atlanta [Georgia], yeah, yeah, go to Atlanta, get on that one train down from Atlanta to Newnan [Georgia], across and down to Chehaw, little, a ten by fifteen or twenty wooden structure right alongside the railroad track.
Story_ID: 531637
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I get to Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] in which you're there for a month or two months in basic training, jumping, and then you go to primary.  Primary training, you had three phases, basic, CTD [College Training Detachment], basic, no--primary, basic, and advanced.  So we go to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], first building inside the main, inside the back gate for primary training.  We would fly during the morning at Moton Field [Tuskegee, Alabama], M-O-T-E-N [sic.], named after Dr. Moton [Robert Russa Moton].  It's a small airfield about four or five miles outside of Tuskegee Institute, Tuskegee, City of Tuskegee [Alabama].  We would fly during the morning in PT-17s [Boeing-Stearman Model 75], that's an open cockpit, two seater, with your instructor in the front and you sit in the back.  It had two wings, nice and slow and easy, approximately seventy or eighty miles an hour for two months.  You'd fly in the morning, the other class with you, they would be in ground school, then in the afternoon you'd switch.  You'd go to ground school, the other class that's in the building with you, '44 [1944] B, see I'm '44 [1944] A, I graduated in January of 1944.  A was January, B, February, C, March, and so forth.  After two months going over, back to the main field, Tuskegee Army Airfield, our instructors were white because we never had any black officers in the Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] to become officers, become trainers.  I was there for, during basic for two and a half months, then advanced for two and a half months, and then graduate after nine months of training as a second lieutenant.
Speaker 1: Who, who else was in training with you that you remember that's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's see there was a--
Speaker 1: --is notable to mention now?
Speaker 2: My class, no one notable.  But previous to this there was Chappie [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.], about six months before me.  Joe Gomer [HistoryMaker Joseph Gomer] about three months before me.  Lee Archer [Lee A. Archer], who died, Lee Archer who's reputed to be an ace but he was not an ace.  You shoot down five planes you're an ace.  Lee Archer never proclaimed himself an ace but somebody else did because being black they wanted to explore and expand this program as a, we've got a black man who's an ace.  But B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.], was previous.  By that time B.O. Davis is a lieutenant colonel.
Story_ID: 531638
Speaker 1: On the way to Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, I was asking you about some of the people who were in training with you, you were telling me about B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] and some of the other people.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so in your class, I mean, how many were in your class?
Speaker 1: Twenty-five.
Speaker 2: Twenty-five.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, out of the twenty-five, half went to B-25s [North American B-25 Mitchell], that B-25 out there, half and--
Speaker 2: That's the bomber unit, right?
Speaker 1: That's the bomber group, it's a two engine bomber.  The same bomber that took off from the aircraft carrier [USS Hornet (CV-8)] with Jimmy Doolittle and bombed Tokyo [Japan] in April of 1942, twin engine.  Now, that takes two pilots, a pilot and a copilot, a navigator who tells the pilot which way to go and a bombardier to trigger, drop the bombs.  Now the navigator and the bombardier were trained in Hondo, Texas, and some other places, you know, as second lieutenants to join the pilots at Tuskegee to form the crew.  Then they had enlisted men, two sergeants on the top tier and the tail gunner that made the crew.
Speaker 2: Well, let me ask you this--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --too, just to be thorough here, I mean, who trained you, you know, I mean who trained the twenty-five of you guys?  And were they white guys, black guys, what, and what rank were they and what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, see now when we graduated we became second lieutenants.  Yeah, we graduated, got our wings as second lieutenants.  And the guys who were bombardiers and navigators, they got their wings when, bombardier wings and navigator wings when they finished training at Hondo, Texas, and other places and they all came together at Tuskegee as a crew.  Out of my class, out of the twenty-five, thirteen, I believe, went to the B-25 outfit, twelve were in the single engine, we were the fighter pilots.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But I was asking like who trained you, what, what rank were they--
Speaker 1: Well, they were captains.
Speaker 2: --were they white guys or--
Speaker 1: First, they were white.
Speaker 2: White guys, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and in primary they were black, black civilians--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --who trained us.  And in primary the little two wing, there was a contract that Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] had with the War Department [U.S. Department of War].  They hired the black civilian pilots.  Now, when we got to Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] there are regular Air Force [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] captains and first lieutenants, they were white in primary and, and, yeah, when we graduated.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, do you remember what it was like when you first got inside an airplane and 'cause you had never flown before right, before--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, I--
Speaker 2: --or, or had you, had you?
Speaker 1: Back up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As a fifth, third, fourth, and fifth grader in Detroit [Michigan], there was an airfield about a, about a mile away.  I used to cut school at least once or twice a week, cut school and go to this little airfield and monkey around and become familiar.  And I had rides in the backseat of a WACO just like their PT-17 [Boeing-Stearman Model 75], at the age of nine, ten, eleven, and twelve.  So by that time I knew about airplanes and I had flown, I didn't fly, I simply rode with the instructors, with the pilots.  So to me, it was just a continuation of a career.
Speaker 2: So you didn't have any trepidation about it--
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no.
Speaker 2: --or concerns or, okay.
Speaker 1: I was having a ball, I had a good, darn starting time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So when you got in the plane you were ready to go?
Speaker 1: I was ready.  But I was smart.  Never, never admit to your instructors at Tuskegee that you are, had former flying time because then they would consider you smarty and they would eliminate you.  A hundred and twenty-five men started in my class in April of '43 [1943], only twenty-five finished.  Now, some were washed out because of inability to fly, others washed out because of their attitude, and there were different, different reasons for being eliminated.  When they were eliminated from flying they went back and they became, they became buck privates, that was a hell of a delusion, it hurt some of these men because it hurt their manhood to watch your buddy graduate, make $150 a month with this gold, with the gold bar and a set of wings, and all the pretty girls, see.  Some of the guys went bananas.  But, but none of them committed suicide, let me say that.  In the movie, in the movie a young man buzzed the tower and because of it they were gonna eliminate him and wash him out, take him out of the, out of the system.  He ran out, got in a T-6 [North American Aviation T-6 Texan], a trainer, and committed suicide by diving into the hangar, it's all a big fire.  That's Hollywood.  But I hate it because it gave the rest of the public, the American public, the fact that when black men run up against adversity, they chicken out and commit suicide, which is a lie.  No man ever committed suicide no matter what the conditions were, so, but the movie was great anyway because it admitted Tuskegee Airmen to the general public, we needed that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the movie with Laurence Fishburne and--
Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah, 'The Tuskegee Airmen' (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 531639
Speaker 1: Back to the train going to Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Train back to Detroit, back to Selfridge Air Force Base [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan], twenty-five miles north of Detroit.  And the 1st of February, 1944, I graduated 7th of January, spent a month at, did I spend a month at Tuskegee [Alabama]?  No, I came right up here to Selfridge, a thirty day leave.  Got to Selfridge in February, flying P-39s [Bell P-39 Airacobra], that's that crazy airplane with the engine that sits behind you, with long a drive shaft underneath, up to the gear box with a, this was a propeller, and through the gear box the 37mm, it's about that big around, it's about that long, and every time you, the trigger on top of the, top of the control stick, and every time you do this, you'd say (makes sound), and the recoil you lose two or three miles of air speed with the recoil.
Speaker 2: It pushes the whole plane back?
Speaker 1: It, if you're doing a 160 [miles per hour], boom, 155, 160, 150.  It was great.  We sent 'em to Russia and Russia used them as tank busters.  Now, I was at Selfridge, I was flying P-39s because the three squadrons had been formed.  The three squadrons, the 100th [100th Fighter Squadron], the 301st [301st Fighter Squadron], and the 302nd [302nd Fighter Squadron], and they were flying P-39s out of Naples [Italy], they were stationed right there at Capodichino [Capodichino U.S. Navy Base], which is close to the City of Naples, and they were flying coast patrol back and forth.  And I was supposed to be a replacement pilot for the P-39s.
Speaker 2: Okay.  A question.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: This question is, now, when you finished training--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --what was your particular, I guess, specialty or talent or did you have a, you know, something that you could do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, we, we graduated--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as second lieutenants--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --MOS, military occupational specialties, 1055, see we were classified as fighter pilots.  And we went to Selfridge--
Speaker 2: So you passed a test or something to be a fighter pilot?
Speaker 1: When you came out you graduated as a single engine, as a fighter pilot, you're either single engine as a fighter pilot or the, some of the guys graduated as twin engine bomber pilots, that's where we were separated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 531640
Speaker 1: I got to Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan] and well, our instructors at Selfridge to teach us overseas tactics was Charlie Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden].  In the movie he was depicted as A-Train because in New York City [New York, New York] you have a subway called A Train.  Charlie Dryden, Spann Watson, who else?  Number three, number three--but you had, they were in the 99th Fighter Squadron, North Africa, they went over under Colonel Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.].  In Morocco, Algiers [Algeria], and they flew close ground support, firing at tanks and other things, close ground support.  He, he flew his twenty-five missions and he became, he came back to Selfridge and he was our overseas instructor, teaching us the tactics of warfare, ground support at Selfridge.  We clamored to go into the officers' club, Colonel Selway [Robert Selway], said heck no.  With, they took a room in one of the barracks, put a wooden bar in it, and said, "Okay, guys this is your bar, this is your officers' club."  Of course, we resented it, and let him know, Detroit Free Press got a hold of it, Urban League, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and quite naturally a big stink, we were being segregated at Selfridge and denied our privileges.  One day, I was over at Lake Huron and I was firing an aerial target pulled by another plane, firing at the target, we call it aerial gunnery practice, and the radio said, all of a sudden, "All officers report to the post theater on the double as you are," which means you drop everything no matter what.  We stopped firing, turned (unclear) every, every plane, there were five or six of us, in, in, in formation.  We flew back to Selfridge, we landed and walked up to the officer, up to the theater.  At the time there was approximately forty black officers on post and approximately 150 white officers on post, we were milling around together and somebody said attention, we popped too and down the aisle strolls a two star general.  We looked at each other and said, "By god, what the heck is going on?"  And if you understand the military rank, second lieutenants, first lieutenants, double bar captains, gold leaf major, silver leaf lieutenant colonel, little chicken, full bird colonel 06, then seven, one star general, then lieutenant colonel, lieutenant general, two star general, then three, major general, and by the way, four star.  Now, here we are second, with second lieutenants at the bottom of the Officer Corps [U.S. Army Officer Corps], at ease, so we had a seat.  "Gentlemen," he rambled on and on for about four or five minutes, but these are the world I remember him saying, oh, by the way his name is, oh, my god, we'll get to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: "Gentlemen, this is my airfield," Double O Hunter, O'Driscoll Hunter [Frank O'Driscoll Hunter], "as long as I'm in command there will be no socialization between white and colored officers.  Are there any questions?  If there are I will deal with that man personally."  Here we are second lieutenants, you don't dare open your mouth, we're stunned.  Attention, we popped to, stood up, he walked out.  They locked the gates of Selfridge Air Force Base, if you're white you could leave, leave the base.  We couldn't leave the base.  Do you realize what that meant?  We were under arrest.
Story_ID: 531641
Speaker 1: Was Thursday, Friday morning, or Saturday morning they backed in a Pullman train, put us on the Pullman train with our mechanics, all the mechanics were black, and that train proceeded to go South.  Three days later we ended up at Walterboro Air Force base [Walterboro Army Airfield] in South Carolina, forty-five miles west of Charleston [South Carolina], out in the swamp.  And when the train stopped, we jumped off and these pinks and greens, you know, brand new base, sharp, every ten feet there was a white soldier with a rifle, hand grenades, because they had been told a bad bunch of, I can't use the N word, had rioted at Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan].  I said what the heck is going on?  This was our introduction to Walterboro Air Force Base, where the German POWs [prisoner of war] had all the privileges that we didn't have.  They could go to the PX [post exchange] any time they wanted to, we were subject to only, now, we're second lieutenants, could only go to the PX during certain hours.  And some of those hours, if you're flying--
Speaker 2: You might miss it.
Speaker 1: --up the creek.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's it.  I was only there for two weeks because my class was slated to go overseas as replacement pilots.  Charlie Dryden [HistoryMaker Lieutenant Colonel Charles Dryden] was the instructor.  That Sunday morning we took off for practice.  Charlie Dryden was the leader.  I'm on his wing, I'm number two, this is one, two, then three, and four, Charlie Dryden the instructor, I'm number two, oh, by the way, the 301st [301st Fighter Squadron], no, that, the 301st is later on, two, and three and four, we flew across the country, low level, came back to Walterboro and Charlie Dryden went on one side of the church steeple, I'm on the other side of the church steeple, we came back with tree stains on our propellers from the tops of the trees.  We landed, and out of it, he was court martialed for buzzing the tower, buzzing the church.  Ironically, my class, got on the train, at Yemassee [South Carolina], we went up to Hampton Roads [Virginia] and we were on our way overseas, we were not court martialed.  Charlie Dryden is the only man in the history of the Air--Army Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force] who was court martialed, retained his rank, and retired.  He was a great guy.  Charlie Dryden, Charlie Dryden died about four or five years ago.
Story_ID: 531642
Speaker 1: We went across to, on a single ship, all by ourselves zigzagging, six and a half days, to Oran [Algeria], North Africa.  Then up to Naples [Italy], where we joined, took a truck across from Naples to Ramitelli [Ramitelli Air Base, Italy].  Ramitelli was where the three squadrons of, first squadrons of, were flying, right, it's on the heel, if you look at, Italy is like a boot, and on the heel was Ramitelli.  Ramitelli is named after a farmer, the farmer had a wheat field, went out to his wheat field and laid down strips of corrugated iron, what is it?  They made a runway out of it.  The family name was Ramitelli, that's the reason why we called it that.  I was there with the three, oh- with the 301st Fighter Squadron, the 99th [99th Fighter Squadron] was there, the 100th [100th Fighter Squadron], the 301st, and the 302nd [302nd Fighter Squadron], I was a replacement pilot for the 301st.  My bunkmates were Faulkner [William Faulkner], good guy, Henry Perry, somebody else, I can't remember the, Othell Dickson, Dickson killed himself, yeah.
Speaker 2: On purpose or--
Speaker 1: Accidentally.
Speaker 2: Accidentally.
Speaker 1: I got there just in time, oh, I was, oh, the truck, we had a truck, we're on a truck going from Naples across Italy to Ramitelli and we arrived first thing in the morning and we witnessed the last mission of P-47s [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt], they flew P-47s for only one month.  And Laird [Edward Laird] took off, we saw this P-47 take off, he went up, got to the end of the runway, pulled up and it shivered, like it shaked and bang, he went in, exploded.  Laird was killed on takeoff on the last mission of P-47s.  During the P-47s, the 301st and 302nd were up at the head of the Adriatic [Adriatic Sea] and happened to have seen a German destroyer, they came down and strafed it, and they were lucky enough, nobody knows what happened, but anyway something on deck exploded and the ship broke in half and sank.  Now, when they came back, of course, the War Department [U.S. Department of War] said, hell, no, never could have happened, but they brought their gun camera film which proved it.  Only instance, here again, where a naval vessel was sunk by air, by machine gunfire.  332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group], here we go again, as black men, you often, have to be good, you have to be first.  I was there for, until August, 1944, August, August the 12th.  I flew eighteen long range missions.  We escorted the B-17s [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress] from Italy to Germany, Italy to Ploiesti [Romania].  Oh, by the way, let me back up.  They brought in P-51s [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang], the next day when I got there the whole unit was transferring into P-51s.  So we went out that next morning, a couple days later to practice, you take off and practice, two or three hours around, become familiar with, with the aircraft.  Othell Dickson, my buddy, my roommate, he and I were down there together, he checked out his plane, by the way you get into it, and the mechanic says, "Lieutenant, here's the landing, here's the landing lever, here's where your flaps, this is the radio, this is how you check the mags, mag needles, boom, take off."  There were no check orders to read and he took off.  And showing off, came down, buzzed the tower and pulled up in a slow roll, and fell out of it, barely missed the ground by ten feet.  Othell Dickson more than likely, said, well, that was a bad move, let me go back and show them that I can really do it.  Turned around, came back, did the same thing, this time he fell out of it and bang went in, exploded.  When we found out, when we sought, got to the wreckage, nothing but a torso, no head, no hands, no legs, burned completely.  We knew why.  Sitting behind you, there's an eighty-five gallon tank, it was full.  Your wings have ninety-two gallons inside of each wing.  But with that eighty-five gallon tank, your center of gravity is off, and you, when you take off you're supposed to use that first to bring back your center of gravity.  All of a sudden the colonel said, everybody's got to have a class in reading the tech orders before you fly.  I had eighteen missions, escorting the B-17s from Italy to, so forth and so on.  A, B-17s and B-24s [Consolidated B-24 Liberator], bombers.  The nineteenth mission was a strafing mission, not the first time we strafed by the way.  When we escorted the B-17s or the B-24s, along this pattern of their path, a certain portion of it was assigned to the 332nd, there were four P-51 groups in Italy, three were white groups, and one black, we were the black group.  Now, along that pass, we could be assigned a certain portion, then we'd have to use up our gas and come home.  Another group would take off much later, meet the bombers at that point, when we turn 'em loose, they would take over and carry them on to the target.  When they got to the target, the P-51s would leave and come home, another group would take off and meet them and carry on.
Story_ID: 531643
Speaker 1: On the eighteen missions, if the bombers, if the top bomber is at twenty thousand feet, the bombers only did 160 miles an hour.  If we did 160, we'd stall out at that altitude.  So we did 220, the whole four squadrons would do 220 back and forth to stay with them.  And when we left them, we were free to search and destroy on the way back home, come down across a German airfield and strafe it.  Barges on the Danube [Danube River], strafe them with fifty caliber guns, with our fifty calibers.  Trains, you see a train, you go down and strafe it on the way back home.  Now, the nineteenth mission was different, it was purposely a strafing mission to knock out radar stations along the coast of southern France because the invasion of southern France came off on August the 15th, and the radar, the control--
Speaker 2: This is 1940--
Speaker 1: Forty-four [1944].
Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944], okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-four [1944].  The radar would control the guns against the ships coming across the horizon and we had, the 301st [301st Fighter Squadron] had the target of the radar towers, right outside the City of Toulon [France].
Speaker 2: Toulon, how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: T-O-U--
Speaker 2: T-O-U--
Speaker 1: --L-O, oh, my god, L-O-N, T-O-U--
Speaker 2: Toulon.
Speaker 1: --L-O-N.
Speaker 2: This is still Italy, right?
Speaker 1: No, this is France, southern France.
Speaker 2: Oh, France, Toulon, France.
Speaker 1: Southern France.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That's where the invasion came off on the 15th--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of April [sic.].  And the radar would control the guns.  And our job was to knock those guns out.  Now, the other three squadrons had different targets along southern France, radar stations.  And at that time we didn't know what in the heck radar was.  When I talk to young people, before LPs, this is way long, we didn't know what radar was, simply, you told us some towers and some buildings, go ahead, and shoot 'em up with the fifty calibers.  Well, I was, in, in, in the, in the formation, I'm the last guy to go across the target, first four guys went across the target, radio became alive and everybody's cursing, you know, what the--and you could see the red traces coming back towards us all along the cliff, it was right on the cliff, right on the edge of the water, with, with these radar stations on top of this cliff.  And by the time I got there, I'm the last one, first four guys, then the second four, that's eight, then the third four, that's twelve, and last of all, one, two, three, four, Danny [Robert T. Daniels] is number two over here, I'm number four.  And by the way our call sign of the 301st Fighter Squadron is bubble, call, go bubble, and this is, red, the second floor, white, yellow, blue, so consequently I am bubble blue four, Danny is bubble blue two.  The leader is bubble blue one.  Richardson [Virgil Richardson] is bubble blue three.  I am bubble blue four.  And as I go right across the top of the target, tree top height, something said, boom, I look up and there's a hole right above my head in the canopy, and fire came up out of the floor right in front of the stick.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It missed your body by how much?
Speaker 1: It missed me, another two feet and it would have hit me.  So I pulled back on the stick to get some altitude, 'cause I'm close to the trees, we almost hit the trees, pulled back on the stick to get some altitude and as I go up, you reach up on that instrument panel, you pull the little red knob, and a canopy goes off.  At the same time with your left hand, you got a little a wheel down here and you look, you rotate it forward, trim tab, rudder, elevator, so if you turn the stick loose, the nose goes down, trim tab.  I pull that son of a gun up anyway, pull it up to get some altitude.  I got up about eight hundred feet, I think, maybe a thousand, I don't know, anyway turned the stick loose, when you turned it loose, the nose quite naturally does that, following the trim tab.  Same, same time, had straps here with a, with a big buckle, you hit that and it came loose.  When it came loose, centrifugal force threw me out.  As the tail went by, I saw the tail, you reach and pull that, the D ring to the parachute and I remember pulling it and looking, I said, "Doggone I'm too low," and just like, bang, I'm in the trees and the parachute pulp, all tangled up in the trees, I ended up about ten feet off the ground.  Scratches, bruises, down through the trees.
Speaker 2: You were hanging (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was still in, in the chute.
Speaker 2: Ten feet off the ground?
Speaker 1: About ten feet off the ground.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And by the way, I was only kept from hitting the ground because the parachute caught in the tree.  Fifty feet, a hundred feet, German soldier, (speaking German) I said, "Oh, hell, yes, you got me."  So they were right there underneath so.
Story_ID: 531644
Speaker 1: That was my introduction to nine months in Germany as a prisoner of war.  The commander of the local Germans, took me to see him, he was seated at a table on the coast, right next to the water, and when I walked in naturally, oh, the rest of the German soldiers were enlisted personnel and they saw me and they saw my little gold bar, even though they knew I was a Negro and they were surprised but they saluted me, military discipline.
Speaker 2: So they did?
Speaker 1: They saluted me.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So I when I walked, this guy was sitting at the, at a glass table, next to the water and he had some stuff, crap on his shoulders, so naturally I saluted him and in perfect English he said, "Have a seat, lieutenant."  It blew my mind.  I said, well, the first thing they did, they took my Pall Mall cigarettes, Parker pen, my Ray-Bans, what else?  That's all they wanted.  Oh, my watch, I had a big watch.  We got to talking and, of course, I'm supposed to give name, rank, and serial number, "[HistoryMaker] Alexander Jefferson, second lieutenant, 0819461, sir."  We rambled on, he talked, he said, "Ever been to Atlanta [Georgia]?"  I said, "No, sir."  Hell, I spent four years in Atlanta.  He described Auburn Avenue, all the black nightclubs, the food, the women, and I'm saying, what the heck's going on?  "Ever been to Washington, D.C.?"  Heck no, I told him, "No, sir."  I spent a year at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He told me how Howard University theater [Howard Theatre, Washington, D.C.], on Friday mornings the first two rows are filled up with Howard University students when they change the venue, they had vaudeville, Moms Mabley, Pigmeat Markham.  Then after that you'd have a Jimmie Lunceford play at twelve o'clock, the music.  He said, "You ever been to Detroit [Michigan]?"  By that time I'm furious, I said, "Yes."  He said, "Oh, then you know how to go down behind the library and catch the open streetcar downtown, and it goes out through East Adams [Street] and passes the Three Sixes [Club Three Sixes, Detroit, Michigan], the 606 Horse Shoe Bar [606 Horse Shoe Bar and Lounge, Detroit, Michigan]."  Finally I said, "How the hell you know all of this?"  He graduated from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in 1936, eager for the, oh, he went back to Germany, and they put him in charge of this field, coastal artillery unit, he's waiting for the war [World War II, WWII] to be over so he can come back to the states and enjoy the music, the food, and the women.  Of course, I never saw him after, after that because I was transferred from there over, up to the Rhone Valley with Danny [Robert T. Daniels], Danny was number two in the unit, I saw him when he get hit out the corner of my eye, I saw the black smoke go off that way.  He put it down in the water because he was afraid to bail out and the Germans went out and picked him up, brought him back and the two of us proceeded over to Marseille [France], up the Rhone Valley to Valence [France].  That's where we saw Robert Daniels, no, not Daniels, Richard Macon [Richard D. Macon].  Richard Macon was strafing and, with Shellbrook, Wesley Shellbrook [sic. Shelby Westbrook] we found out later who was flying on his wing, said the shell hit the top of the canopy.  Richard Macon did a half roll and an outside loop.  When you saw him, his eyes were bloodshot and he had, you'd shake him and he'd pass out because he had a fractured vertebrae in his neck, a broken collarbone.  So we went up the Rhone Valley and the Germans put him in a hospital.  I never saw him after that.  But Robert Daniels and I went to Frankfurt-on-the-Main [Frankfurt am Main, Germany] where we were interrogated.  That's where the guy showed a big book and on it he had pictures of every class that graduated from Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].  On the front of the book it said, 332nd Fighter Group [332nd Expeditionary Operations Group], Negroes, Red Tails, had every class picture, he finally turned around and said, "Lieutenant isn't that you?"  There's my class picture.  They had all my marks of Howard University, had all my marks of Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], even knew how much taxes my dad [Alexander Jefferson] paid on his house here in Detroit.  Everybody says, "Well, Mr. Jefferson, how did he do that?"  What did they do to the Japanese Americans after Pearl Harbor?  They put 'em in a concentration camp in Colorado.  What did they do to the German Americans when we declared war on Germany?  Nothing.  They were free to roam.
Story_ID: 531645
Speaker 1: Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany], Stalag means camp, Luft means air, L-U-F-T, this is the third camp, Roman numeral three, Stalag Luft III, the camp was controlled by the Luftwaffe.  Luft means air, Waffe means army.  Politically a little bit more lenient.  This is why the respect of air force personnel.  I was at Stalag Luft III.  Ten thousand white officers because every time a B-17 [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress] went down, you had four officers, a pilot and copilot, navigator, bombardier.  Sometimes they lost fifty, go back on the next mission, lose seventy-five, out of the ace air force, from England down to France.  The 15th Air Force [15th Expeditionary Mobility Task Force], the same, from Italy up into Germany.  Many, many, many B-17s and B-24s [Consolidated B-24 Liberator] were lost.
Speaker 2: So these were white pilots from a variety of countries, not just the United (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, from the United States.
Speaker 2: This is just the United States?
Speaker 1: From the United States.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Ten thousand--
Speaker 1: Ten thousand white officers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, that's not including English and Polish, French, but we were treated as officers and gentlemen, no beatings, no, no torture, they knew everything about us.  Plus Geneva Convention, how you treat officers.  McCain [John McCain] was beaten, tortured, because the Far Eastern mind is a different mindset.  They committed suicide before they surrendered.  And if you surrendered they treated you like a dog.  But my days at Stalag Luft III, eighty miles east of Berlin [Germany], on the Polish border, near the town of Sagan [Germany], S-A-G-A-N.  I was there from August '44 [1944] to January '45 [1945].  Coldest winter in history, twenty and thirty below zero.  And when the Russians started coming west out of the east, the Germans put us out on the road and we walked eighty kilometers west to be, being prevented from being picked up and released or, or recaptured by the Russians.  And the German soldiers going along with us were the Volkssturm, the old men, seventy-five and eighty, white hair, after four and five miles they gave out, we had to carry their rifles for them.  We put them on wagons, we, we were pulling little wagons, these are the old German officers, we couldn't let them be recaptured by the Russians.  But during the year, five months there, I only lost four pounds because the Germans didn't have any, any food, all they gave us was potatoes every day and that black bread, the darn loaf weighed about eight, eight or nine pounds.  We found out later the consistency was 50 percent sawdust in order to fill your stomach.  Flour was at a premium so they used sawdust to make up the bread.  And they kept it stacked in rows in hay to preserve it.  I remember the bread that came to my room was dated 1937, 1938.  But I got news for you, there's an old saying, wine, women, and song.  After the first week, you forget about the wine.  Second week you forget about the music.  Third week you forget the women.  What do you remember?  Food.  Some of the guys in my room were there, went down in North Africa, they had been there for three years.  One guy lost twelve pounds, fourteen pounds, I only lost four, I was there a short time.  But it was hectic, colder than heck.
Story_ID: 531646
Speaker 1: We left Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany] in January of '45 [1945].  We ended up at Stalag VII-A [Moosburg, Germany] near Munich [Germany].  That's where General Patton's [George S. Patton] Third Army [U.S. Third Army; U.S. Army Central] came down and liberated the camp.  I saw Dachau the next day.  We were twenty miles from Dachau, something like that.  And the ovens were still warm.  Man's inhumanity to man.  Thousands of dead bodies stacked up like cord wood.  So they'd take a big tractor, bulldozer and dig a big trench and then use the trench and push these dead bodies over into it.  It was horrible.
Speaker 2: Now, did you, so those who say that those, you know, this is a fake and that sort of thing they're not--
Speaker 1: I get incensed, I get angry, and somebody's gonna tell me that the Holocaust never happened, I have to curse and use some expletive deleted words to express what I saw.  A table, ten or fifteen feet, covered with dentures, when they gassed the people, before you burn the bodies, you have somebody with a pair of pliers pulling out the gold in their mouth.  And table just covered, heap, another table covered with hair, they cut the hair off and they used the hair for seat cushions, fifteen or twenty feet long, just piled up with hair.  Another room completely filled with the suitcases that everyone in Europe's, traveled with a cardboard suitcase, a little brown cardboard suitcase, whole room filled with shoes, a room filled with, stacked up with shoes, man's inhumanity.  The Russians treat- the Germans treated the Russians like hell, that's when I learned ethnic hatred in Europe.  The Germans hated the Russians.  The Russians hated the Poles.  The Poles hated Slavs, Yugoslav.  The Turks hated the Armenians.  Everybody hates everybody.  And all of a sudden, it becomes clear to you of man's inhumanity to man.  Horrible, horrible, horrible.  So that was my introduction to Dachau.  Came back we were free, we're on our own, we went up to Le Havre [France], we hitchhiked to Le Havre, hitchhiked boat back on the boat across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean], coming into the harbor of New York [New York Harbor], passed the Statue of Liberty [New York, New York], flags are waving, everybody glad to be home, on the boat we're mismatched, a bunch of whole characters everybody coming back home.  Walk down the gangplank and there it is back home, little white soldiers bark, whites to the right and niggers to the left, coming back home.  What a feeling.  But I realized this was racism and segregation and discrimination, back to reality.  That was my trip overseas.
Story_ID: 531647
Speaker 1: Tell me during the time that you were in the prison, did the German prisoner of war camps and the Stalag--
Speaker 2: Three, and Stalag Luft III [Sagan, Germany] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) yeah, Luft III or Luft IV [Stalag Luft IV, Gross Tychow, Germany], did any of the American soldiers miss good old American segregation and did they wonder why the Germans were treating you as equals (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the camp we had military discipline.  The senior American officer, the colonel, he was the guy who spoke to the Germans all the time.  Once we got into camp we never talked to the German officers.  When I got there, I walked in, the first time in August, '44 [1944] in Stalag VII [Stalag VII-A, Moosburg, Germany], Stalag III, I could feel the officers looking at me, these regular prisoners, as if to say what in the hell are you doing here?  But I had a gold bar on my collar, a set of wings, and they couldn't say anything.  A week later a bomber crew came in from the 15th Air Force [15th Expeditionary Mobility Task Force], saw me, ran over and grabbed me and said, "Oh, god damn it, you're a Red Tail."  I said, "Yeah."  "If you'd been with us, we wouldn't have been shot down."  We had a reputation for bringing guys back.  It spread throughout the whole camp.  Negroes are flying P-51s [North American Aviation P-51 Mustang], they're Red Tails.  And the record came back, my other guys who came in, we always brought the guys back, we were damn good.  Now, we, we lost one or two along the way don't get me wrong, let me go across something.  Somebody said, well, the 332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group], the Red Tails never lost a bomber to German fighters while they were with them.  That is a myth.  We found out, we went back, researched at Maxwell Field [Maxwell Air Force Base, Montgomery, Alabama] through the historic system, while we were assigned a B-17 [Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress] or a B-24 [Consolidated B-24 Liberator] unit, we had five groups, the 332nd, five groups and each group composed of three squadrons, twelve ships to a squadron, 12, 24, 48, and we had five groups, over 150 airplanes, hell, there were only sixty of us, back and forth over, and we lost one or two to German fighters.  Almost impossible to survey and protect their number.  There might have been some other instance where we lost but we do know we did lose one or two or three, we still got a heck of a record.
Speaker 1: Well, it's not perfect (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Heck no, nobody's perfect.
Speaker 1: It's an exaggeration.
Speaker 2: We know that.  This myth by the way was always perpetrated by a writer, somebody over there wanting to make a good story and the old thing trying to make black men super, well, we were up to a certain extent but we were not that perfect, let's face it.
Story_ID: 531648
Speaker 1: I don't know if it was [HistoryMaker] Joseph Gomer or [HistoryMaker] Roy Chappell, but they suggested that because the government entered into the Tuskegee project with a bit--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of reticence, they made a, they practically over trained you guys.  And admitted to keep, prevent from deploying you they trained you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and trained you and trained you, so as a result you actually had pilots that knew more about the planes than anybody else.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, the 477th [477th Bombardment Group; 477th Fighter Group], the bomber group, was that way.  The 477th, the B-25s [North American B-25 Mitchell], they trained and trained and trained right here in the states.  Between Godman [Godman Army Airfield, Fort Knox, Kentucky], by the way they were at Selfridge [Selfridge Army Air Base; Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan] under Colonel Selway [Robert Selway], he's the guy who told them, heck no you cannot go to the officers' club, Selway was trained when we were kicked out, we went to Walterboro [Walterboro Army Airfield, South Carolina], the 477th went to Godman Field, Kentucky, then Freeman Field occurred during that time where a hundred officers were arrested for, not for trying to get into an officers' club but for refusing to sign their names, Selway had that statement sign your names showing you have read my order, 85-1 of whatever it is, that you would not go into the officers' club.  They refused to sign their names, therefore they were arrested, simply on the, oh, refusing to follow a direct order, when the colonel says jump, you jump, and they refused to sign their names, they were arrested and reprimands went into their records, um-hm.  That was hard.  477th never went overseas, they had to be accepted by a wing, and the wing never accepted them.  And then after the war [World War II, WWII] they brought us back, put us in P-47s [Republic P-47 Thunderbolt], combined us with the B-25s as a composite group, the 477th Composite Group.  And we were slated to go to Japan for the invasion and thank god, they dropped the atomic bomb.  And every time I say that, you hear these mothers, "Oh, my Lord, they dropped the atomic bomb and they killed all those people, how horrid."  I say, "Hey, wait a minute, best thing that ever happened."  Why?  The [U.S.] Army had ordered 500,000 body bags.  Who do you think they were gonna use them for?  And these old ladies who look at you real odd for, and after four or five minutes, it occurred to them, they're gonna use it on American soldiers dying because an invasion of Japan.  Atomic bomb was the best thing that ever happened, saved a lot of men.  I wouldn't be here.  A lot of other men wouldn't be here.  But that's all comes out of the war, a horrible war.  And just think, Hitler [Adolf Hitler], Hitler pushed out the men who were responsible for developing the atomic bomb, the Jews.  Hitler pushed out the man who was responsible for us going to the moon, what was his name, Von something?
Speaker 1: Wernher von Braun.
Speaker 2: Wernher von Braun.
Speaker 1: Yep.  Hermann Oberth, Wernher von Braun--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --these guys.
Speaker 2: But, god, I think about it, how close we came, hm, hm, hm.  That's my story, of course, there were other details, other things in detail.
Story_ID: 531649
Speaker 1: On the wall here, before we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --we started doing this--
Speaker 2: Those drawings.
Speaker 1: --if I can kind of recap of the interview we did earlier, yeah, the drawings, and now, you may have mentioned this before but, but how did you become interested in art?  Were you always an artist or--
Speaker 2: Always drawing, I was always drawing something somewhere.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there's like a comic strip tableau of what you just described that happened on the nineteenth mention--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --mission.  Right, you bailing out of the plane and, and landing and being arrested by the Germans (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During, during the four or five months at Stalag III [Stalag Luft III, Sagan, Germany], by the way, the International Red Cross [International Committee of the Red Cross] gave us pencils, ink, pens, paper, baseball equipment, soccer equipment, everything, so you didn't have anything else to do but draw.  And by the way, many, many of the guys in the camp were drawing and you'd take that idea and expound it as your own.  And I got the idea of this.  There I was, firing at the target, and the next one when I bailed, excuse, excuse me, when I bailed out, and as is, realistically, when I landed and the other pictures are places in Stalag Luft III, many of these ideas were perpetrated through other men and you take that idea and change it to your own.  I did a lot of drawings, to while away the time.  We had an extensive library, god, I think I read every book this side of the world.  And there were other classes, you could take a class in chemistry, there was a class in physics, there was a class in contemporary writing, class in sewing, crocheting, the winter was coming, every man there was knitting and crocheting socks, scarves, caps, because we knew it was gonna be cold and we were getting ready for the winter.  God, I tell you but what a way to spend your time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this, this period, I know this period of time for a lot of people--
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: --is the cardinal, I guess, event of their life.  I mean, the World War II [WWII], those who went, they seem to remember it, in vivid, vivid detail.  Do you, is that the way the war affected you or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Weirdly some guys, some, some of the guys were reticent about talking about their experiences.  There are some World War II men who have never said a word about what they went through.  I'm just the opposite.  War to me was an adventure.  I don't get this feeling I'm the only one left, some of the guys are hurt because they feel so God cursed him, he's the only one left and took his buddies and he walks the--me, no.  I look at it, it was an adventure, I happened to be lucky, I survived.  Not what I did, but the good Lord up above (unclear), you're still there.  And I talk about things, events and occasions and if hadn't been, been for drawing those pictures I would never, I remember looking at.  It was 10:47 a.m., I would never remember the time that I was shot down and some of the other, how close the trees were, and I never did get the German officers name but all of these things have kept in the back of my mind because I wrote them down at that time.  So, so I just keep on talking because I'm not, I don't feel guilty, I don't feel hurt, some of the guys feel hurt, they're reticent about their adventures, um-hm.  But came back after the war, I was a, oh, way back to Tuskegee Army Airfield [Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] and became an instrument instructor for (unclear) advanced classes about to graduate for about a year.  And during that time, right for about a year, until Tuskegee Army Airfield was closed and I was transferred up to Lockbourne [Lockbourne Army Airfield; Rickenbacker Air National Guard Base, Ohio] where the 477th [477th Bombardment Group; 477th Fighter Group] was in Lockbourne and all the rest of the black pilots came to Lockbourne.  Spent a year there and then cashiered out.  I didn't wanna get out but they cashiered out all of us.
Speaker 1: In 19-what, forty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: Six [1946].
Speaker 2: The latter part of '46 [1946], the first part of '47 [1947], yeah.
