Story_ID: 9349
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with Dr. Katherine Butler Jones. The interviewer is Robert C. Hayden. And the videographer is Scott Stearns. The date is October 14 [2004]. And the site of the interview is at the home of Hubie and Kathy Jones on Commonwealth Avenue in Newton, Massachusetts. HistoryMaker, would you state your full name and spell your name for us.
Speaker 2: Katherine Elizabeth Butler Jones. Jones "J-O-N-E-S".
Speaker 1: And spell your first name and middle name.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Katherine "K-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E" Elizabeth "E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H" Butler "B-U-T-L-E-R".
Speaker 1: Good. Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 19, 1936.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City.
Speaker 1: New York City. How would you describe your present occupation? What are you presently engaged in? You've done many things. But how would you describe your present--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I would say that I've kind of taken a break away from the work that I did during my career which was in education. And I've been writing. Now for the past ten years, I've been doing my family history. And that has led to all kinds of different activities. Including the most recently, adapting a chapter of my book into a play ['409 Edgecombe Ave.: The House on Sugar Hill']. And right now I'm in a playwriting class. I was in a playwriting class with Ed Bullins. And a stage reading was done of the play in the spring at Eggleston Y[MCA, Young Mens Christian Association]. And so I'm, you know, really exploring those kinds of creative parts. Essentially still doing the same thing and that is educating people about African American history.
Story_ID: 9350
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (laughing) Lobster. I think that's without a hesitation (laughing).
Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The summer time. Because I love to swim and I like to be out doors. And so when I can get in the water and have the sun out, that is my idea of heaven.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness. I don't know. Maybe purple, maybe red. Something like that. I never thought about that.
Speaker 1: I think I know the answer to this. Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (laughing) My favorite vacation destination is probably many--any country in Africa. Would be Ghana. I really love spending time in Ghana. I've got very close friends in Ghana. So that's been a wonderful opportunity to not only know something more in-depth about the culture and the history of the country, but also to have this human contact and with a family that has brought--been here. And their children have come and stayed with us. And our children have gone and stayed with them. And so it really does kind of symbolize the connection. The connection that I haven't been able to find in terms of my historical research to my actual homeland in Ghana. But this is a substitute for that.
Speaker 1: I see. Okay. One last question along this line. Excuse me. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: I think that--something that I think comes to my mind and that is, "Love many, trust a few, but always paddle your own canoe."
Story_ID: 9351
Speaker 1: Let's start by talking about your childhood and your parentage. Would you tell me a little bit about your mother? Or give me her name and--.
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: Give me a little history of her early life?
Speaker 2: Sure. My mother [Meme Clark Butler] was born in Jamaica, West Indies at the time when it was a colony of Great Britain. And she was born in 1891, in Falmouth, Jamaica which is on the coast, near Montego Bay [Jamaica]. Her father [Robert Clark] was a sergeant in the [Jamaican] Constabulary Force.  And so that was--at that time a kind of prestigious job to have. And she--my mother was one of eight children. And three of her older siblings--three of her siblings had come to the United States. My mother studied telegraphy. And was a telegrapher and went around to the various parishes to work in the post office and do telegraphy. Send messages by dot-dash. She decided one year in 1921 that she would come and visit her siblings in New York City. And so she did that. And a lot of Jamaican and West Indian people were coming to the United States at that time. There was no limit on immigration. She came for a visit for a couple of weeks. And she never went back to Jamaica. And she was fascinated by New York. She came at the time of the Harlem Renaissance--the height of the Harlem Renaissance. She learned how to do hair work. And at that time Madam [C. J.] Walker's technique and the apex method of straightening women's--black women's hair was at its epitome. And she learned how to do that and worked in a beauty parlor shop on seventh avenue called Frankie's, where she met all of the chorus girls who worked in the Cotton Club [Harlem, New York] would come in to get their hair touched up. And she was fascinated. She was here at the time when Abyssinian Baptist Church [Harlem, New York] was being built. And talked about what that was like. When Marcus Garvey was riding down 7th Avenue. All of these things were part of her experience. But it was also the experience of a person coming from a predominantly black country to a country which was run by white people. She came and she decided she would stay a while. Her brother asked her what she wanted to do. She said, she wanted to do telegraphy, of course. And he said, "We don't--They don't hire jiggaboos to do things like that." And so she started out being-working in domestic work as a governess. She did some work as a maid. But this did not sit well with her idea and concept of herself. So she refused to comply with the wishes of these employees down on Central Park West [New York, New York]. She quit jobs (laughing). My aunt, her older sister would get jobs for and then she'd stay for a while and then she'd quit. And that's what brought her into hair work. 'Cause it gave her a sense of independence. And then soon after she got--had ran the business very efficiently for Frankie, she decided she would take her hair work to her home and take some of her customers with her. So she did work at home. And she moved with her sister to 401 Edgecombe Avenue [Harlem, New York] where she was a bachelor girl. And it was only one vacation when my mother would hire--she had very, very high standards in terms of her life style. And she hired a chauffeured limousine to take her to a vacation in Pawling, New York.  And then she met my father [Theodore Butler]. And they were married in 1932. And I was born in 1936, and my father was a postal worker. And that's the--that's the story about my mother.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother in terms of her personality?  How do you remember her growing up and as an adult? What was she like as a person?
Speaker 2: Okay. Well she was very clear about the expectations in terms of education. That was as far as I was concerned, that was her primary focus. That I would have the best education that was available. And so that meant that I went to the Modern School [Harlem, New York] which was a black private school. Run by blacks--run by Mildred Johnson who was James Weldon Johnson's niece and [John] Rosamond Johnson's daughter. And after that, when she decided that that wasn't challenging enough, she decided that I should go to the Ethical Culture [Fieldston] School [New York, New York]. And she--and as a beautician, she came in contact with people from all walks of life. So that my exposure was to people who were nurses and to people who were lawyers as well as people who were maids as well as people in all walks of life that crossed our threshold. Because she did the work at home. And one of the people was a person who worked as a counselor at the Y--the Young Womens Christian Association. An so she asked her about schools that were good for, you know. That I might be able to go to. And I was tested at all of these schools and I--she chose the Ethical Culture School. So that was clear that that was her--whatever was the best she was going to have. It was gonna be the best (laughing) she was going to have. It was going to be the best oriental carpets. It was gonna be the best (laughing) furniture. It was gonna be the furs. It was gonna be all of the things and also to live in this apartment building 409 Edgecombe Avenue which was the home of the black elite. The place where James--not James Weldon Johnson, but where W. E. B. DuBois lived, Thurgood Marshall. All of those people were living there when I was growing up and they were my role models.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did she tell you any stories as you were growing up about her growing up in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yes. Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Could you share a couple of things she told you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that she told me was essentially about how her education was done by the British. So that she grew up without any knowledge of the Arawak Indians, without any knowledge of the Maroons that had tried to prevent colunialism from coming to Jamaica. Her identification was with England.  And as a matter of act, she had told me that she had gone to Oxford University [sic, University of Oxford, Oxford, England, United Kingdom]. So there was this idea that the English who--the sun never set on the British Empire, that that was--that was the epitome of everything. And the people in her group immolated the British. Although there weren't as many British there, that was still the model. And that would be what I would say. So she did not have a West Indian accent. She spoke perfect English. She had a beautiful handwriting. She also I would say did not socialize very much with other people. She did a lot for her family. But aside from that she was pretty much self-contained.
Speaker 1: What can you tell me? You mentioned a little bit about her father. What can you--more can you say about her parents?
Speaker 2: Okay. I have learned my mother--my mother's mother [Catherine Simpson Clark] died when she was eighty-seven. And my mother never returned to Jamaica. So I have very little contact with my grandparents. My grandfather died even earlier than that. I think probably before I was born. But I would say she had a number of siblings. My grandmother I understand was a very generous person that people came to for support. She cooked for the people. My grandfather as I said in the mil--in the police department. And she later after he passed on, she cooked food for the prisons. And that was something that I remember her doing. So I have cousins here who told-who knew my mother in Jamaica. And so I've heard most about her from them. But she certainly did tell me about the--how to count the money in the English system. The way the spelling of words that was different. So I learned how to spell words, the way (laughing) people spelled them in England. And that was--that was really her standard.
Story_ID: 9352
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. What was his name? When was he born? And where was he born?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Theodore Harold Butler. He was born in Boston, Massachusetts on December 6, 1882. and by the time that he was in his--in grade school, the family had moved to New York City. I don't know exactly what year. But most of his life was in New York. He and his sister were born in Boston. His sister was born in 1880 in Boston. And they lived on the back side of Beacon Hill. Now where Mass[achusetts] General Hospital [Boston, Massachusetts] is located. So that's how much I know about his early-his early life. His father did not arrive in New York. So I know that my grandmother [Elizabeth Weeks Butler] on the census information described herself as a widow. And my father lived right near--right where Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts] is in New York City now. That was the San Juan Hill section of New York City. I was very lucky that my father saved a lot of things from his life. From his early life. Because he died when I was fifteen years old [in 1957]. And I never asked the questions that I would have asked as an adult. So I didn't know very much about his early life. Or--he was a postal worker. And became one--an early postal worker in the 1900s. And I think that was his first major job that he had.  And he had it until he retired. And he was a member of the YWCA [Young Womens Christian Association] colored men's branch in 1900 when it became established. And later became actually an association. But the communication-I've reviewed all of the records of the Y. Because the Y's minutes--the place where all he Y's records are kept are in New York City. So I went down to look at the records for the Harlem [New York] men's branch--colored men's branch, and there were no records for this group. Another--it really wasn't Harlem. The Harlem branch in 1900 was white. Because it was still white. But my father saved all-he was the correspondence secretary. And he saved all of the copies of the communications that he sent out. So I really have the records. The only records of--that I know of this organization from what he had saved. He was also a member of the debating team. And as a member of the debating team, he saved his arguments. So I have copies of those. And he made an argument that Booker T. Washington was a detriment to the Negro people in 1907 he made that statement. And then he a had records of a baseball team that the Y organized to compete against the bellboys in the Majestic Hotel [New York, New York], which was on 72nd Street and Central Park West. So they'd have a game in Long Island [New York]. And they had all these rules and regulations. A whole litany of rules and regulations. So I have had an opportunity through these little items that he's saved to get a picture of his life. And then to do the research that more fully explored some of these-the things that I found in the documents. But he was a wonderful father. I mean I was very fortunate. He--I was an only child. That meant that his focus and my mother's focus was on me. We lived right near the Polo Grounds [New York, New York]--across the street from the Polo Grounds. I'd go to baseball games. Walked under the bridge to the Bronx [New York] to the Yankee Stadium to see the Yankees play there, to the circus. To all the things that you could ever imagine. I was very--I had a very close relationship with my dad.
Speaker 1: Coming back to Boston for just a minute. He was born in Boston?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about his parents and how they got to Boston?
Speaker 2: I can't tell you too much about how they got to Boston. I know that my grandfather was born in Richmond, Virginia. And the oral history is that he was an escaped slave. I found him in the city directory in Boston as a porter. My grandmother was born in Keeseville, New York in 1856. And how she got to Boston, I mean I don't know. I don't know how she got to Boston. I do know that a lot of people who were from Richmond, Virginia came to Boston because Boston was interested in getting for the most part illiterate people from--after the Civil War, came to Boston were hired by abolitionists people. So my sense is that's what brought him to Boston. But I don't know very much about him. And I haven't done the research on that part of my family. But I was very fortunate that my father's family on his mother's side were free blacks. So I've been able to trace--and then also I go back very far in several generations. So I go back to my great-great-grandmother being born in 1770--1775 in Rensselaer County, New York. And then I've been able to, you know, trace them from there. But it's only because I found--one of the things that my father saved was a marriage certificate of my great-grandparents. They were married in Troy, New York in 1843. It was an official New York State marriage certificate.
Speaker 1: And their names?
Speaker 2: Edward Weeks and Hannah Diamond. And when I started tracing that, I got back on both sides to the 1700s of my family being here as at one point free blacks in 1816.
Story_ID: 9353
Speaker 1: You've been engaged as you said for ten years at least in intensive research and writing and study of your family roots in the Adirondack [Mountains] section of New York. Would you take us back to the family roots there and what you found and some of your writings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And kind of spin that out for us.
Speaker 2: Well it's been very--it's been a very exciting journey. Because I've just used all of the resources that have been available to me. I've used census data. I've used the newspapers. Because I like to not think of this as a necessarily a family history, but a history of Americans in this country. There're lots of--I found a lot of ideas that black people all came from the South. And so in many of the presentations I get--people ask me, "Well when did your family come from the South?"  And I say, "Well one of the things that the North does beautifully is to deny that slavery existed here." And that there were slaves imported into Providence, Rhode Island, into Boston, Massachusetts and to the New York Harbor. So one of the things that this kind of work does is to dispel the idea that slavery was a southern institution. Although obviously most people who were enslaved were enslaved in the South in the plantation system. And the other thing I find interesting is that in the North, the people referred to slaves as servants. So--and people are still surprised. "You mean to say that people had slaves and the children were sold away from their families?" And this seems even at this date in 2004 a very difficult concept for people to come to grips with. So--and then it was even more important, I think, because we don't usually think of African Americans as having a history that goes back before the founding of this country. Although we know from, you know, my long work, that people who were here for a long, long time. But some how or another that information has not been described in the history books. So we know very little about that too. So it's not just the story of my family. But it's the story of many, many other families similar to this. I found my family was involved in Underground Railroad activity in Upstate New York. That they were helping escape slaves get to Canada after the passage of the Fugitive Slave Law in 1850. I found that my family had started a church in Troy, New York, which Henry Harlan Garnet; the famous abolitionist was called to minister. That the people in that church were very activists. They were in many ways I think even more radical than the people in Massachusetts. Because I think that in some ways the Massachusetts people were following [William Lloyd] Garrison. And so they were involved politically. They were not supposed to get involved politically. But Henry Harlan Garnet was the person who said that it would be better to die as a martyr than to live as a slave. And encouraged blacks to revolt in the South. And the people in the North who were free were helping in that effort. But remember that in New York State slavery wasn't dissolved until 1827. So I was fortunate--and my family were free. So I was able to find them in all kinds of documents. In church documents because of baptism of children and in the census data. Because they were identified and the numbers of children in the family and so forth. So that--that has--that's helped speed the research. I think it would be harder to do my grandfather's story.
Story_ID: 9354
Speaker 1: How have you been able to disseminate to date the research and the writing and the analysis that you've done of your family history in New York? Tell me some of the products that you've--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Well right--that's been fascinating. Because I have had the opportunity to do exhibits based upon my research. So one of the exhibits was at the Museum of National Heritage [sic, National Heritage Museum] in Lexington [Massachusetts] that ran for six months. And it was the story of families. And I--my family was the only African American family. So the curator used the documents that I had to put together this very effective exhibit. And also a videotape that I had done with senior members of my family on my father [Theodore Butler]'s side. That was a commentary on some of the parts of their lives that they remembered. So that was one venue. Most recently at the Museum of the City of New York, I was in an exhibit called 'Harlem Then and Now'. Which was based on the architecture of Harlem [New York], with pictures of my family and some of the documents that my father had, that were pertaining to New York in the 1900s, were on exhibit there. And I gave the keynote address about growing up in Harlem that fit in very nicely with the theme of this exhibit. So those are two venues. And then I've done a lot of stuff on television and a lot of stuff on PBS [Public Broadcasting System] on public radio. I was invited to come to the 200th anniversary celebration of John Brown's birth in Upstate New York, where he's buried as you know. And that was because my family had gotten land from Gerrit Smith. In the 1800s, they gave land to free blacks so that they could vote in New York State. And John Brown had a piece of land on this particular plot of land that was given by Gerrit Smith to these 3,000 black men in New York State. So--but the work has led to all kinds of opportunities. Including articles in 'American Vision' and all kinds of opportunities to speak to--to talk to genealogical societies, historical societies, New York State history stuff. So I've really done a lot. And the most recent thing was the article--a chapter from the memoir that I've been writing in the 'Harlem Reader'. And that goes over Harlem from the beginning of Hamilton--Alexander Hamilton and Hamilton Grange [National Memorial] up to the present with people writing about their perspectives on Harlem. And of course--.
Speaker 1: Can you give us the author of that publication and the title?
Speaker 2: The editor--'Harlem Reader'?
Speaker 1: The editor--Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was edited by Herb Boyd, published by Free River Press which is a branch of Crown [Publishing Group]. Published in 19-in 2003. and it starts with Hamilton Grange and then it goes through to the present to what the effect of gentrification on Harlem--the community and the people who have been contributors to that mostly are dead (chuckling). But it does include James Weldon Johnson. It includes W. E. B. Dubois, Duke Ellington, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Sonia Sanchez and a variety of people. So all of them writing about Harlem as they remember it.
Story_ID: 9355
Speaker 1: One of your writing is titled "They Called it Timbucto"?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: The article that was published in 'Orion' magazine.
Speaker 1: Would you spell 'Orion' for us?
Speaker 2: 'O-R-I-O-N' magazine. I believe it was in 1998. Talks about piecing together this story that I've told you a little bit about. From finding this document of my father [Theodore Butler]'s--my great-grandparents wedding anniversary and tracing it back. And what I found was that first of all that my great-great-grandfather owned land in Upstate New York in--from the time 1825. Okay. And by 1850 he had several acres of land and agricultural records which I've seen of how much grain was harvested and all of these--how many animals he had and so forth. For--this was quite surprising to me. Because it didn't fit into what my idea about what black people were doing. So they were farming. And doing very successfully. And he had--he had eight children. And two of those children I know were actively involved in Underground Railroad activity. The Gerrit Smith land grant in 1846, at the time when slavery was gonna end in 1827, the legislature--New York [State] legislature decided that black men should have to pay money to hold a certain amount of land $250 worth of land in order to vote. White men didn't have to own any land to be able to vote. And that was obviously an attempt to make sure that black people didn't have an opportunity to exercise franchise. They never got the right to vote until after the Civil War in New York State without the property restriction. Well my great-grandfather got land from Smith. And I thought that was fascinating. And went and traced the land. Got to the place where the land was located. And, you know, met all these wonderful people. As you--because in upstate New York, a lot of people stayed there. So the descendants--I found somebody who lived--whose great grandfather lived next door to my family in 1825. So--and they're very welcoming (laughing) and they will let you come into their home. I found records that were going back to 1816, where my great-grandfather's children went to school. All of these kinds of things. And piece together the story as I said. Not just of my family, but other African American families that were there.
Story_ID: 9356
Speaker 1: What advice or suggestions do you have for African American individuals and families in New England, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York about getting started on family history and how to do it?
Speaker 2: Well the first thing is to record the older members of the family. That's the most important thing.  Because you will lose that information.  And nobody else has it. There's no where else you can go.  So that's the first thing.  Videotapes or audiotapes of the older members of the family.  The second thing which I have found very helpful is to find an organization--if there's an African American historical genealogical association in your area, use that.  Because that can be a wonderful way of sharing information and learning technique.  The third thing is to get to the archives.  And--well I think probably now it's much easier with the Internet to get access to records using the family name and checking through the Internet for--and they're supposed to be very, very good programs available that will help you to do the searches for genealogical information.  The next thing is to get out to the places.  Because there is no way that you can even with all these valuable resources find all the--what you need to find.  Especially if you can connect with the--with the place where the family member was living and get to that local historical society and get to the people there.  Because I found important tax records were in the school. I found important documents--church records in somebody's house. Upstairs in the attic. I mean so these things have not all been copied and documented and made available for the public. So it's very important to make those visits to the towns and to talk to the people who were there who have access to information that would never get other--any other way. And the other thing that I think is extremely important is to read the papers. To read the notices in the papers. The death announcements, the wedding announcements in the local press. Because that's another very valuable of getting a sense of what was going on at that time. And in the larger context, if you didn't live in the--if it was a national--a paper like the 'Colored American' or any of those papers that were available at the time in the early 1830s, read those newspapers. 'Cause they give a context for the work that you'll be discovering as you do this search.
Story_ID: 9357
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your growing up. Your early life. What are your earliest memories of growing up in New York City?
Speaker 2: (laughing) Well I think that's funny that you ask that. Because just last weekend, since I kept the apartment that I grew up in, we often go--my husband [Hubie Jones] and I often go to New York and spend some time. And I was there this past weekend. And reminiscing. And one of the things that I remember is the playground that was on Edgecombe Avenue [New York, New York], that I used to go to. And go on the swings and do all that. The other thing that I hadn't done in many, many years was to go to the library, which was about six or seven blocks from my house. The library where I used to spend a lot of time getting books out and so forth. And that was interesting. 'Cause now it's predominantly a Hispanic neighborhood--Washington Heights [New York, New York]. And so there were books there in Spanish, and people who were using the library were a lot of Spanish speaking people. So those were two memories. The other one I would say which was very strong was going to the school where I started in kindergarten, where I went to school [Modern School, New York, New York]. And, you know, that was a block and a half from my house. And the building is still there. Oh I'm very fortunate all of the places that were important to me in my childhood--except for the Polo Grounds [New York, New York] which is long since torn down. But most of the places and institutions are still there. So I have an opportunity to check them out (laughing) from time to time. And so I remember--I remember the school. I remember Mildred Johnson. I have had an opportunity since I was doing the memoir to interview her on the [Martha's] Vineyard [Massachusetts]. And to talk to her about how she started the school. What motivated her to start a school. And that was an important kind of connection. Because, of course, first of all the concerns about connecting with her again. Because I hadn't connected with her since I was in the third grade. And I thought, first of all she might--she won't remember who I am. But she remembered all about what--who I was and about my mother [Meme Clark Butler], and about the fact that I'd left the school after third grade. But I remember going up the steps to that building, of having her mother, Nora Johnson, meet each of the students at the door, of what the physical appearance--gray hair, pulled back with a bun at the nape of her neck. Very, very clear memories of the friends that I had there. The performance of 'The Nutcracker' ballet that was done as a fundraiser for the school. Those are things that--and, of course, we all learned, 'Lift Every Voice and Sing'. Because her family had been involved in writing that national--the Negro National Anthem. And we sang that and we knew from memories all three verses of the stanza.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You were living where? Give us the address and the location of your home at the time.
Speaker 2: All right. The address is 409 Edgecombe Avenue. And I--I mention in my memoir that in the 1940s you didn't have to--if you got a cab in Harlem [New York], all you need to say was 409 and the cabdriver would know where to take you. At that time the building--it's a thirteen story brick building with 111 apartments in it. And at the time that I was growing up, there were uniformed doormen, hall men and two elevator operators. Oriental carpets on the tiled floor, penthouses on the roof and it was a very elegant building with flowers in the lobby. In the--and so I lived there at that time and then also saw the decline of the building. Until it went bankrupted, it was owned by African--Metropolitan Life Insurance [Company] owned it at one time. And then a group of West Indian real estate owners had purchased it and then it went bankrupt, and went to the city. The building in 1993, I believe, was designated as a New York City Landmark building. And that was because of the people who lived in that building. That was because of Thurgood Marshall, Walter White, W. E. B. Dubois, and May E. Chin (ph.) who was the first black doctor on the staff of Bellview Hospital [New York, New York] and was my physician. The other thing that I say about the building is that you didn't need to leave the building for anything. Because everybody from all walks of life lived in that building. There were Pullman porters. There were redcaps railroad--people worked in the railroad. My father [Theodore Butler] was a post office clerk. Lawyers, doctors, (unclear), gamblers. Everything.  Every--the whole range of African American community. Because at that time there was no place else to go. People did not have access to Long Island [New York] or New Jersey for the most part as a place to live. So Harlem was the place. And this was one of the two largest buildings and most elegant buildings in Harlem that I grew up in.
Story_ID: 9358
Speaker 1: Is there any individual at 409 [Edgecombe Avenue, New York, New York] as you were growing up in addition to your parents who were especially influential in your growing up that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well this is what I also say about growing up in that building is that we were the children of 409. In other words, there were very few young people in that building. But those of us who were there were the people who got that older generation looked to as being pioneers. So people would always ask me about school. I mean Walter White's first wife Gladys would--we-I lived on the twelfth floor and the Whites lived on the thirteenth floor. And the DuBoises [family of W. E. B. DuBois] lived on the thirteenth floor. So there were a lot of opportunities to have conversations going up on this long elevator ride. And there was always this interest in the young people and what they were doing, and how was school today. And what did you do (laughing). So you always knew that a lot was expected of you. So it was a really--and then there were people--of course, you know there were people whose--whom I would visit in the building. And that gave--beside the people who were coming in from outside. I was getting a very, very broad knowledge about what the community was about. And I call it a vertical community.
Story_ID: 9359
Speaker 1: What was your family life like? Any special events or observances that were out of your family culture that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well I--well Christmas I guess is probably the one that stands out (laughing) most in my mind. That the tradition is--as far as Christmas is concerned, that my father [Theodore Butler] on Christmas Eve would go out and get a tree and then decorate it that night.  And then the next--on Christmas morning, the tree was up. And the things that I liked to get--I never was interested in dolls. I was interested in--I got boxing gloves one year (laughing). 'Cause that's what I wanted. I got books. And one of my mother [Meme Clark Butler]'s friends worked for Brentano's [Books, New York, New York] which was a bookstore downtown. And every Christmas I'd get, you know, a box set of books with illustrations and everything. That was the high point. The other thing that I recall is going to Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York]. Mother and I would go down--early in the morning get the first shuttle. And that--the carpeting on that floor, the elegance of that environment, the Rockettes and the stage shows as well as the movies, that was something that I remember. Macy's Department Store was a place where we shopped. And I remember they had a cow there. Elsie the Borden Cow. And there was this, you know, this figure of this cow. And then you paid your money and you'd get a container of (laughing) chocolate milk. Those are some of the--and, of course, the circus. That was a very, very exciting thing for me.
Speaker 1: You're telling us about some of the sights--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.
Speaker 1: That remind you of growing up. Any sounds or smells?
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: That remind you of growing up in--?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, there was the smell of the food in the hall. Now I must say that when I was growing up, the building [409 Edgecombe Avenue, New York, New York] was very safe, so that people kept their doors open in the--in the summer time. So my mother had a conch shell that she kept. And the door was open. So people--and people would--people would just come in. And so you had these aromas in the hallway of the cooking that was--that I certainly--that I remember very well. And another aroma. And that was in the basement there was--there were tubs. This was before washing machines became fashionable. As a matter of fact, it was during the [Second World] War. So I don't think you could get washing machines very easily. There were tubs. And in the basement, they also had dryers where people--after you finished washing clothes, then you hung them up. And I used to go downstairs with the person who helped my mother to hang clothes in the dryer. So I have this--I remember this smell of the heat. You know, the smell of the heat on the--on drying these wet sheets and all of those things. Those are a couple of smells.  Then the dog. The family next door had a dog. A little chow dog. And when they would go out--take him--take this dog Chubby out. Sometimes he'd come in and come into our--and I loved dogs. So that was another--that was another smell that I remember. Yeah. Those are some of the smells.
Story_ID: 9360
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your entry into formal schooling. When did you start school?  What school did you first attend?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Okay. Well I started school at the age of four, in kindergarten. And I started at Mildred Johnson's Modern School [New York, New York]. And it was as far as I know the first school for black children, run by black people in Harlem [New York]. A private school. And I--my mother [Meme Clark Butler]--there was also a public school also about the same distance away as this school, which is about one and a half blocks from my house. And I think that--oh I know how my mother found out about it. Because one of the customers lived on 154th Street between St. Nicholas [Avenue] and Amsterdam Avenue. And she told my mother about the fact that this school had opened a couple of doors down from her. And my mother wasn't excited about seeing the way that the children behaved when they were dismissed from the public school. So she inquired about this. And my parents decided to send me there. And that's how I got to the Mildred Johnson school. There were also other kids in that school were--that lived on my street. And we also--there was also a teacher--a former public school teacher who was fired because she was--they decided she was a communist. And she did art classes. And so a number of us who went to Mildred Johnson's on Saturdays would go to Miss Wilcher's house at 381 St. Nicholas--Edgecombe Avenue for art lessons. I had a very close friend who lived in the Bronx [New York] who went to Mildred's. And we'd spend time at each other's house. So this was--this was my--you know. It was like an extension of the protection of the building that I felt. This tremendous--not only my family, but also the people in the building who were really--and the people in the hall. The people that worked there really were wonderful. I remember coming home from school and the doorman would, you know, kind of toss me up in the air (laughing) when I came home from school. And when I got older, let me run the elevator, when nobody else was on it.  You know, you had it--it was a manually operated elevator. Those are things that I remember that were very, very important to the sense of security, of belonging and of identification. Because I saw a core section of people of color in my building, and in my community. And I also had music lessons. I started music--piano lessons probably when I was about seven. And the piano teacher lived in the building on the seventh floor. And so I'd go downstairs for piano lessons. My doctor was in--May Chin (ph.), Dr. Chin was on the first floor. So, as I said, you know, the building really was a community.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay at the Mildred Johnson [Modern] School? How many grades or--?
Speaker 2: I stayed there from kindergarten through third grade.
Story_ID: 9361
Speaker 1: The reason that I--my mother [Meme Clark Butler] and father [Theodore Butler] decided to put me in another school was because I--Barbara Patrick and I--Barbara Patrick was a classmate of mine. And she lived up 555 Edgecombe [Avenue, New York, New York]. Her father was Thomas Patrick who was a pediatrician. And we were always the top of the list in all the subject areas. And my mother said that she didn't think I was getting challenged enough, so she asked one of her customers about alternative schools. And also one of those customers was a counselor at the Y[MCA, Young Mens Christian Association]. They were also people who were majoring in psychology that would often come up and give me tests. So--for the work in that class work. And so my mother got the names of all these schools and had me tested at all these schools and placed me at the Ethical Culture [Fieldston] School [New York, New York] in--on Central Park West. And when I went there, Mildred Johnson's brother was in the class above me and I new him from the Modern School [New York, New York]. And Barbara Patrick and her sister also were taken out of Mildred's and were--Barbara was in the class below me. So I knew some people in that new environment. But it was a totally different place because I was the only black person in my class. So here I am going from an all-black school into a predominantly white school. And I had no idea how this--how that was gonna work out.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Do you remember how you felt at that moment?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh yes.
Speaker 2: As a--how'd you feel?
Speaker 1: I do. I remember feeling--my mother took me down there. And sometimes Barbara's mother would take both of us down to school. We just--it was like a subway ride from 155th Street down to 59th Street. So you'd go and change for the express and be down there in fifteen minutes. It was not a big--a major trip. But it was a big trip in terms of the culture and the race issues. And I remember that the first day when I came into the classroom I sat down in my seat. The girl behind me said to the person who was sitting next to her, "There's a colored girl." And then I said, "My goodness." (laughing). Now what does this mean? What--how is this experience gonna affect me in my social life and everything? It--at that time it was the fourth grade.  It wasn't an issue. And I was indeed invited to people's houses for parties and socialize. As a matter of fact, this weekend (laughing) when I was in--when I was in New York, one of my friends from the fifth grade came up to visit me at 409 [Edgecombe Avenue, New York, New York]. and we were just--you know, she's looking out the kitchen window. And said, "Oh my goodness. I remember when the Polo Grounds [New York, New York] used to be there." So I made friends in that environment that are friends to this day. I went back to my fiftieth high school reunion last year, and some of those people are really very, very close friends. And also some of my friends from--from my days at Mildred's. I have maintained friendships with them. So, you know, it was the thing that I remember very distinctly was going to somebody's house on Central Park West by myself. 'Cause we rode the subways on our own. By the time I was fifth grade I was going to school by myself. And coming into the lobby and say that I was going to somebody's house. And they told me to use the service elevator. And now it may have helped that I lived in a building where I had an elevator. And I didn't use the service elevator. Said, "This does not make sense." I refused to do it at eleven, twelve years old. I said, "No. Please announce me. I'm not going on the service elevator." So they called upstairs. And apparently whatever exchange there was, the issue was nullified and I rode on the passenger elevator. And so I never told my parents about it. I just felt that was my thing. It was also the idea that if you were accepted into a school--a private school like this that you were very privileged. And that you represented--you were a pioneer for your race. So there was also that expectation. That some how or other--certainly my idea that I should be able to cope with whatever things that happened in that setting. And I also still socialize with people from school from Mildred's who also went to private schools. And my aunt lived in the Dunbar. And I'd go down there and visit. And would play with these friends of mine. But we never talked about what we were experiencing in these new environments. That was just not discussed.
Story_ID: 9362
Speaker 1: You went through high school at the Ethical Culture [Fieldston] School [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Right through high school?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student. I was not--you know, I was not the top of my class by any means. But I was a good student. I loved to read and I enjoyed school. I loved school.
Speaker 1: Can you briefly describe the nature of the curriculum and the program at Ethical Culture once you moved into the middle school and high school grades? What was the program like?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I need to say that it was a school that was founded on--by the Ethical Culture Society, which is a religion--a humanistic religion where the person is considered to be valuable. And there was not an emphasis on competition nor on grades. So we didn't get graded-letter grades. We got paragraphs (laughing) about good, excellent and so forth and then a description of how you were doing in each subject. We did compete with other schools in terms of sports in high school. But it wasn't about winning. It was about the whole idea of sportsmanship and learning. So I think that was--I think that's really a very important thing to mention. In addition to that, I also went to the Ethical Culture Sunday school and I went to the Ethical Culture camp. And that's the place where my husband [Hubie Jones] and I met. And this philosophy permeated all of the activities that were done by the Ethical Culture Society. So that's important to say. Now it also meant that if you're thinking about people treating people well, and that basically human beings are good, then it kind of counteracts the experience that black people have (laughing) where you're running into people who don't treat you right. There was an attempt essentially to kind of overlook that, to minimize that. And just to say that those were people who were different, but did not necessarily reflect a society and the whole racism in society. So those of us who were in these kinds of environments were not necessarily--we were in a way not getting the true story. All right. I read Langston Hughes. I had some exposure to the writings and too, of course, seeing black people in doing--in a variety of different ways. So that--that would counteract some of the more negative things that might occur. But essentially it was a pretty good experience until the time of adolescence, where people were then dating only--for example, it was a predominantly Jewish school. The Horace Mann School [Riverdale, Bronx, New York] which was located right down the hill near Van Cortlandt Park [Bronx, New York] was a Christian school. Most of the students--boys they were Christian. But there was not--even though people were traveling on the train, going downtown, there were--people sat in different cars, and there wasn't that kind of relationship. At the time of dating things really, really changed appreciably.
Story_ID: 9363
Speaker 1: What dreams and aspirations did you have at this point in your life? You're in high school now [at the Ethical Culture Fieldston School, New York, New York]. What were you thinking about in terms of your future?
Speaker 2: Oh well I had--by the fourth grade I had made up my mind what I was gonna do (laughing) and be. I was gonna be a social worker. And I--that came from--I--just living in this building [409 Edgecombe Avenue, New York, New York] and coming into the hall and then seeing the disparity.  When I--I rode on the number two bus which went down 7th Avenue. And then went down Central--5th Avenue. And I remember riding on that bus. Like one of the people--the neighbors in the house used to take me on the double deckers and sit up on the top and have this wonderful ride all the way down to Washington Square [Park, New York, New York] and come back on the bus. And one of the things I noticed was that you went through Harlem [New York], on the lower part of Harlem people--housing wasn't good. I mean it was just not--not good. And then you went--when the bus turned at 110th Street and then turned on to 5th Avenue, then that whole area was white. And white people were getting on the bus and black people were getting off the bus to work in these houses. Okay. So I remember that. And I think that my idea was that when I got older, I was gonna make a difference in terms of the economic (laughing) condition that black people experienced. And the best way for me to do that was to be a social worker. So I had decided I was gonna go to the New York School of Social Work [now Columbia University School of Social Work, New York, New York]. I had the whole thing all planned out. And I even wrote something in the fourth grade there--I guess it was fourth form--they asked us to write something about what we wanted to be. And I still have this thing about how I was gonna be a social worker, okay. So I went to college with that in mind. And I chose to go to Mount Holyoke College [South Hadley, Massachusetts]. And I made a very calculated decision about where I would go to a all-women's college. And that was because I felt I would have at that time, the men's colleges--there were men's colleges and then there were women's colleges. And most universities were co-ed. But I wanted a smaller environment. I didn't want to go to a university. So I--this was a decision made with the guidance counselor at the high school, at Fieldston. And I said, yu know. I guess what I'd also heard is that Mount Holyoke admissions person would communicate with the colleges--high schools, the better high schools and say that they would, "Do you have any students that you would want to come to Mount Holyoke?" So there were like one or two black students in each class out of 400 students. But I was--I had been used to being in that situation before, so. But I chose to go to an all-women's college because since there were all-women's colleges and all-men's colleges and co-ed institutions, usually people dated with people in that environment--that my social life would be better if I went to an all-women's college 'cause then you had all these all-men's colleges around and there would be many more opportunities for dating. So that was--that was the reason I chose to go to Mount Holyoke. And it was--that was an interesting experience. 'Cause it was a predominantly WASP [white Anglo-Saxon Protestant] environment. And that was very different from a Jewish environment. Much more conservative. I was coming in contact with people who were Republicans (laughing). I didn't-hadn't had that experience before. And so that was--that was it.
Story_ID: 9364
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you were with the Ethical Culture [Fieldston] School [New York, New York] camp. And you were there as a camper or--?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm. I started there when I was ten years old. And the camp was located in Cooperstown, New York, where the [National] Baseball Hall of Fame is, near a seven-mile lake [Otsego Lake]. And it was an absolutely gorgeous, gorgeous city. And I went there when I was ten. And I went there from the time I was ten until I was fifteen. And that was where I really learned to swim and how to play tennis and do baseball and do all these things that I love to do. And then when I was fifteen, my last year as a senior camper Hubie Jones was working as a dishwasher. And the way he got that job was because one of his mother's friends worked at the [Ethical Culture] Fieldston Lower School [New York, New York]. And the director of the camp was the music teacher of Fieldston. And he asked if she knew of somebody who could do this job because somebody had wormed out at the last minute. And she asked Miss Jones. And she said that her son wasn't doing anything that summer and that he might be a candidate. So that's how Hubie got there. And I was there as a senior camper. So I knew who he was. But that was about it. I was fifteen and he was seventeen. And then they had reunions every winter at the Ethical Society. And so I would see him at reunions. But I went on to other places. I went to University Settlement [New York, New York] and to [Camp Madison] Felicia [Putnam Valley, New York] and to a camp that Reverend Robinson ran as a counselor.  And then in 1955 I came back as a counselor. And Hubie had continued to go from '51 [1951] until '55 [1955], being a counselor and moving up in that that way. And then in 1955 we started going out together. And that was the end of my sophomore--so junior--my junior and senior year we dated. Hubie was at Boston University School of Social Work [Boston, Massachusetts] starting that-in 1955. And so we commuted between Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] and Boston.
Speaker 1: So you met at the camp when you were already matriculating at Mount Holyoke?
Speaker 2: No, I met at the camp when I was fifteen years old.
Speaker 1: No, no. But I'm saying when you finally started dating.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In college--when he was in college.
Speaker 2: The year we started dating I was in college and he was in graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 9365
Speaker 1: Tell me about your Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts] experience. What were the four years like for you there?
Speaker 2: Okay. Well that was--that was a very different experience from--first of all it was an all-female environment, and I had never been in an all female environment.  And that had its positive parts to it just in terms of community because there weren't distractions, you know, all the time--in terms of class and school and so forth. And also it gave women the opportunity to take positions of responsibility which doesn't necessarily always happen in co-ed environments. So that was--that was the good part of it. I went there with a friend of mine from--that was a camp counselor--we were counselors at camp together. And we decided that we would go. If we got into Mount Holyoke we would room together. And so I started out with a roommate. And that was good. Somebody that I knew. And there were a number of people from my class that went to Mount Holyoke. And so I had a support system, both of people above me and people in my class who were from-who were from [Ethical Culture] Fieldston [School, New York, New York]. So that was helpful. It was a very different place. I think that they had some problems really not knowing what to do with African Americans. Because they--I think in some ways they thought of us as fine students. That was not a category in which we could fit. And I also went to that school under very, very interesting circumstances. My father [Theodore Butler] died when I was fifteen.  And the summer I was at--my last summer at Ethical [Culture] Camp [Cooperstown, New York]. And we had no money. But my mother [Meme Clark Butler] had this idea as I said before that education was important and that the best education was what I should have. And, therefore, she had no question that I should go away to school and have the experience of living on campus and having all of that. There were options. I could have gone to Hunter [College of the City University of New York, New York]. I could have gone to any school in the city. So that was--that was her idea. And at Mount Holyoke I had applied for a scholarship, but they didn't give me any scholarship. So how was I gonna go to the school (laughing) without any money. So this gives you an idea of what my mother was about. So she said, "Oh I'll think about it." And the next day she said, "Oh I'll just cash in my life insurance, the money's it's for you. So you might as well use it. And then something will happen--will carry you through this year. And something will happen later on down the line." Well before I went to school, we were visited by members of the Mount Holyoke Club of New York. And my sense in retrospect is that the people came to check out this person to figure out whether they really needed financial aid. And when they came to 409 [Edgecombe Avenue, New York, New York], I'm sure they did not expect to find me living in this kind of environment. It didn't fit into the criteria that they had in mind for a black kid in Harlem. So that may have had an effect on the decision not to give me financial aid. But I really had (laughing)--I had no money whatsoever. So that was a strain. But, you know, somebody gave me $100. I came--gave me money to come home from college. And I got a $250 scholarship from somebody collecting from the Ethical Cultural Society. So that helped. So there were some financial strains there. But in terms of preparation, I had Fieldston well prepared me for college. And so the academic thing was a challenge. Then the next year there were two black students in the freshman class. And also--there was one black in each class above me. And so I got to know some of those people. But it was--we were pretty isolated. Pretty isolated. But I did--I also got a chance, you know, to date guys from Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts] Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and all the schools in the area. So that was--that worked out.
Story_ID: 9366
Speaker 1: What goals and aspirations did you have at that point--midway through college [at Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts]? What were you thinking about in terms of your future?
Speaker 2: Oh definitely social work.
Speaker 1: Still social work.
Speaker 2: Definitely. I had--that was totally--I was totally committed to that. My plan was that after I finished Mount Holyoke, that I would go to Columbia University School of Social Work [New York, New York]. And that was my--that was my intent.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in what year?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 1957.
Speaker 1: And the degree was in?
Speaker 2: In sociology and economics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had taken no education courses. And that's part--I knew I wasn't gonna be a teacher. I knew that. I was gonna be a social worker. And I even turned down a scholarship from one of the sororities that my mother's friend--my godmother was in to--if I was gonna be a teacher. But they weren't giving me money.  And I said, "I'm not gonna be a teacher." (laughing) So that was thrown out the window. But what happened was that by the time I was--I'd finished-Hubie [Jones] and I worked camp together and we became engaged in 1957 when I finished school. And he was going to look at jobs. There was also a war going on. It was the Korean War. And he had to register. And so to be sent to Korea or to do some other kind of service. So that things were not quite clear about what would happen. So we decided we would get married in December of 1957, and so I just kind of put on hold what, you know, going on to graduate school. To see wherever we were gonna end up being. Whether he was gonna work or go into the service or whatever. So that was that.
Speaker 1: So then where were you at that point? You were married. Where did you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We came to--well he was--we got a job at Boston Children Services. So we came to Boston [Massachusetts]. He started working in October, and we married in December. And so we came to Cambridge [Massachusetts]. And we lived with a family on Dana Street that--his father ran on a railroad and he went to Boston. And he--this was a man he knew from the railroad and he had this house and so he would stay there when he was in Boston. And Hubie rented a room from them as he--as a graduate student. He'd always taken all these black people when Harvard wouldn't let them stay there. So he had a whole host of people that she had, you know, made them--this was this home essentially while we were away at school. And so that's where we lived for the first couple of years until we moved to Newton [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 9367
Speaker 1: Now what did you do those first couple of years?
Speaker 2: Okay (laughing). I did--When I came to Boston [Massachusetts] and I was looking for a job. And I went to the Urban League to find a job. And then the person who was running the group work program at Boston Children Services mentioned that the Boston school was looking for teachers. So I said, "Well apply for a job." And I said, I never took any education courses. But I had been a counselor and I knew how to play the piano. So they--they were desperate. They were taking (laughing) anybody who was breathing. And so I started as a substitute teacher. And I taught in all of the schools around. I had my little book and I was a substitute. And I went around to all these schools. And I had no idea that there was discrimination against black teachers in the Boston schools. I had no idea about that, 'cause I was in a little cocoon. And I had an opportunity to teach all over Boston, but not in Roxbury [Massachusetts]. Not where the blacks were. Never in any of the black schools. And then finally they assigned me to East Boston at the end of my first--in May of that year. I went to East Boston. And the woman who was in charge of this kindergarten was senile. But they would not move her out of the classroom. She had--she would come to school, I believe, on Saturday and Sunday, 'cause she did not know what she was doing. The principal was trying to get her out, but they wouldn't move her. I took her class and had her sit in the corner. And I took the class and I taught it. And I was very fortunate. 'Cause right across the street there was another school. And there was somebody there. Also a young person who just finished college, who knew how to teach. She majored in education. So we both had a kindergarten class. We both lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. We went back and forth together and she taught me how to teach (laughing). We planned curriculum together. We brought a bought a rabbit together that we shared with each other. And I had a wonderful, wonderful experience. And then they re-assigned me to that school the following year.
Speaker 1: What school was that?
Speaker 2: That was the Theodore Lyman School. It's now a housing thing in East Boston. So that was my experience in Boston Public Schools. And I stayed there until I started my own family. So I taught in Boston for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: About two years.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 9368
Speaker 1: When did you move to Newton [Massachusetts] from Cambridge [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: In 1961 when I was expecting my second child. When Lauren was--I was pregnant with Lauren. We moved to Talbott Street in West Newton. And that was an experience because the people on the street decided that they didn't want us to move on to the street. And they petitioned the church. They had a meeting at the church--at the local parish church. And with the support of the priest, they had a petition circulated that everybody signed except one person on the street, to tell the owner that we--the owner of the house was willing to sell to us, that he shouldn't sell. And he got telephone threats, death threats. But he was committed to make the sale. And so that's how we bought the house, and it was a small modified cape house.  And we lived there until I was pregnant with our fifth--sixth child. I was pregnant with Hamilton. And then we moved--we got this house and that was no problem. At that time that was thirty--thirty-five years ago. We had no trouble in buying this house.
Story_ID: 9369
Speaker 1: This might be a good time for you to give us the names of you eight children.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when they were born. And maybe--no. We'll talk about where they are and what they're doing a little later.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: But you said the first was born while you were living in Cambridge [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So start with Karen and just move--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay. Karen was born in 1959 at Cambridge City Hospital. Then our next daughter Lauren was born in 1961 also at Cambridge. But by the time we moved--we had moved to Newton [Massachusetts]. Because we definitely needed to have space of our own. And then Harlan was born in 1963, Renee 1965, Lisa 1967, Hamilton 1969, Cheryl 1971, and Tanya 1974. and all of the--the rest of the children were born in Newton after the first baby.
Story_ID: 9370
Speaker 1: You're in Newton [Massachusetts]. You're having your children. Your family is growing. What did you do professionally when you came here?
Speaker 2: (laughing) I started my own kindergarten. So for the first year that we were living here I was involved in some civil activities. I was involved in Newton Fair Housing Education Committee, the Newton Fair Housing Equal Rights Committee. And very concerned about the lack of representation in the curriculum about African Americans and in the history, in the courses that were being given in the schools--in the high schools. I was going through books. And I was finding totally missed--I mean just things--outright distortions. So I worked on the Education Committee and with the superintendent of schools at that time, Chuck Brown, to make the school system aware of these discrepancies and misrepresentations in the school. And then the other thing is that because I was--I had children, I was looking at books for children. And this was the beginning of integrated text. This was the beginning of books that were written with black heroes. And so I was beginning to do bibliographies for the school system. With putting together lists of books that would be appropriate for different grade levels. So that what I was--that was what I was doing. And then I think I was involved with--oh I remember there were stay-outs. And I was involved in organizing people in the suburbs to come into Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: There were stay-outs where?
Speaker 2: Stay-outs in Boston. Stay-outs because of the lack of--the quality of education of the Boston public schools. The black community was trying to make demands upon the school committee to make changes. The school committee was resistant to that. And so in protests, there were stay-outs when the kids would go to churches and other community places and learn African American history for a day. All right. So the first stay-out that happened was pretty self-contained. And then the leadership decided that it would be fine for kids to come from the suburbs to also participate in the stay-out and teachers for the suburbs to come in. So I was helpful in organizing the suburban community involvement with the school stay-outs. Got involved in a lot of these different activities. And then I decided I needed to go-after Harlan was born, I decided I wanted to take a course. I didn't know--I mean I was learning this material on my own. So I took an extension course at Boston--at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts], taught by Adelaide Cromwell. And that's how I met Adelaide. And Vivian Johnson and I met in that class. Okay. And I did that class. And Vivian says (laughing) that one week I wasn't there. And then the next week when I came back, she said, "Were you sick?" I said, "Oh no. I had a baby." And that was when (laughing) Renee was born. And so I took that course.
Speaker 1: What was the course?
Speaker 2: The Negro in American Society. And that was a wonderful, wonderful course. So that gave me a background. And before I took that course, I took a course with George Goethals in Harvard Extension, which was the--in psychology. A course in psychology, a whole survey course which was excellent. So I did that. And then after that, I took a master's degree at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] in urban education. And three months after I got my degree Lisa was born. So--and then before I did that, I started a freedom school in Newton. Roxbury/Newton Freedom School with a group of parents here and in Roxbury. And we had alternate meeting places in Roxbury and Newton. And there were about a couple of hundred children in like sixth through eighth grade that were involved in this program. And volunteer teachers and so forth. And I did that for two years.
Story_ID: 9371
Speaker 1: I think it was some kind of a thing about a Kerner Commission Report about the status of the Boston [Massachusetts] Public Schools. And I talked to Chuck Brown, who was the superintendent of schools [of Newton, Massachusetts]. And I said, "You know, I've had experience in teaching in Boston. And I know that they--there is a great deal of work that needs to be done.  Why can't we take kids from Boston schools and have them educated here in Newton?" And--because there had been this model at Prince Edward County. When the schools in Prince Edward County, Virginia closed down, parents were willing to send their children to North to be educated. And it was the American Friends Service Committee. And there were--Sam Turner and Eloise Holton had organized that in Newton. And so there were about three kids from Prince Edward County, Virginia that came to Newton to go to school. And they lived with the families. And none one them finished through Newton High school. So I said, "this is a model. Why can't we do that here on a larger scale for Boston kids?" But there was no legislation at that time, to make it possible to educate a child from another community without having that child--student pay tuition. So that was the discussion. And the next thing I know I'm hearing about this METCO program that might happen.
Speaker 2: Now what did METCO stand for?
Speaker 1: Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity. And this came again out of this frustration because the Boston schools weren't doing anything to improve their schools. And suburban people were saying, "Well why can't we do something?" And 'cause our kids are isolated out here as well. So I called--ow this was beginning to talk--there was talk about this. And I called Ruth Babson (ph.). And I said, "Well I have kids here in the schools and the schools in (laughing) Newton need some help." Because I found Little Black Sambo on one film. My daughter had been told she was gonna be a maid in the play and she was sent home to get an apron. And I said, "Well, we really need to think about what has to happen for these schools in the suburbs to take and educate--effectively educate our children." So she said, "Okay Kathy. Well why don't you join the board?" And that's how I became involved in METCO. So I was involved in planning the program and writing the guidelines for the program. And making decisions about which schools should be part of it. I was on the executive committee. And then when the--when it really did finally get approved, and the finances came through, it was approved by the--as an educational program--innovative educational program under Title 3, of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. And it was going to happen. Then they asked me if I would take responsibility for developing it in Newton. And I did that for two years on a volunteer basis.  And then I was hired by the school department and worked all together eight--ten years.
Speaker 2: So this movement of black students from Boston to Newton and to other suburban communities started when?
Speaker 1: In 1966.
Speaker 2: How many children came to Newton that first year?
Speaker 1: Fifty children came to Newton and 220 children went to the other six suburban school systems that participated in the program initially.
Speaker 2: Now what were those other systems?
Speaker 1: Okay. there was Lexington [Massachusetts], Wellesley [Massachusetts], Brookline [Massachusetts], Newton, I believe Weston [Massachusetts], Braintree [Massachusetts] and that's--there's only one missing that I can't recall. But that's most of them.
Story_ID: 9372
Speaker 1: You were the organizer and then coordinator of the METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunities] program in Newton, Massachusetts. And tell me how that program evolved--continued to evolve and grow? What happened over the years?
Speaker 2: Well I think the--I think the first thing is to start with how it actually got off its feet. Because that that time there was a tremendous amount of energy going in the Civil Rights Movement. And I think it was sparked by what was going on in the South. And there was a lot of good will about trying--we were making a difference, a significant difference in the lives of young people. To make sure that the curriculum and the people that were teaching children were sensitive to what the differences were. And that we really--I felt very much needed to have a support staff of people of color--African Americans who could work with the school system and help them in answering questions, and also providing teacher training. Because--so that's what I did. I mean we brought Al[vin] Poussaint here to talk to the teachers. We did films and had discussion groups. So it was--a built-in part of the program would be that there would be in-service training for staff as well a as person to work on the issues of curriculum development. And so Vivian Johnson was hired by the school department to do that piece of work. So--and then it was also important to think about programs. Not just the academic thing, but also what other opportunities were there for children to come together outside of the necessary---you know, the school setting? To make sure that they could stay for after school programs. To make sure that they had connections in the community that were more than with school. So that the host family was very important, especially in the beginning of the program, when children were going home for lunch. That the family that they went to was willing not only to--the parent to be there for the lunch. But that the family was willing to make this a reciprocal relationship. That the METCO student should not feel as though it was a one way thing. That those families should be willing to have their children go into the community. And also that the teachers had an opportunity to know about something about the community. So that we used [Roxbury/Newton] Freedom House as a place where the teachers came for programs. And had an opportunity to meet with parents and so forth and so on. What I found out in doing this was that even new children didn't have an opportunity to come to the school before the first day of school. So when METCO started, I made sure that the parents and the children with the teachers were having their in-service training before school started. So the day before school, the children and their parents came to the school. See the school, meet the principal, see the teacher, meet the host parent, go to the host parent's home. So that you provided some kind of foundation for what this experience was like. And then I had hired two volunteer people to be tutors, to be social workers and to provide that kind of support and psychologists to provide that kind of support in the school for the METCO students in addition to the regular people that they had to work with. And that then became the model that was used throughout the METCO program in other participating schools. Then we saw the program expand. So that each year we started with 220 children. And now there are 3000 children going to school. And now we see the children--Newton each year has a program for the graduate students--the graduating METCO students at the Myrtle Baptist Church [Newton, Massachusetts], and both students and parents come to that. And there's a dinner and a program and the kids get scholarship money that comes from the community. And I understand a number of communities do that for their graduating students so that they have some financial basis. They go on to--to go on to college. So we're seeing not only the program expanded, but we're also seeing another generation of METCO students coming through. So I've seen--gone to this METCO celebration each year. And there is somebody whose parents graduated from the METCO program. And that parent is now there for their child to see their child graduate. So it's too bad--I'm not saying that it's great. I think it's too bad that things haven't changed enough so that there isn't a demand for this program. Because we certainly thought we'd just last for a few years. And then the Boston schools would get its act together. And then the program would end.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. So here we are thirty-eight years. How many black students from Boston are currently now enrolled in Newton schools?
Speaker 2: There are 200 children in Newton.
Speaker 1: 200 now.
Speaker 2: Mh-hm.
Story_ID: 9373
Speaker 1: How long did you coordinate the [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunities, METCO] program in Newton [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: For a decade. I started in 1966. and then in 1976 I decided to leave the program. I had a staff of ten people at that time. And what was happening in Newton and what was happening, I guess, throughout education--because all of these things that were happening here were reflective of things that were going on in a national scale. There was a move toward conservatism in education, wanting to go back to the basics to forget about open classrooms and also to question the whole issue of children coming to Newton schools from Boston [Massachusetts]. And as a--what I was experiencing was a lot of questions with--the Newton school committee had changed, and became very conservative. And I was getting a lot of questions each month about--for a report from the school committee about what I considered to be irrelevant questions around METCO. And I said--and then the state monies for the program--by that time it had become a state funded program--were held up during the winter--during the summer. So there was a lot of uncertainty about whether the program would go on. And if so, where there would be cutbacks made in staffing and so forth. And the decision was made by the superintendent that we would have to cut back on staff. I knew that I couldn't run the program effectively with these cutbacks. And so I decided that I would leave the program. And at the time I decided that I would also run for the school committee. That I thought that would be a viable place where I could affect policy more effectively. And so then I also thought I'd do--I'd run for school committee. I had went to teas all over the city to talk about what I would do as a school committee person. I was the first African American to run for school committee in the city of Newton. And then I also applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to pursue my doctoral studies and also to apply for a job in Cambridge [Massachusetts] schools as the elementary staff program supervisor.
Story_ID: 9374
Speaker 1: What was that campaign like running for [Newton, Massachusetts] school committee?  Did you have competition? Did you have-?
Speaker 2: Well there was an incumbent from my ward who had been on the school committee for several terms. The school committee is a two year term. It was at that time there was no remuneration for the position. And you could run for four consecutive terms, and then you had to step off. The time that I ran there was this incumbent and there were three other white males that decided to run. And the fact that I was the METCO [Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity] coordinator for the city of Newton gave me--had given me exposure throughout the city. Whether, you know. So--and with the teachers, of course.  People knew me because I worked in the school system. And so that was an advantage. And there was also a slate of people that were put together by a group called Concerned. A slate of liberal candidates. And the conservative members of the committee had their organization called Voice. And so they ran a slate of candidates. So you had this, I think, probably it was the first time in the history of Newton that there were slates. And I was on the slate for the liberal group. And I was able to get a narrow victory over the incumbent. And I think it was like a few hundred votes. Most of the other members of this-of the committee were elected with very substantial victory. It was-It was a hard campaign. I worked very hard to win. My husband [Hubie] Jones was my campaign manager. As I said, we had coffees all over the city to present my platform.  I had experience as an educator and as a parent of kids in the school system. So I had a lot of good perspectives to bring to the decision making position.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Do you recall historically whether there had been any other blacks elected to school committees in Massachusetts before you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. There were--wasn't there a school committee person in Sharon [Massachusetts] at one time?  Yes, I'm sure there were others. But this--I was the first person in Newton--first black person.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) In Newton. What do--looking back retrospectively, what do you consider to have been your major/contribution accomplishment as a Newton school committee member?  What are you proud of?
Speaker 2: A number of things. One was that it--I was an eye for protecting the METCO program. So I would keep close tabs on what was going on in METCO. And then would bring issues to the committee around that. The second thing that I did was (laughing) I was very important in getting computers into the Newton schools. And getting it--'cause this was the beginning of computer education. And to put money in the budget so that there was somebody to coordinate that so it wouldn't be making a mistake about what we did and how we approached computer issues. The third issue is around hiring people of color in the school system. And we were able to get a policy that 10 percent of the people at all levels administration, as well as teaching would be African American and reflective of the population. That was a very important move. In addition to that, the establishment and retention of a person of color in curriculum for the school system. Those were the things that I considered to be the most important things. And I also always supported the retention of the Tuesday and Thursday afternoon for in-service training for teachers. And--so that we had short days on Tuesday and Thursdays. 'Cause I felt that that was very important in the small classes. Making sure that the classes weren't above twenty-five.
Story_ID: 9375
Speaker 1: Now at the same time, you decided to go to the Harvard [University] Graduate School of Education [Cambridge, Massachusetts] while you were on the school committee.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about what you did at Harvard and what you ended up with?
Speaker 2: Well what I did I think was put all three of these things together in a very (laughing) unique way. One thing I didn't do was anything outside of my (laughing) work. Both grad--I didn't socialize. I didn't go to movies (laughing). I didn't go to plays. I didn't see anything (laughing). I just did these three things. But I made a decision to take a number of courses. They were independent study courses. And so I used my work in the Cambridge school system for writing about what was going on there that was part of my independent study. I did my doctoral dissertation on how school committees make decisions about school consolidation. So that was another way of merging these two responsibilities and making them make sense for me. And so that one day a week--on Monday, for example, the school committee met in Newton [Massachusetts]. And I was sitting on that table as a representative from Ward 2. And then on one other day Wednesday night the school committee met in Cambridge and I was sitting on the side as an administrator in the school system in Cambridge. Very, very different communities. Very different ways of running schools. And so I learned a great deal from that experience. But I managed to do all three things and graduated in three years, which is normal time that one graduates. And do my--meet my responsibilities. I never cross the lines. I never did any work that was related to Newton when I was in my job. And I enjoyed--what I enjoyed most was that I was relating my educational experience at Harvard with my work experience. So that it wasn't just a, you know, a theoretical esoteric experience. It was--it had meat to it. And I had, you know, I had great teachers. I worked with Ken Haskins (ph.).
Speaker 1: So your position in the Cambridge schools as--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Elementary--supervisor of elementary staff and program.
Speaker 1: At the same time you were on the school committee and at Harvard.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All three. Okay. I wanna be clear on that, okay. All right. You finish your doctoral work at Harvard. How long were you on the school committee?
Speaker 2: Eight years.
Speaker 1: Eight years.
Speaker 2: Yes. I--for as many terms as I was--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The full.
Speaker 2: Qualified to serve.
Story_ID: 9376
Speaker 1: So you accomplished that. You got your Ed.D [Harvard University Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. What were you involved in after all that?
Speaker 2: Well after that, I stayed in Cambridge for another year. So I got my degree in '80 [1980] from Harvard. And I stayed in Cambridge until 1981. And then I decided to do consulting work. And so I had an opportunity to do wonderful work with the Family Service Association in Boston [Massachusetts]. I did volunteer work on the Board of Family Service. I worked with Barbara Harrell at Roxbury Children's Services and did a training program for daycare providers--family daycare providers, which entitled them to get course credits at Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts]. And that was--that was wonderful, wonderful work. I did a lot--I did work for Milton Academy [Milton, Massachusetts] in recruiting minority staff and students and did a lot of work in other independent schools. I was on the Minority Affairs Committee of the National Association of Independent Schools, planning programs for the national conferences, planning and working through an assessment tool that would be used by independent schools to ascertain whether the children of color were having a decent experience in the schools. So that's--that's where--and then I was on the--I was also elected as alumni trustee at Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], the second alumni trustee of color in the history of the college. The college started--it was the first women's institution--women's higher education institution. And finally in 1973 I was elected as the second black trustee.  And that was another way of looking at education from a perspective as an alumni of college and working at a university level.  And then also in--in between that, I--also after I finished my master's at Simmons [College, Boston, Massachusetts], I taught at Simmons for a couple of years in the same program--in the urban education graduate program in urban education.  I taught at Wheelock [College, Boston, Massachusetts] in the same graduate program.  And so I had some experience at college level.  And then later on I went back to teaching at Boston University at Simmons with--this time with the thrust on African American history, and women of the 19th century, African American women, and survey courses and African American history.  So it's always been education.  But it's been different dimensions of education that I've been involved in.
Story_ID: 9377
Speaker 1: We must not lose sight of the fact that through all of this, you were raising eight children.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you do it?
Speaker 2: (laughing) Well I'll tell you.  The way that I did it was well first Hubie [Jones] was very helpful in terms of doing some child care when the children were little.  And then when Hubie ran for [U.S.] Congress in 1972, I was very fortunate to have someone come to help me with the children. And Mrs. Richards stayed with us eighteen years.  And that was the only way that I could have done (laughing) any of the things that I did was to have somebody here to be running the household and taking care of the major responsibilities. So that I could devote my time--get up in the morning at 4:00 and study.  And then go to classes, go to work, go to whatever I was going to do.  And then come home and find things functioning.
Speaker 1: Who is Mrs. Richards?
Speaker 2: Oh (laughing) Mrs. Richards was a woman from Costa Rica who lived in Boston and she was my housekeeper.  And she is still a part of our family, and she comes and celebrates holidays with us, and made the dresses for my children when they got married, and has been just a very integral part of our family.
Speaker 1: What did your children think about all these things that you were involved in?  How did they react to your--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, you know, I think going to school was good for them because they saw me as a student.  They saw me studying (laughing). They saw me doing all these things that I had to do.  My children were an inspiration for me to run for [Newton, Massachusetts] school committee.  Because when I ran for school committee, my children had been elected as student representatives to the school committee.  Both Karen and Lauren.  They decided that it was time for--to let students have some say in terms of what was going on with their education.  And so they would come here with other members of their--of their little group of high school students.  I think there were probably four of them--two from each of the high schools, and plan their agenda and stuff.  And so it was fascinating to see them, you know, making plans and working around issues.  As a matter of fact, Lauren brought the issue of Title IX because the boys were getting better experiences in practicing for the teams than the girls and so forth.  So it was--I think it was mutually good for the children to see me actively involved in community.  My children have been actively involved in community and have been working in-for the most part in non-profit issue--careers around  African Americans, either as educators of--a lot of them that started out in other careers have ended up in education.  Lauren is a psychologist.  She's working in the Washington [D.C.] schools as a psychologist.  Cheryl has been in education ever since she finished.  She's now working on a doctorate in education.  Renee is a lawyer. Practiced law in Boston [Massachusetts] for eight years and is now is teaching law at Boston College Law School [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] (laughing) .  So it's fascinating to see them going in different directions, but coming back into education, in one form or another.
Story_ID: 9378
Speaker 1: We spent a lot of time in the early part of your interview having you describe the family history research that you've been doing in the writing.  But you had a special opportunity in New York City at some point to get you start on your family research.  Tell us about that opportunity.  What did--what did you achieve?  What were you given to do the work?
Speaker 2: Well it's interesting to think about it in the time that I began doing this because I kept the apartment that I was brought home from the hospital to.  And as a matter of fact, I bought that apartment when it became available.  And so at one of my visits to New York, around the time that my mother [Meme Clark Butler] was failing, I explored a bookcase in the foyer of our apartment.  And on the bottom shelf in that bookcase were a bunch of papers, photographs, newspapers, letters, greeting cards.  And among that group of things were this envelope.  And in that envelope was the wedding certificate of my great-grandparents.  And that started me on the search.  Because then I had the date, the place, the person who married them all in one piece of paper. So--and when I went to Troy, New York where they were married, I found that they had a database of black people that were in the city directory where you could find out where they lived, what their occupations were and so forth.  And then from there I was able to find both sides of the family, of my father [Theodore Butler]'s family, on the maternal side.  And that discovery and that search really helped  me to know something more about who I was, and who the people were who  had made me who I am today.  Because we're all part of the history of our ancestors.  It also--here I was in Newton [Massachusetts] trying to find a house and having been told that I wasn't essentially good enough to live on that street and my family had been here before the country was founded.  And I didn't know that.  That gives you a sense of belonging and a sense of what responsibility you have as a citizen to make sure that this country lives up to or begins to live up to what has been promised to all.  And then also being part of a family that was an immigrant family.  My mother would never call herself an immigrant.  But she was (laughing) an immigrant.  And what that immigrant status brings with this determination to succeed, and to do whatever you necessarily need to do to succeed for yourself and for the generation that comes after you.  Those are the things that I think I gained from that discovery in the bottom shelf of my father's bookcase.
Speaker 1: But you had a formal opportunity in New York through a grant.  Did you not?  To help you do the--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yes.  Oh yes!  I was very--I was fortunate.  I had a grant from the New York State. From Upstate New York from the University of---the State University of New York in Albany to do some research.  And then I was the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] scholar at the New York Public Library.  And so I used the apartment as my base when I was doing work and research and using all those wonderful materials that the Schomburg has available to scholars.  And that was a wonderful year.
Speaker 1: What year was that, that you were at the Schomburg?
Speaker 2: 19--I think it was 1991--'92 [1992].  I think it was '91, '92.
Speaker 1: And you were a scholar in residence?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Mm-hm.  Worked with Arnold Rampersad.  And that was just wonderful.
Story_ID: 9379
Speaker 1: You've illustrated in so many ways a very diverse and dynamic involvement in civil rights in so many different ways.  And I have a publication, 'The Civil Rights Movement in Newton [Massachusetts]: 1950s to 1970s', by Katherine Jones and Lillie Jefferson and Nina L. King.  Would you tell us about this little publication and what's in it?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things--this came about in relation to Newton's Celebration 2000 at the beginning of this new--new century. And there was a committee on history.  And I decided that it would be a good thing to join. And as an--to join it so that I could make sure that the representation of the black contribution to the city could be documented and included I this history. And so I worked on that.  And the work that was done was incorporated in the city material on the whole hundred years of--200 years of Newton's history.  Then the city of Newton decided that there were two things that were done--intensive work done. One was on the Newton women and the peace movement, and the other work on the Civil Rights Movement.  So the city decided to publish both of those as separate publications.  And so the entirety of the work that was done was published by the city and is available at the Newton Historical Society for sale.
Story_ID: 9380
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life?  And what has been important to you over your lifetime?
Speaker 2: Well I think being a part of the Civil Rights Movement having--coming to maturity in the '60s [1960s] was a wonderful thing to have happen.  It has its ups and its downs.  The most important thing was there were so many things that were happening to help you get a sense of who we were as a people so that there was this alertness, this clarity and direction that prevailed all aspects of our lives.  From the political to the artistic, educational. The whole gamut.  That was--and a sense of vitality.  And people of good will working together around achieving certain objectives. So that was great.  But I think what is devastating is to know in retrospect that all--most--a lot of that energy and enthusiasm and commitment has dissipated.  That we find ourselves facing the same issues that we felt we had worked through  during the '60s and the '70s [1970s], that means that the place of children in terms of schools and opportunities is disastrous, that we have our black men in prison or on drugs and not in educational settings.  The limits on people in terms of employment still--even though there are few people who have big jobs, the majority of black people are still on--in marginal situations.  So--and then, of course, on top of that, we have an administration [George W. Bush administration] and a war [Iraq War] that we should have never gotten into.  And, you know, the whole gamut of things that have happened during the past four years.  So I think we--as a country, we're in the worst place we've been in my lifetime.  I don't see an easy way out of the conditions that we're in at this point.  And I really fear for this country.
Speaker 1: What do you still wanna do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well  what I still (laughing) wanna do is I wanna get my book published. That's one thing.  I wanna get my play ['409 Edgecombe Ave.: The House on Sugar Hill'] finished and produced.  I wanna spend more time with my five grandchildren and see them develop and grow.  And I still want to work for the things that I think are important as a--as a citizen.
Speaker 1: Are there any things that you've done in the past that you look back on and think that you might have  done differently?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I often think about one of the things that I had discussed with other people.  And  that I still really feel probably would have been an important thing to do. And that was to set up a school for black children--independent school for black children or a charter school or whatever.  But I really feel that we don't have enough quality educational experiences for black children. And I--that's what I think I would have, you know, want to try to do (laughing) if I were given a chance.
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Oh well I think one of the things that I 'd like people to say about me is that I tried to build bridges among--between people of different races and religions, that I have always been interested in making sure that my children and other children were exposed to a larger world, to go beyond their own country and to live and experience all of the world, and to be able to draw from that into their own lives in meaningful ways.  I think, you know, I think that's--and that's what I've tried to do also in this model that I've tried to establish for them.
Story_ID: 9381
Speaker 1: You've talked about the concerns that you have for the African American community.  But what are your hopes for the African American people and communities?
Speaker 2: Well one of the things that I hope is that through some institutions--I don't--I really don't necessarily believe that it's gonna be the educational institutions. But I think that African Americans have to set up a means to effectively communicate their history to the next generation.  Whether it be through schools, whether it be through Sunday schools, whether it be through Saturday schools.  But I don't have much hope for this happening in the educational system--public educational system.  So I think it's our responsibility to make sure that our children know about our history and that they grow up with a sense of commitment to their people, and grow up with a sense of values that that history and their culture are important to preserve and value.  I think those are the--those are the things that I really feel very strongly about. They're extremely important for us to survive as a people.
