Story_ID: 653918
Speaker 1: All right.  So I'll begin by slating.  My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Today is June 15th, 2017.  We are in Harrisonburg, Virginia, and we are with Mr. Anthony Jackson [HistoryMaker Anthony Jackson].  Would you please say and spell your name, tell us your birthdate, and location of birth, and your occupation.
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is Anthony W. Jackson.  A-N-T-H-O-N-Y.  Middle initial is Wayne, and J-A-C-K-S-O-N.  I was born on June 20th, 1946.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: In Cincinnati, Ohio.
Speaker 1: In Cincinnati.  And your profession?
Speaker 2: I'm retired now, but I was a professor of accounting and finance.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: Well, several institutions (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.  So we'll, we'll get into that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 653919
Speaker 1: All right, so I'm gonna start with very easy questions.  We call them People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Probably blue.
Speaker 1: Food?
Speaker 2: Well, steak.
Speaker 1: Time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Warm--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --and wet (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess, guess my favorite saying is--no, no, no, no, no, no.  It's just not coming to me now.
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: It's just not coming to me now.
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Story_ID: 653920
Speaker 1: So we're--well, we wanna talk about your family, talk about your mom and your dad [Houston Jackson].  We'll start with your mother.  Could you tell me her name, when, and where she was born, and a little bit about her?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother's name is Geneva, Geneva Jackson.  She was born down south, Alabama.  And, you know, they all moved to Cincinnati [Ohio], and she has one bother and one sister.  And she's the middle child.  And my grandmother, who is a part of our whole household--you know, kind of, you know--the son, you know, the--was her favorite.  You know, so we sort of, you know, moved at his direction.
Speaker 1: And he was the eldest?
Speaker 2: No, he was the youngest.
Speaker 1: He was the baby?  Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the baby.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: You know.
Speaker 1: And so when you say you moved in his direction, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a handy man, did all kinds of things, you know.  So like I said, I was born in Cincinnati, you know.  Then he had a move to Cleveland [Ohio] overtaking, you know, so he moved to Cleveland.  So my grandmother who was living with us, decided that, you know, "I miss my son."  And so, it ended up, my mother and I would follow her, you know, so we all moved to Cleveland.  So I lived in Cleveland for a few years, and then he had the urge to go back to Cincinnati.  So we went back to Cincinnati.  Yeah.  So I, I see that is as a reason why I'm with maybe a half a dozen schools, you know, as I was coming through before I got out of high school [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Because you were moving.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Robert Lee [ph.].
Speaker 1: Robert Lee.  And so you mentioned that your mother and her family are from Alabama.  What town?
Speaker 2: I have no--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --idea.
Speaker 1: Do you know what her--the family did?  What their work was in Alabama?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And how far back can you trace your mother's family?
Speaker 2: Just beyond that.  And I can't go back that far.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.  But they moved when she was young?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To, to--
Speaker 2: Cincinnati (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Cincinnati first?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 653921
Speaker 1: And then what about your father, what's your father name?
Speaker 2: Houston.
Speaker 1: And he's Houston Jackson?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where was he from?
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: He also.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So your parents met in Alabama?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but I think so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And did he come to Cincinnati [Ohio] as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you grow up with him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  They--
Speaker 1: It--
Speaker 2: --divorced when I was young.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Was--
Speaker 2: I was a baby.
Speaker 1: --was your father in your life?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I got a chance to see him, visit him.  I used to go down to his place, you know, from time to time.  You know, he would come out, see me.  So it was a positive relationship, you know, I got pleasant thoughts about him.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  What was his work?
Speaker 2: He was a hustler, you know, he was a hustler.  So he owned a bus at one time, so he did transportation.  He owned a Cadillac for, you know, limousine purposes; and those are the two activities I recall.
Story_ID: 653922
Speaker 1: And what was your mother's work?
Speaker 2: My mother [Geneva Jackson] was a, you know, a home nurse, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Did that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh. So you were born in Cincinnati [Ohio].  Do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: No, half brothers and sisters, you know, around and about.
Speaker 1: But in your home, it was you, and your mother, and your [maternal] grandmother--
Speaker 2: Right--
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: --that was our basic.  That was the family unit--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I remember growing up with.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's work?
Speaker 2: Oh, I never knew my grandmother to work, you know, she wasn't working by the time, you know, I came along.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I didn't hear her talk about a career or any work kinds of things.
Story_ID: 653923
Speaker 1: When you think back on your childhood, what's your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, the earliest childhood memory.  Down on Richmond Street, Cincinnati [Ohio].  Playing outside, and I do remember, you know, the ice man coming down the street.  You know, those days, people still had ice boxes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and playing.  That's about all.
Speaker 1: What was your neighborhood like when--where you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a, you know, this is urban--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, town.  So a lot of, you know, street playing, you know, playing tag, playing hide and seek; those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: And was that a black neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's a black neighborhood.
Story_ID: 653924
Speaker 1: So as you recall your childhood, what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember growing up?
Speaker 2: The kitchen, you know, cooking.  Sounds--there were sirens, you know, to and fro.  Those are the basic sounds.  Horns were blowing, those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: What do you remember seeing?
Speaker 2: What do I remember seeing?  Schools.  I remember seeing playgrounds, swimming pools, baseball fields.
Story_ID: 653925
Speaker 1: You grew up--so, so Cincinnati's [Cincinnati, Ohio] in the North, but you were growing up during Jim Crow.  Do you remember, in your young years, any moments of racial conflict?
Speaker 2: Well, I do clearly remember, you know, racial separation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  There was a time that I was going to a Washburn Elementary School [Cincinnati, Ohio] and where we lived, on one side of the street, were only black people.  On the other side of the street, were only white people.
Speaker 1: Same street.
Speaker 2: Same street.  Same street.  And I remember I had a friend that lived on the other side of the street, and we would see each other as we came out of the house.  You know, wave, and we had to walk down to the corner before one of us could cross over the street, you know, to go to school, which was at the end of the street.
Speaker 1: So Washburn, your school, was integrated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh.  And, and so the neighborhood--your side of the neighborhood was black but, literally, across the street was white.  Was the--
Speaker 2: Only white.
Speaker 1: --was the rest of the neighborhood also white, on the other side?  Like, did it go deeper than that block?
Speaker 2: Well, this was a--can't remember what they called it in those days.  But they were, you know, apartments.  You know, so each side looked the same but just had different people in them.
Speaker 1: And so in school, it was fine for you to be friends with this white boy, but not at home.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Did, did ever children cross the street to be with each other?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.  Not to my knowledge (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was just understood.
Speaker 2: It was understood.  And without any--what should I say, apprehension in any way.  That's just the way life was.  That's just how you lived, you know--
Speaker 1: And so it--
Speaker 2: --they lived there, we lived here.
Speaker 1: In this integrated school, were there white and colored bathrooms?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: No.  'Cause this was like, I mean, second grade is something--
Speaker 1: So you wouldn't remember?
Speaker 2: --like that.  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  How common was it for there to be integrated schools in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: It was, I guess, it was common in some places.  In some places.  As I just think about over the years, the very first school I went to, there was no integration.  You know, it was all black.  And the situation I'm talking about where I had this friend on the other side of the street, you know, that was a mixed school.  But by the time I got to--well, third, fourth grade, I went to Frederick Douglass Elementary [Frederick Douglass Elementary School, Cincinnati, Ohio].  And I mentioned that because that was a unique situation.  That was a totally black school from the principal down to the janitor.  Every teacher.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like for you?
Speaker 2: I, I liked that experience.  That was an interesting experience.  One of my favorite teachers, Ms. Rhodes [ph.] at that time, was a classic teacher.  I mean, we would cook, you know, things in her class.  We had plays.  What else?  Choirs, things of that nature.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean, she was just really--she was a serious teacher, she was a serious teacher.
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a decent student, I was a decent student.  I, I enjoyed learning.  I think--grades were kind of a misnomer, but I got decent grades.
Story_ID: 653926
Speaker 1: When you talked about moving, because as your [maternal] uncle [Robert Lee (ph.)] had the family move back and forth, was it difficult for you acclimating to different schools with some frequency?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I just thought it was another part of life, you know.  And, oh, I gotta go to another school, I'd go to another school.  So I never really made a thing out of it.  It just happened.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And did you make friends easily?
Speaker 2: I seemed to.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I seemed to.
Speaker 1: As a young boy, what did you think that you might want to do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I really, really didn't think about that very much.  I guess I may have been in high school [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio] before I thought about what I would do, you know, as an adult or later in life.  I enjoyed the outdoors, I enjoyed sports.
Speaker 1: What sports were you involved in?
Speaker 2: When I was younger, I, you know, played baseball, ran track, and football grew on me.  So I enjoyed football.
Speaker 1: And were you on the teams as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes, by the time I got to junior high school, I played basketball and football--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and ran track.
Speaker 1: All three?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 653927
Speaker 1: And where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school--I started junior high school in Cleveland [Empire Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], and there I was on the track team.  And then we moved back to Cincinnati [Ohio], and there I played the three sports.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and in the fall, you know, I did football.  In the winter, I did basketball.  In the spring, I ran track.
Speaker 1: And was this at an integrated school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Hughes [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And then where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: In Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And what was that school?
Speaker 2: That, that, that was Hughes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it--and you said that when you were in high school you started thinking about what you might do for your future. What were you thinking about?
Speaker 2: Being a doctor, being an architect.  What else?  Those are probably my two choices--
Speaker 1: And what were the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at that time.
Speaker 1: --what were your years for high school?
Speaker 2: This is--I graduated high school in '64 [1964].
Story_ID: 653928
Speaker 1: You were growing up, you're in your adolescence at the height of the Civil Rights Movement.  There's a lot going on in the country, a lot of civil unrest, a lot of, you know, fighting for the rights of black people.  What do you remember--as you're growing up you're going to school, you're involved in sports and this is happening around you?  What do you remember from that time?
Speaker 2: Well, in fact, at the high school I went to, which was Hughes High School [Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio] and it was large school, we would go in the front door, and to the right, there was a cadre of white students.  To the left, was a cadre of black students.  And that's how you went to school, that's how you went in.  People knew each other, they would talk, but you didn't, you know, spend time in those areas.  Yeah.  But we didn't have any, you know, conflict, you know, in terms of, you know, the order of the day, you know.  We all played on the same football team, we all played on the same basketball team, you know, and that was good.
Speaker 1: Did you--do you feel like sports helped to be a unifying factor for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, clearly.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was clearly one for me.
Speaker 1: And, and as you were playing sports, did you play as equals?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Was--were your mother [Geneva Jackson] and [maternal] grandmother involved at all in the civil rights activities, during that period?
Speaker 2: Not in any formal sense.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Just informally.  We would talk about it, we watched, of course, things on TV, you know, newspapers, those kinds of things.  But, racial conflict was not a household topic.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, white people were white people, black people were black people.
Speaker 1: Did you have any sense that there might be obstacles before you because of race, 'cause you describe maybe would be a doctor or an architect.  These weren't necessarily the professions that black folks thought, oh, I can do this.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, and some people were doctors, some people were architects.  But, it wasn't the--neither of those was the common profession.  Did you feel that there were obstacles or did you feel like you could do anything you wanted?
Speaker 2: Well, I essentially thought I could do whatever I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: What I was good at, you know, what I found easy, what I found creative and inviting.  But, no, I didn't have any, any social conflicts around any of those things (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 653929
Speaker 1: Was it understood that you would go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, in fact in my mind, it was always that's what's gonna happen.  When you get out of high school, you're gonna go to college.  Now, didn't have any money to go to college, didn't have any college to go to per se.  But it felt like that would happen, and it did.
Speaker 1: So what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, in my--the summer between my sophomore and junior year, I decided to change positions.  I decided I wanted to be a quarterback.  And so when I went to camp that summer, I told the coach, "I want to be quarterback."
Speaker 1: And you would go to football camp each summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or a sports camp?
Speaker 2: Well, sports camp--
Speaker 1: Sports camp.
Speaker 2: --I mean, for high school [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], that's when you started--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --early.  And he said, "Well, go ahead and try."  And I tried it, and I made first string, you know, as quarterback.  So from that time on, football became my number one sport.  And by the time I got to be a senior, I heard from the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], and I was invited to come play there for a scholarship, you know, all of tuition paid and so forth.  So that's where the money came from.
Speaker 1: Fantastic.  And so you go on a football scholarship.  Are you still thinking you may pursue medicine or architecture?
Speaker 2: Yeah, architecture was probably still, you know, heavy on my mind.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The doctor thing was just--that was a childhood thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A--so what did you major in?
Speaker 2: Well, in fact, when I first got to college, I majored in math.  And I did that for, I think, my freshman year.  And surely there after, I got bored with the math and said, "Man, this just doesn't seem like a good thing."  Well, one of my roommates was an accounting major.  He said, "Well, why don't you do accounting?"  So I went and spoke with this accounting professor.  She was from the South, she was white--Clara Lelievre [Clara Chambers Lelievre] was her name.  And I told her my situation and I said, "Could you make me out a schedule to do this thing, you know, in four years?"   Because that was another issue, I wanted to be in and out in four years.
Speaker 1: Was your scholarship for four years?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, she called me back and said, "I've got your schedule."  And I came and looked at it, and she said, "You can do it," and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So now you become an accounting major, you got this schedule.  You're also on the football team--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --right?  For many athletes, the academic schedule and rigors of the--just the athletic schedule can pose challenges.  How did you manage that?
Speaker 2: Just carefully.  Quite carefully.  It wasn't very much of a problem, but that was, that was good.
Speaker 1: Mh-hm
Speaker 2: That was good.
Speaker 1: As you're on the football team, were, were you the quarterback there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so how did your team do?
Speaker 2: We did fair, we did fair.  We had good, good seasons, we had bad seasons, we had teams we'd always beat and teams we'd always, you know, lose to.  But we had a lot of camaraderie, we had a good, good feeling, you know, on the team.
Story_ID: 653930
Speaker 1: What were the years that you were at--you went to the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were your years there for your B.A.?
Speaker 2: From '64 [1964] to '68 [1968].  Went in the fall of '64 [1964] and graduated in the spring of '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Again, you're there--you're at--you're in undergraduate when--right after Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassinated, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Malcolm X.  I mean, there's a lot going on.  What's happening on your campus?  Is your campus involved in this political upheaval?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--
Speaker 1: Civil rights?
Speaker 2: --an interesting time. There was a lot of, you know, racial talk going on, on campus and so forth.  But oftentimes, you know, the whites and blacks, you know, had separate venues that they covered, you know.  Like in the student union, there was a card room that was for black folks, so we did that, you know, to socialize.  So when we got on campus and you wanted to see somebody, that's where you saw them, you know, in the card room.  But as I got to be a junior, senior, you know, all of these issues of social unrests became more tangible, you know.  We could see things happening and not happening, and it brought about a movement.  And that movement resulted in the United Black Association [United Black Student Association].  And I was this first president.  And we organized, you know, got a space on campus.  And there was a guy in the dean's office, you know, who was a black guy, who was the first black guy in the dean's office.  Ron Temple [Ronald J. Temple] was his name.  And all organizations had to have a advisor, and he became our advisor.  There was a, you know, young man who was a, maybe, a year or so behind me named Dwight Tillery.  And I--the reason I remember that so clearly is that-excuse (cough), excuse me.  When Martin Luther King was assassinated, that was a very, you know, significant time.  And I recall because at that time, I was getting ready to go to the next level, and I let Dwight Tillery go to the funeral with Ron Temple as opposed to myself.  You know because I thought--
Speaker 1: Because you were getting ready to go to the next level of what?
Speaker 2: Education.
Speaker 1: Ah.  Because it--what year were you at that point?  Junior?  I guess.
Speaker 2: No, I was a senior, I think.
Speaker 1: All right.  Yes, you--yeah.  You were about to go to graduate school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, and I'm pretty sure, didn't--
Speaker 1: 'Cause he died in--
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968].  That's right, you're right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you graduated in 1968.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So when--as you were getting to the point of graduating, and, and you did then go to graduate school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], how did you make that choice?  You know, that, that rather than going to work right away--and, actually, we'll ask this on the other side.
Story_ID: 653931
Speaker 1: Okay, so go ahead, tell me?
Speaker 2: Well, (cough) during those years, my undergraduate years [at University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio]--you had draft, you know, documents. You know, and you had, "How are you classified?"  Because they were, you know, pulling guys off to go to war.  Remember this--several of the kids that I went to high school with [at Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], you know, got drafted, okay.  But I had the 2-S classification, you know, which student--that you couldn't get drafted as a student.  But it was of concern.  Now, (laughter) I remember after I graduated from undergrad, they sent the documents to the--to my house. You know, said, "Hey."  And I know my mother [Geneva Jackson] called and she was all upset, you know, "You got this thing"--
Speaker 1: You mean, draft documents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That you gotta come down and get--take a physical.  You know, for, you know, going off to the war.  And I was living in Chicago [Illinois] at the time because I'd gone to graduate school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business] in Chicago.  So, I went back (cough) for this physical, you know.  And somehow, I failed a physical.  I failed a physical.
Speaker 1: The athlete failed the physical?
Speaker 2: The athlete--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --failed the physical.  But I had got injured, you know, in college, you know. So I had a separated shoulder, you know.  I think that was part of the reason.  I also had a asthma condition, you know, I was allergic to something, you know, so I--in the fall as I get treated for that.  So when I went for this draft examination, I took, you know, those documents with me.  And--
Speaker 1: And was this when you were in graduate school?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: --I was in graduate school by that time.
Speaker 1: When you got the draft documents?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So it didn't work for you to have the student waiver, at that point?
Speaker 2: No, but see, that didn't keep you from getting, you know, come for your--
Speaker 1: For your physical?
Speaker 2: --your physical.
Speaker 1: Ah, got it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you took the documents and that--and then--you were not drafted.
Speaker 2: Right. In fact and my classification was changed, I think to 4-F or something like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Which meant what?
Speaker 2: You know, this is not eligible for draft, you know, that's what it meant to me and that's all I needed to know, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So that was pretty frightening, wasn't it, in the midst of everything, that you might have to go to war.
Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure.  And I mean all of people, I mean, at that time, you're calling '68 [1968], '67 [1967], '68 [1968], a lot of people--draftees, you know, were getting killed in Vietnam [Vietnam War].
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: You know, so that was not a place to be.
Story_ID: 653932
Speaker 1: So you, you are not drafted, you're, you're exonerated from that; you graduate from, then, the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] with an M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In, in what field?
Speaker 2: Accounting and Finance.
Speaker 1: And so what was your plan after going to get your M.B.A.?
Speaker 2: Well was--it was, it was, it was dealing with black business.  I was in Chicago [Illinois] at the time and, you know, I wanted, you know, to be involved in the community and so forth.  And (cough) Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] at that time, you know, was operating, you know, Operation Breadbasket [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And he had a half-brother [Noah Robinson, Jr.] that came to town and started the Breadbasket Commercial Association [Breadbasket Commercial Association, Inc.].  And (cough) I think that was, who was that?  I can't--I have to come back to it--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --don't remember that.  But that's who I went to work for first.
Speaker 1: For Operation Bread- for--
Speaker 2: The Breadbasket Commercial Association.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It dealt with small businesses--black businesses--that were apart of Operation Breadbasket.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I's was started--would have been, let's see, did I get out in--
Speaker 1: Seventy [1970], right?
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970]? Yeah.  The summer of 1970.  1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you learn there, because this is grassroots, right? Helping black businesses in the community?  What were you exposed to in that environment?
Speaker 2: Well for one that, you know, it was an environment where you could see that black folks could make money.  But to go over the hump, to get to the next level, you know, we had to deal with white folks.  You know, and that's where the problems happened, you know.  So there was a construction division, you know, so, you know, we'd had a black plumbing company. And I that--I mentioned that because that was one of the firms that we worked with.  But to get to that next contract, you know, the--to work on the new buildings, you know, you had to have some influence.  You know, some play.  So working with the black businesses was a routine, was a daily routine.  There was black sanitation company, you know, that picked up debris and garbage.  That was another situation where you needed to be, you know, careful.  You know, you needed to be conniving, you know; and you had to, to put forth the effort, you know, to get the contracts.
Story_ID: 653933
Speaker 1: Well, and I mean, sanitation is known for being very political and, and certainly not for being (laughter) with something that African American businesses ran.  Right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh yeah, clearly.
Speaker 1: So as you are engaging with these different businesses, when did the idea come to create some kind of consortium?
Speaker 2: Well, those were my graduate school years.  Okay.  And (cough)--so you recall that I'd had this, you know, flavor for integrating, you know, black folks and white folks and changing things from my undergraduate experience [at the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], you know.  And see, I recall (laughter) you know in fact as, as I was, you know, getting ready, you know. I'd had already had the opportunity to go to the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  Okay.  And I remember being in the San Francisco 49ers training camp that summer.  And--
Speaker 1: So you were drafted for the 49ers?
Speaker 2: Well, I had signing contract.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I had a signing contract.  And I went to camp and that was a time when we could see the conflict in Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention], was that summer.  And you had a lot of action, you know, in Chicago [Illinois] around the Democratic National Convention.  So that by the time I got there in the fall--
Speaker 1: What year are we talking about now? Sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: In the fall--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --of 1968.  We had to--well, you know, you had to understand that to deal with it.  And there was some, you know, campus, you know, talk about the, you know, the war [Vietnam War], you know, the dealing with the segregation and so forth.  You know, and those kind of elements, you know, moved us to think about, you know, black folks ought to get together about this thing.  And that's when we decided (cough) to bring about, you know, a united black MBA association [National Black MBA Association].  Yeah.  And so the deal was, well, let's get started.  So I say that, you know, because you had a two year program.  So there was always this overlap of classes, you know, like the classes started, you know, in 1968 when you got to your--Chicago, there was a class that started in 1967.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: It was in the second year when it was our first year.  And, you know, we talked with those fellas and we all had come from undergraduate schools, from around the country, you know.  Some majority schools, some minority schools.  And that process, you know, led to us deciding well, let's put an organization together.  And that started the association--
Speaker 1: Who's the we?  Who were you talking to about this, as you're developing the idea?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the name that comes to my mind is George Bradshaw because he ended up being the co-chair, you know, for the organization.  And we formed a littles group, you know, that, oh, half a dozen folks had saw.  And the things that were particular about the group was everybody had to do some work.  But we also knew that one class couldn't do what we wanted to get done.  So we wanted to be sure that there was someone on the committee that would take it to the next step.  And there were two people, you know, Chico, which was, was Bill Preston [William Preston] and Karen Williamson who were in the class of 1971.  You know, it was their first year when it was our second year.
Story_ID: 653934
Speaker 1: As you're formulating this idea, were you originally thinking it would live there on campus or was it always with the national focus?
Speaker 2: Well it, it had a national focus because in terms of deciding who were gonna be the attendees, you know, to the conference.  We included, you know, twenty-six schools from around the country, so we tried to include all the best M.B.A. schools and, you know, we even had minority schools, you know, got involved in that, you know, univers- let me see who was that?  Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] was a--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --local, you know, school that had some black folks.  And then there was Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] that had black folks.  But we also invited, you know, folks from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], you know.  Where else?
Speaker 1: Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Howard.  Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Yeah. You invited the Ivies.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, NYU [New York University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And so you're planning this conference. From the time that you have it as an idea to the conference occurring, what--how quickly did you have this first conference?
Speaker 2: Well (cough) the--when we got to Chicago in the fall of 1968, there was something called the Liquidity Preference Function, which was a Friday event where you kind of stopped around at the business school and everybody had to go have some beer or something like that.  And you would talk informally about things.
Speaker 1: The Liquidity Preference Function (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That, that was the happy hour?
Speaker 2: LPF.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That was happy hour.  That was happy hour.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And, you know, from, you know, that occasion and out of task for what we just see and read each other, but we're talking 'bout things.  Well the class that was there before us, you know, they had ideas too.  So we talked about it. And this guy George Bradshaw by the time that year was over, we said, "Well man, let's do this."  And so when by the time the fall rolled around again, we decided we're gonna put together a united black association [National Black MBA Association], you know.
Speaker 1: So it's after one year?
Speaker 2: It was after one year.
Speaker 1: Now as this is happening, what's happening with you and the 49ers [San Francisco 49ers]?
Speaker 2: Oh by that--the summer--that I got the contract, I got cut that summer before the summer was out.  And I went back to Cleveland [Ohio] and finished the rest of the summer and then went to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But so you just continue with your education?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And the--so tell me about this first conference?  When and where was it, who attended?
Speaker 2: It was in Chicago, I think was April of 1970 and we invited maybe twenty-five, twenty-six schools, two persons from each school.  And, you know, all of the students at U of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] were, of course, invited.  The people from Roosevelt came, and so forth.  We had some business leaders, some other deans from around the country, you know, came.  So it was a pretty well attended conference.
Speaker 1: And what was the intention of it?
Speaker 2: Was to get an association together, you know, so that was the idea going in.  And we wanted to see how that could be done.  And we knew it couldn't all be done in one conference or one setting, you know, so we made sure that all the committee, we had somebody to take it to the next level.  And that was Karen Williamson and Billy Preston [William Preston], you know.  So they were a part of that original committee you know, that George Bradshaw, Gavin [ph.], you know, myself, you know, were involved in.
Story_ID: 653935
Speaker 1: So this is 1970; and in America in 1970 there was, there--there were a number of things going on in, in terms of claiming a rightful place for black people.  So Essence magazine was founded that year [sic.], Black Enterprise magazine was founded that year, you know, there were more blacks in business schools getting ready to be funneled into the business world and yet there still was a lot of push back.  But, you know, people kind of exercising their muscles, I guess, in a different way.  What do you think--what occurred after you have your first conference, your intention is to create an association?  Did you find that there was a positive affect right away of this collaboration connection among different M.B.A.'s?
Speaker 2: Well at the second day of that conference--I mean, that afternoon of that conference--there was a very positive feeling, you know, about what had taken place.  I mean, people were there and they was surprised to see other people there, you know, with the same kind of idea but from different parts of the country that were doing different things.  So we had some pretty good feelings about what the next step would be, you know.  So I was totally encouraging, you know, Karen [Karen Williamson] and Billy Preston [William Preston], you know, to take this to the next level.  At that meeting we had, at least, divided the country up into, like, out west, Midwest, east, you know.  So they had a plan, you know, from making that happen.  And not having any idea that it would've grown to what it is now, I mean, it was just amazing.  But it was started that way.
Speaker 1: And so after you graduated [from the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], did you continue to be actively involved in the association [National Black MBA Association]?
Speaker 2: Well (cough) I was, you know, had touched base with Karen, you know, from time to time, you know, what's happening.  But not, you know, totally--or I should say not actively involved--until, you know, we heard from them in 1970, I guess.  Yeah.  And saying, "Look what we've done."  Now I know it was just outstanding, absolutely--
Speaker 1: So what had--
Speaker 2: --outstanding.
Speaker 1: --occurred from the time that you planted the seed to when they contacted you?
Speaker 2: Oh, they'd incorporated.  They divided up the country.  What else had happened?  Those were the two big things.  They had opened chapters, different parts of the area.  And, let's see, and then where we're at and changed headquarters, head locations, you know, from New York [New York] to Chicago [Illinois].  Yeah, so a lot went on then in those years, you know, between the 1970 and 1990, 2000.  You know, I think, it was the--2000 was when we celebrated the thirtieth anniversary.
Story_ID: 653936
Speaker 1: When you left [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois], having received your M.B.A., what did you do, what, what, what was your next step?
Speaker 2: Well, like I said, the next step was Breadbasket Commercial Association [Breadbasket Commercial Association, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, we worked with some of those small businesses for a while, 'bout a year and a half.  And then myself and a former roommate of mine, Jim Hill [HistoryMaker James Hill, Jr.], had an accounting practice and we worked with small businesses.  Then I had got a taste of--for teaching during that time and I went off and started (cough), you know, teaching, and decided I wanted to go back to graduate school.  Jim went on and continued in the, you know--
Speaker 1: Accounting firm.
Speaker 2: --accounting firm.  So I went back and went to graduate school at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] to get the Ph.D.  So and I did that.
Speaker 1: But that was quite some time later.  So you spent--how many years did you work in your own firm?
Speaker 2: Oh I guess three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay so when was it that you went for your Ph.D.?  When did you start?
Speaker 2: When was that?  I think that was maybe 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I started to do that.
Speaker 1: And it typically takes some time. (Laughter) So can you describe that journey?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was a journey, because I was married by that time [to Ellen Jackson (ph.)] and trying to raise a family.  So those were some tough days.  Those were some tough days.
Speaker 1: So were you in school working and raising a family all at the same time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were still with your accounting firm while you were getting your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, I had--still had some clients in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, dwindling down. And, I guess, it was (cough) by the spring of that first year. And the Ph.D. program, I had to stop doing that because I couldn't go back and forth, Cleveland [sic.] to Chicago et cetera, et cetera.  So that was tough.
Speaker 1: And you got your Ph.D. from the University of--
Speaker 2: Cincinnati (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Cincinnati.  And was that where your family was living? In Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes. They moved there.
Speaker 1: So then you'd had to cut Chicago out 'cause it was too much.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 653937
Speaker 1: What did you do for work during that time?
Speaker 2: Well in fact, I recall the beginning that, I guess, it was my second year down there.  In the program, the Ph.D. program [at the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], I was in, you know, you had coursework, you know, and you had a couple classes, you know, that were a part of the deal.  Okay, that you went to school for.  But I didn't see how I was going to do that, how I was gonna make it through.  And literally, the weekend before the first class was starting up, the chairman called me--chairman of the accounting department--called me and asked me did I wanna be, you know, had, you know, an instructor, which gave me a full load of, I think, maybe three courses.  But a base salary.  So it was that base salary that allowed me to do that, to make that through.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And making the choice to teach versus being an accountant, what drew you to teaching as opposed to, really, working in your own accounting firm and continuing along that path?
Speaker 2: Well it was something I'd done even as a kid, you know, interacting with folks, you know. We, like you said, the math thing, you know, was always something, I would interact with of the students about and so forth.  And I kind of liked it, the teaching thing.  The learning thing and, you know, when I got this first teaching thing that I was doing in Chicago [Illinois] at, I think was at Chicago State [Chicago State University], I said, "Well, you know, maybe I can do something about these kids."  Maybe I can help this, you know.  So that was the notion for, you know, going on pursuing the Ph.D. and thereafter, you know, going into it full time.
Story_ID: 653938
Speaker 1: When you completed your Ph.D. [at the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio], that was '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did you go to teach after that?
Speaker 2: Miami University.
Speaker 1: So you got to go to the warm weather.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well no, Miami University in Oxford, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It only sounds warm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so you were a professor of accounting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was it like being there, at that school?
Speaker 2: It was interesting, you know, it was often referred to as kind of like the Ivy League school of Ohio.  But the chairperson at that time was the--he was the first person that I knew in the profession in terms of it being full time.  Because when I was still in Chicago [Illinois], I worked for him, at Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And--didn't know him but--he had transferred from, you know--took a deanship from Loyola to Miami.  And he called me, you know, when he got to Miami, and said, "If you wanna do this, you know, let me know."  And so when I graduated from the Ph.D. program, I went to Miami University in fact, start teaching finance.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, at the Miami University.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Three or four years.
Speaker 1: And where did you go after that?
Speaker 2: Where did I go after Miami?  I think those are my Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] days which got me back in touch with our people.
Speaker 1: Right.  Cause that's an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities].
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 653939
Speaker 1: So I was asking about Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  What--at, at what level were the students when, when you're meeting them there and you're working with them?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an undergraduate experience--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --you know, so they were, you know, juniors, you know, seniors, you know, sophomores.  But that was--that was an interesting time.  That was an interesting time.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Just being there.  I was--I was a chair when I was at Central State.  And--
Speaker 1: Of the finance department?
Speaker 2: Of the accounting department.
Speaker 1: Accounting, okay.
Speaker 2: And on my staff, I think there was only one other black person; and he had been the former chair.  But I had a, you know, white guy.  I had a guy from, like, India, something like that, Indian guy. Had a, a girl who, who was, again, foreign.  I can't remember what country she came from.  But it was an interesting, interesting group, you know.  So I did that for, for a while.
Story_ID: 653940
Speaker 1: And where are some of the other schools where you've taught?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Taught at Ball State [Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana], I think, for a, a year. And I told you about--let's see--Ball State.  Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  So Loyola, Ball State, Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio], University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] and then Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 1: And what period were you at Hampton?
Speaker 2: When was I at Hampton?  I think that was beginning in '98 [1998] through the early 2000s, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, again, this is an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Very prestigious university.  What's the--who, who were some of your students?  What's the development at this point?  Because, you know, now we've--we've moved along in time.  We're in the late '90s [1990s] into the next century.  Are you finding the students having different ideas?  Are they looking more broadly than maybe they were years ago, or what--what are the students like?
Speaker 2: Well, that--that--that Hampton time there--was very unique in a sense.  I mean, people felt like it was home. There was a lot of camaraderie there, you know.  And, like, homecoming was, was a treat, you know, when you'd see people come back from years and years and convene and, and so forth.  So dealing with that group was, was special. That--that was special.
Speaker 1: Are there any students, over the years, who stand out for you as people who've gone on to great success?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, many names don't come to mind, but I--I've run into these students at other, you know, events, you know, other--well, in fact, at the black MBA association [National Black MBA Association] event I've seen--I've seen a couple students.
Speaker 1: And so you've reconnected with black MBA association over time?
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  Yes.  Beginning in the year 2000, when they celebrate--I think it was the thirtieth anniversary, you know, I got hooked up with some of the intermediaries who, you know, help hold the organization together and--yeah, that--that was--that was a good time.  That was a good time.
Story_ID: 653941
Speaker 1: When did you retire?
Speaker 2: Oh, just a, a few years back.  I think 2K5 [2005] or '6 [2006].
Speaker 1: Where were you working?
Speaker 2: I had finished at--at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  And I had done some swap teaching at Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia], you know.
Speaker 1: And so, as a retiree, are you still working or did you really retire?
Speaker 2: No, I really--I really retired (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) You did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 653942
Speaker 1: Tell me about your family.
Speaker 2: Oh, the, the, the, the two kids that me and my wife [Ellen Jackson (ph.)] made, you know, at the time, was Anthony, Jr. [Anthony Jackson, Jr.] and, and Meghan [Meghan Jackson].
Speaker 1: And what do they do now?
Speaker 2: Now, Anthony is now teaching in Baltimore [Maryland], social studies, you know, and he also coaches the track team there.  I think he enjoys his--his lifestyle, you know, completely.  My daughter--yeah, it was an interesting thing--she--when it was time for her to go to undergraduate school, you know, she looked around.  I had taken her here, taken her there, and she had decided to go to Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  Now, interesting enough at this time, I wasn't at Hampton yet.  I think I was doing the job at Governors State University [University Park, Illinois].  And I got a call from, from Hampton and, subsequently, went to Hampton with my daughter there.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So that was--that was a good time.  It gave me, you know, time to spend, you know, some quality time with my daughter.  And she decided to do--that's when she decided to be a doctor, you know, so she was--went into their graduate program, which was a brand new graduate program for that and, you know, succeeded, you know.  So now she's a pediatrician--
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: --you know, with her own practice.
Story_ID: 653943
Speaker 1: As you think about your career and, in particular, helping to start the black MBA association [National Black MBA Association], what do you think your legacy is?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's--you know, as, as my boy, Gavin [ph.], would say, you know, it's recognizing that--it's like imagining, you know, the, the egg and sperm coming together, you know, as this must happen; and then some time after that this grows, and you see, see other things, you know.  Well, I'm just, you know, so happy to be a part of that coming together, you know, at the beginning, you know.  This is how this happens.  And I've just been totally amazed, you know, and astounded at how it's--how it's grown over time.
Story_ID: 653944
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Hm. (Pause) Well, not with respect to the association [National Black MBA Association].  No, none, none at all.  No, now, I think I could've--I could've done other things, you know, with respect to the profession.  I, I like art and I like photography, you know.  So I still, you know, do some of those things now.  But I could've enjoyed doing them then, as, as well.
Story_ID: 653945
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young African Americans who are interested in being entrepreneurs working in the business world today?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think the opportunities are, are better, better.  I'd like to see more entrepreneurial opportunities, you know, come up.  I think if there's anything that's happened, some of these students now look for and think about joining a majority corporation, you know, with respect to their lifestyles.  But I'd kind of like to see more self-employment, more energy, you know, with our people.  In fact, there's a, a situation that I've, I've been sensitive to, you know, for quite a while, and I really don't have any how to situations or whether even a how to would, would make sense. But in so many of our black communities, there are stores run by non-black individuals; and they come from all over the world.  Now, when I--when I say I don't know how that happens, you know, it's just that I don't have any firsthand knowledge.  But, clearly, someone sees money, you know, in that market.   And it's just--it just amazes me.  I'll, I'll go to a local store in the black community, and this guy behind the counter can't even understand my English and we have to do business together. I mean that's just, I, I, I would love to see that to be a task taken on by the black MBA association [National Black MBA Association], to get black owners of minority businesses in black neighborhoods.
Speaker 1: It used to be that they were mom and pops throughout the neighborhoods, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I mean, when--when I was in junior high school [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], growing up, I remember this--this corner that was--the corner store was a grocery store, you know, Italian grocery store.  Next door was a black cleaners, you know.  And then next to that was Mr. William's [ph.] store, you know, which was a brother, you know, that--that ran that store by himself.  I mean, that was something that I, I just haven't seen enough of lately, you know.  The--that's just not there anymore.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, only that I'd like to see, you know, that take place, minority ownership of minority businesses in black communities.  And, I mean, not, not any- anything that's outlandish.  I, I can't--I can't think of anything--
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: --right now.  Cool.  I tried.  I, I know that's not--that's not tough (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You did fine.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: --you know, you know.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 653946
Speaker 1: My name is [HistoryMaker] Anthony Jackson, and that's when I was a toddler, bending on a house across the street from where I used to live.
Speaker 2: And what town?
Speaker 1: In Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  Oh, something slipped out.  Very good.
Speaker 2: Again, that is Anthony W. Jackson, and it was taken at a photo studio when I was four or five years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my mother and father in their heyday.
Speaker 1: And what are their names?
Speaker 2: Geneva Jackson and Houston Jackson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Good shot.
Speaker 2: Now, that's my oldest stepson.  That's Marcus [Marcus Hall].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's a picture of me on a boat ride.
Speaker 1: About when?
Speaker 2: Oh, mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's my ex-wife, you know, on that same boat ride; so that's the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And then, actually, there's a picture where we can see her face.  What's her name?
Speaker 2: That's Ellen [Ellen Jackson (ph.)].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: And that's us at the dinner table on the boat ride; and that's myself, Ellen, Anthony [Anthony Jackson, Jr.] and Meghan [Meghan Jackson].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Meghan and Anthony enjoying the pool.  I think that was a trip to Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: On that same trip, that's Meghan coming out of the pool.
Speaker 1: Now, that was one day when I took Meghan and Anthony to work with me up at Miami University [Oxford, Ohio].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: That was me included in a, you know, contest on the boat ride.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's where I won the contest. We're carrying, carrying--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'm running to the ball.
Speaker 1: --ball.  That's one of our pictures from Meghan.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's the photograph that was used in the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] school book and my graduation picture from undergraduate school [University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 2: That's a little picture of Anthony, Jr.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Kerry [Kerry Hall], you know, by the time he was growing his bush.
Speaker 1: And who is Kerry?
Speaker 2: Kerry is my, you know, second stepson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And his brother, Marcus, the older stepson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is Marcus and Kerry.  I guess they're about--I don't know--eight, nine maybe.
Speaker 1: That's Junior, Anthony Jackson, Jr.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And is this Junior, as well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Meghan Genelle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, these contacts, you said they were too small.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they might be.
Speaker 1: But I'll go to the--you look just like her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my [paternal] grandmother.
Speaker 1: Wow.  What's her name?
Speaker 2: That's Emma, Emma Welch.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's Meghan and Anthony and a little cat that we had, Spunky [ph.].  Again, that's Marcus.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's little Anthony.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I'm going to pick a couple out of the book.  This, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Actually, let's go, first, to these.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a drawing I did of Malcolm X.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's another pencil drawing I did of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 1: That's a hand drawing, a pencil drawing of Meghan.  No, excuse me, Meghan.  Meghan's mother.  That's my first wife, Ellen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Only wife Ellen, actually.
Speaker 2: Here's a little photography.  On the right it's the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.], and on the left you had cloud formations.
Speaker 1: Is that it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Almost.  Okay.  All right.  Let's see now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is down at the beach, outside of--where in the hell was that--Newport News [Virginia].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Newport News.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sideways.
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: And that's the cover for the book that I wrote, 'What John Said About It' [ph.].
Speaker 2: Very good.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Got it.
Speaker 2: We got it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's it?
Speaker 2: Thank you. Yep.
Speaker 1: Cool.  All right.
