Story_ID: 106532
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker Hamilton and I am the interviewer, Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Monday, January 31, 2005, and this interview is taking place in New York.  Now, if you would please, for the record, tell us your full name and including your middle name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My name is Debra, D-E-B-R-A, my middle name is Ann, A-N-N, and my surname is James, J-A-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on February 16, 1953, and I was born in Knoxville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, birthday coming up.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a judge or a justice of the New York State Supreme Court where I sit by designation.  I've actually been recently re-elected to the lower court.  New York has kind of a Byzantine system of courts.  The lower court is known as the New York City Civil Court and by administrative appointment, I'm sitting in the higher court which is known as the Supreme Court of the State of New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 106533
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions, just to help us get to know you a little bit better and also to help you get comfortable with the process.  So I ask you to give me short answers to these questions.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  Black beans and rice.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Late spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: These are actually hard.  The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, if you have one.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Let's begin--
Speaker 2: Not that I recognize.
Speaker 1: --When one pops in your mind, just let us know.
Story_ID: 106534
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl?
Speaker 2: My mom's name is Elizabeth.  She uses her maiden name as her middle name, Kemp, and her, of course, last name is my father's name, James.  My mother was born in Tampa, Florida, and she grew up in that area, Clearwater, Tampa, Florida.  And her birth year, do you want it?
Speaker 1: If you know it.
Speaker 2: Well, she was born about seventy-four years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up in Florida?
Speaker 2: Yes, she has.  She had a pretty large family of approximately six brothers.  She was the only daughter.  Her mother and father lost a daughter to polio.  And it was a difficult childhood.  There wasn't a lot of money in the household.  Her father grew up--or had business in Maryland, so at times wasn't with the family and--
Speaker 1: What kind of business did he have?
Speaker 2: --Restaurant business.  He was a Bahamian, he came from the Bahamas, or his parents did, come from the Bahamas.  And so there was a lot of separation in the family, but it was a difficult time, was a really difficult childhood, but my mom's grandmother, her father's mother really encouraged my mother in terms of her education.  My mother went to parochial school, C.P. Claiborne (ph.) was the name of the high school, or the name of the elementary school that she attended.  And she attributes a lot of her learning through her paternal grandmother's insistence that she was a bright young girl and so her grandmother really pushed her to do well in school.  My mother was always very good scholastically.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very private.  Very private person, very much enjoys solitary activity, gardening, she likes to cook, homemaking, very devoted to her children.  We had all of her attention and time and care, and she was a nurse by profession, but I always felt that was secondary.  She was a very good nurse.  In terms of career, her career definitely took second seat to being a mother and wife.
Story_ID: 106535
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your father, starting with his name and where he grew up as a boy.
Speaker 2: My father, his name is Edward, his middle name is Cornelius.  He doesn't use that too much, so you know you heard a secret.  He was born in--actually he had a seventieth birthday, and we had a party for him when he turned seventy, it was about eight years ago.  Wish I had his precise birthplace, but it was Falmouth, Kentucky.  And he grew up in Falmouth, Kentucky, Covington, Kentucky--Kentucky, Cincinnati [Ohio], that area.  That was where his parents were from.
Speaker 1: And did he ever talk about what life was like for him as a boy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I knew more about his life when the family moved to New York, his parents were domestics, my grandmother, was a cook, a wonderful cook, and her husband drove a, I guess, chauffeur, drove a car--drove cars for wealthy people in New York.  And my father ultimately lived in Mount Vernon and went to New Rochelle High School, where he graduated.  He had a sister. What can I say about my father's life?  I guess similarly to my mom [Elizabeth Kemp James], they weren't rich people, they were probably, they were lower middle class, by African American standards.  So I think, though he was comfortable, they weren't wealthy people.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about like how the migration occurred from Kentucky to New York?
Speaker 2: You know.  I haven't asked him that.  I assume it's similar to my--well my mom came later, but it's similar to other African Americans who were leaving the South for opportunity.  I know he would joke at one point, in elementary school, we were asked to go home and ask our parents what was the depression like in the '30s [1930s].  And my father would have been a child in the '30s and he said, what depression?  He said for African Americans they really didn't--many African Americans really didn't see it because their situation didn't really change.  They were pretty much poor before and poor during.  But he had parents who nurtured both he and his sister and another brother.  They were very nurturing.  And his father, definitely, I knew my grandfather, he very much emphasized reading and learning.  My grandmother was semi-literate.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Extremely hard worker and he was--well, he's now a retired electrical engineer unfortunately, but both of my parents are still living.  My father was an electrical engineer.  He was--he served in the [U.S.] Navy towards the tail end of his--toward the tail end of World War II, was stationed in Hawaii for some time.  When he came back he went to school on a G.I. Bill.
Story_ID: 106536
Speaker 1: Where did he go to school?
Speaker 2: Howard University [Washington, D.C.], that's where my parents met.  So my father was--he's excellent in terms of math and statistics and--well math and engineering type statistics, I should say.  He was very devoted to his career as an electrical engineer.  And growing up, helped a lot in terms of both the science, in terms of math and science, helped a lot.  So he was very committed to us.
Speaker 1: And so your parents met at Howard, they were both students.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.  My father was an engineering student at Howard.  My mom was a nursing student at what was then Freedmen's Hospital, it since closed, the nursing school and hospital closed.  And that's where they met in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And did they move to Tennessee once they got married?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting.  I think about it.  I know more about my father's later life really and I didn't ask that much about his childhood a bit.  But he had a professor at Howard University, he told me, who had some contacts with government, the US government.  And for the first time the government was going to hire African American engineers.  So a lot of them had planned to go into private sector, but they had this respect and regard for this particular professor who said I have this contact, you know, wish you would all would use this and go out to Knoxville, Tennessee where they were building the Tennessee Valley Authority, I guess, was maintaining the facility out there.  So that's where they moved to when they both graduated from Howard.  They moved out to Knoxville, Tennessee.  And only lived there, I was born my--the older of my younger brother was born in Tennessee.  But my parents only stayed a couple of years because it was still--the Jim Crow was still in effect.  Jim Crow laws and they were very anxious to come back to the North.
Story_ID: 106537
Speaker 1: And tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory is probably--we lived for a short time with my grandparents who were living--had a house in Queens.  So I have, I think, sort of a sketchy memory of living with my--this is my father's parents in Queens.  I think it was the Bailey (ph) Park area.  And then I think my most vivid memories would be I would have been maybe four or five living in St. Albans, which is a neighborhood in New York City in the county of Queens.  That's my earliest memory, being in that house.
Story_ID: 106538
Speaker 1: And you said that you knew your grandfather well, your paternal grandfather?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandfather and my maternal grandmother, both of them--and paternal grandmother, both of my father's parents, I had a relationship.
Speaker 1: And what were their names?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was also Edward, Edward W.  I'm not sure what the W stands for, and my grandmother's name was Virginia, and they're both deceased.  But growing up I was fortunate to have a relationship with both those grandparents.
Speaker 1: And what kind of memories do you have of the time you spent with your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was very committed to the church and as I say she cooked for a living and she was this great cook.  And I would go to her house in Queens, and we would--I would help her cook, 'cause she would cook for the church to raise money.  She cooked to earn a living for her family and she cooked for us which just--I still think she's the most incredible cook ever that's walked the earth.  But she also cooked to help the church raise money.  And I'd go to her house and she would cook and I would help her put aluminum foil over the individual meals and I just, you know, was doing that for her.  And my grandfather, I just always thought of sitting in his rocking chair reading, he was a vociferous reader.  And you know I think, had I had the opportunity I would think a lot more of his life, but he drove a car and drove a car for wealthy people, but he read and he was very knowledgeable and he talked a lot about politics and world events.
Speaker 1: What about your maternal grandparents, did you know them at all?
Speaker 2: Them I knew much less.  My grandmother on my mother's side is Eva, Eva Kemp, Walker-Kemp, the Walker family.  I grew to learn more about them more recently.  So I met my grandmother when she became sick, she stayed with my mother [Elizabeth Kemp James], my parents--our family for a while, so I did meet her then.  But she was very aging, and I didn't really get a chance to really develop a relationship with her or my grandfather, who I may have met maybe when I was a toddler.  I have very little recollection of my grandfather, my mother's father.
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your ancestry?  Do you know if your family came from free people or slaves, how far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually had a family tree that we put together and again I meant to look through before the interview so I can recall.  Both sides go back to several generations and I think the family consensus is people came out of slavery, that our family members came out of slavery.  Well, yes, information, particularly about my mother's family, not just great-great-great, I guess, grandmother who I have a copy of their marriage certificate, great-great-grandparent and the deed, they did own land, so I think they were part of that group of people who were able to actually acquire property after they came out of slavery.  So you know, were some.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 106539
Speaker 1: Could you please give us your siblings' names and their birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, I'm the oldest.  I'm the only daughter, the only girl.  And doing the arithmetic, I'm this year going to be fifty-two years young next month.  I have a brother who is one year younger than I am, he was born in March and he enjoyed his fiftieth birthday last year, he's a physician actually in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Edward also, Edward Kevin.  We call him Kevin as we were growing up so we could distinguish between him and my dad [Edward James].  Edward Kevin James.  And the next birth order is Craig Steven James, he's my my middle brother, he thirteen years--do I have that right--he's ten years my junior.  My mother [Elizabeth Kemp James] always talked about children in batches, my brother and I and then she had the two younger brothers.  My younger brother is ten years younger than I am, so he's going to turn forty, reluctantly, this year, his name is Gary Aaron James.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 106540
Speaker 1: Can you kind of--do you remember the street that you lived on growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of tell us the name of the street and describe your community for us, describe your block?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was 115th Drive which is in an area known as Jamaica Queens or St. Albans is the subset of Jamaica Queens.  It was an area when we moved there where I assume it was white flight, the mostly white families had either moved by the time we moved there or they had left or were planning to move.  And there were some older people who remained and then passed away.  The neighborhood was really becoming sort of an oasis for African American middle class people, and had been there actually before my parents arrived.  They were sort of in the middle, I guess, of that migration into Queens.  So it was very residential, separate houses, you know, stand-alone houses, green trees.  It was really, I think, sort of idyllic childhood, had friends who were in the neighborhood who I got to know and mainly African American young people at that time who grew up in the neighborhood.  And we played stick ball and something in New York City which I know the kids played was called skully which involves using bottle caps to move around the grid with chalk.  Boy, I hadn't thought about this in a little while.  We'd chalk the grid on the street and we had a lot of traffic, so we'd play and then we'd move when the cars would pass by.  It was a boys' game but girls play it too--
Speaker 1: How do you play it?
Speaker 2: --You use your finger and you take--kind of a New York game.  I guess kids don't play it anymore, but you--and I honestly think it was more of a boys' game but some of us girls played, and I was one of them who played.  But the idea is to go around this grid.  You would use your finger to flick the top and you look for bottles that had the smoothest tops, you know, gliding into the box, and there were, I think, thirteen boxes and you had to be the first one to get to the middle box which I think was number thirteen.  There was sort of a grid that you go around and then get into the thirteenth box and that person would win.  The game was called skully.  There was stick ball, more traditional (unclear).  And then as the boys and girls stopped playing together, the girls would play double dutch, so that was a popular game when I was a child--
Story_ID: 106541
Speaker 1: And what were holidays like in your house growing up, were they very festive times or what were they like?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom [Elizabeth Kemp James] sort of defined things, and I think because she had grown up in a very poverished, I think impoverished, a lot of Americans, just African Americans grow up.  She really taught us that, you know, ostentatious sort of gift giving and buying were maybe not the most meaningful part of all the holidays, so while we had, we had the Christmas tree for Christmas and so we celebrated birthdays there were never really grand--my friends were grander.  My mom was always sort of, she set this tone, sort of modest.  My grandparents, my father's side, would come shower us with gifts and were more of the idea, more celebratory.  But I think it was pretty much us for the most part.
Story_ID: 106542
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights and sounds and smells remind you of your childhood and remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, probably greenery.  I think the green reminds me of home too.  We were living in an area that had a lot of trees, shrubbery.  Well, you know, let me go back to some of these questions you're asking.  Sights.  Anytime I, and I still see young people playing Double Dutch, and that will remind me of my youth.
Speaker 1: What sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Wow, sounds and smells.  What, can I think about that?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Probably you know bringing more art--artwork into my life, and I enjoyed painting, so probably the smell of acrylics remind me a little bit of childhood.
Speaker 1: Any particular foods?
Speaker 2: I think my grandma is a great cook.  She would make, again, I thought the best lasagna in the world.  So I guess the smell of lasagna would remind me of growing up.  She also made this stuffed cabbage which was fantastic.  So it probably remind me of, I guess baking bread, I mean, would probably remind me of cornbread particularly, because that's a southern type dish.
Speaker 1: And any particular sounds and if something comes to you then, please?
Speaker 2: Well, music.  I guess I meant to mention that music was always a part of our life growing up.  It's an important part of African American culture.  And we grew up to sort of the Motown era of popular songs, so certainly Motown era songs are--would remind me of growing up.  I also took piano as a child.  And I've recently, really within the last three months, decided to take piano lessons.  Again, I bought a piano and I've been studying music again and a lot of that is reminding me of my childhood.  I spent a lot of time practicing on the piano during my childhood.  Again, I gave it up around sixth grade level, I began to take viola lessons and then once we moved, we moved out of New York, I sort of gave up that part.  But I think it really instilled, really, a love for music that I do have still.
Story_ID: 106543
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school you attended, growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it was P.S. 34 in Queens Village [New York].  And I only left--we were in the north, but at the time the neighborhood schools in Saint Albans [New York City, New York] were not considered very challenging.  So interestingly enough, some of us were bused out of our neighborhood schools.  And this was--we were bused into Queens Village which at the time was almost exclusively white and Jewish families, Irish American families and other families.  And my brother and I actually were two of four, only four, two children who integrated this school in Queens at the time.  So that's where I went to elementary school.
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers there who had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Well, there was one.  They had a double class, in fact, my brother and I were in the same class.  It was third and fourth combined.  A class and it was called gifted children type class.  Mrs. Lilly [ph.] was the teacher there.  And I just, I was frankly the teacher's pet.  Which became somewhat--somewhat of a sort of--somewhat of an embarrassment, but I mean I remember her vividly.  But there were others, and Mrs. Reed [ph.] was my third year--grade teacher.  And Miss Bailey [ph.] was my sixth grade teacher who was very kind of a yeller.  That was Miss Bailey, so I remember her.  But I was actually kind of a little bit of a pain there in my grade school years, because, as I said we were bused out of the neighborhood, and there really wasn't, not many people there that happy about this whole notion of children, even in the North, being bused out of their neighborhoods.  So, have been growing up in the civil rights era, I knew a little bit about what that was like--people who really weren't that keen on necessarily being there and children who weren't necessarily tolerant of our being there.  And as I said there're four of us integrating this school.  So that was some source of pain, because I had children in my neighborhood who wanted to, and we were going to different schools, and these were African American children.  But at that time I guess we were using the word Negro.  So yeah, actually there was some pain there.  But I also had wonderful friends, in fact, one that I had reunited with recently.  One of these ironies of life.  Faye, her name is Horna [ph.], Jewish American.  And it was Mrs. Lilly [ph.] actually who, the first day I was in the court--schoolyard, you know, out of my neighborhood and children, initially, I think were really wondering who I was and if I come from Africa, they really--it's interesting how New York people, the city has really changed, people really didn't know about the racial groups.  And anyway, Mrs. Lilly encouraged the kids to sort of, you know, play with me.  The really--the one that I remember, who just had no kind of color problems was Faye, Faye Horna.  We became best friends actually.  And recently within the last, literally, the last three years, I always wondered about her.  We actually found each other.  She is a photographer and--that's my watch--a photographer--was actually photographing for the New York Law Journal, which is the paper of record here in New York City.  And the New York--National Association of Judges had its convention in--at the Marriot here in Manhattan.  And someone said, there's a, you know, a woman here who thinks she might know you from grade school, (unclear), and I didn't know her last name.  Anyway it turns out she was my childhood friend who I hadn't seen in many, many years.  And since then I met her daughter and her husband we've sort of caught up so.  So life has these twists and turns that are very interesting.
Story_ID: 106544
Speaker 1: And was there any resentment from some of the white kids that you all were in like the gifted program, you and your brother, was there any resentment?
Speaker 2: No, you know, not too much that.
Speaker 1: Just that you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah we were there at all.  It was--it's interesting, this is the North, but and then there was even more controversy at some point there was--they tried to send white children into black neighborhoods to go to school and that was very controversial and there was a lot of controversy over that.  And that sort of I guess I hadn't thought about this in a long, long time.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in high school, I mean I'm sorry, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I always loved to read, I always loved reading.  I have to say that must have been my favorite subject.  But I liked them all and my parents really emphasized scholarship.  And frankly, that was one reason why they decided that they wanted us to go to a school in a white neighborhood, they thought we'd receive a better education.
Speaker 1: And what kind of student were you during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: I was definitely--I'm a bookworm, very, very scholastic.  I mean--My parents enforced a very high standard in terms of doing your homework, doing it with care, and spend a lot of time with homework and then I had the piano so I would study piano every day.  That became a source of friction, I mean, I loved piano but I hated to practice.  There was a lot of practicing, but I was not playing with my friends when I was practicing.  But yeah, I was definitely a strong student always.
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: I always assumed I'd go to college and that was sort of just an assumption.  My parents were the first in their family to attend college, and it was always a given that we'd go to college.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think about what you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I always thought I--I thought I'd end up with sciences because my father [Edward James], as I said, was an engineer and I had a very strong science background in biology.  So I really thought I would end up being some type of scientist or mathematician or ultimately follow my father's footsteps, go into engineering, that's what I thought.  My father, I think, always 'cause I was always very argumentative, thought I'd make a good lawyer.  And he prevailed on me, I think.
Story_ID: 106545
Speaker 1: And what junior high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: First year, Junior High School 192 was again, that school was in the African American neighborhood at the time, and it was a predominantly black school.  Faye [Horna (ph.)] ending up attending, she's one of the few white students that actually went to Junior High School 192, thinking back on this.  But it was actually, rather it was a newly constructed school, and actually I think it was--I was only there a year, but it had an impact on me, because I had took viola lessons and I was--very exciting place actually.  And then my parents moved to New Jersey.  So I spent the last year in an intermediate school in the neighborhood called Tinton Falls, New Jersey, which is central New Jersey, Shore area.  And that's where I went to the rest of junior high school.  Actually it was only one year 'cause New Jersey schools were structured a little differently.  So you started high school in ninth grade but for some reason I only spent one year in the junior high school there.
Story_ID: 106546
Speaker 1: Okay, so Judge James, I think we were talking about junior high school.  So what kind of student were you in junior high school [J.H.S. 192 in New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well similarly, very scholastic, if I say so myself.  I feel I was really somewhat opening up in terms of relationships with the students.  I remember I ran a campaign for, I never forget, a student named Grace Won [ph.], who was a Chinese American.
Speaker 1: Was it for student council?
Speaker 2: Student council, exactly.  She was running for president.  And I think she lost actually, when I think about it.  But we made up these big posters, I don't know if you remember, maybe it's a, maybe a New York thing.  "You don't have to be Jewish to love Levy's Jewish rye."  There was a, well, I think a New York thing.  There was an advertisement to rye bread, you don't have to be Jewish to love Levy's Jewish rye.  And we took the posters and did an enlargement of her photograph and put it over whoever the photograph of the person who was in the advertisement and said you don't have to be Chinese to vote for Grace Won.  So that was seventh grade, and I really was having a good time, and my parents decided to move.  But as I say Faye [Horna (ph.)] was there and I was making new friends.  And it was really, I think it--really dynamic school at the time, very dynamic.
Speaker 1: And what type of young lady were you starting to become, like how would you describe yourself.  Were you shy, were you, what kind of young lady were you?
Speaker 2: I really think at that point I was breaking out in terms of, I think I tended to be inward looking, but I think that little short break in junior high school sort of coming out a little bit more.  And I had friends in the neighborhood who--I have some pictures of some of them who, you know, I socialized with, we, the girls, we would dance.  I mean we were big, you know, Motown fans, and we would dance to Motown and I remember them growing up.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite song?
Speaker 2: Well, probably "My Girl" you know, I loved the Temptations, Stevie Wonder, anything by Stevie Wonder, the Supremes.  I knew all the Supremes songs--I could probably lip sync them all.  So that, those are, I think that those are vivid memories.  Dance was always a big part of what we did, particularly the girls when we--
Story_ID: 106547
Speaker 1: Now what happened when you moved to New Jersey?  Were you still starting to come out of your shell a little bit or--?
Speaker 2: --No, well, it's interesting, in New Jersey, my father [Edward James] had been working for Grumman [now Northrop Grumman].  Initially he worked for the government, for the Federal Aviation Administration [FAA] for many, many years.  And then he went into the private sector working for Grumman, and he worked in the lab which is one of the lunar modules that was sent to, into the outer space.  And then he decided to return to government.  So he's with the United States Army Electronic Command and that's based in New Jersey.  So my parents decided they wanted us--a life.  They wanted to move out of New York and wanted an easier life in terms of his commute.  So we moved to an area called Tinton Falls [New Jersey], but at the time it was called New Shrewsbury, which is again, central Jersey Shore.  And at the time, it was, it had an African American neighborhood.  My parents though were interested to buy something in a more affluent area, and did.  So I ended up moving, sort of interesting, I ended up moving into a predominantly white neighborhood in terms of the immediate neighborhood.  So I think I went a little bit back into my shell to tell you the truth once that happened.  I mean my younger brothers, I think, had a different experience because they grew up in a predominantly white neighborhood.  So I think their orientation is different when I think about it.  And my brother was involved in sports, so I think the--Edward, the oldest of my younger brothers--so I think he was able to sort of find his social place a little better.  I think, I had a little, I had actually had a hard time, because that was sort of the time when kids were expected to date.  And socially, I got withdrawn and more, even more of a bookworm.  And I guess as a teenager, part of this too is just you're developing in ways that you're not understanding so I think that's part of it too.  I think I got somewhat more exclusive.  I had friends, but not a big social network at all in high school.
Story_ID: 106548
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: Monmouth, M-O-N-M-O-U-T-H, Regional High School [Tinton Falls, New Jersey].  And it drew students from four or five towns.  That was sort of the Jersey model of integrating schools, was that...Anyway I think about my life in general, I think about growing up in the civil rights era and sort of watching this movement unfold on television and sort of living out of it so that it was principal plan in New Jersey and the idea was to integrate schools rather than bus children, not bus particular children to particular schools, they would put certain grades in certain schools and all the children from various neighborhoods would go to these schools.  So actually it worked in terms of integrating the schools.  The schools were being integrated.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in high school?
Speaker 2: Well again, it was an excellent high school.  My parents chose the neighborhood partly because, based on the schools, very strong on science.  I think probably the electronic command nearby meant there were a lot of very strong teachers in mathematics and science.  Those were, honestly I think, one of the regional strongest disciplines at that time.  So I took calculus, I had excellent teachers in math, calculus, excellent biology teachers, physics which wasn't my strongest subject, but I took all of the hard sciences and some pretty good social science teachers as well.  I had one particularly strong history teacher, (Unclear), I think his name was.  So it was just a very good, academically, a very good school.
Speaker 1: And were there any other teachers who had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely, Mrs. Vivian Barren [ph.].  I took French, actually since junior high school in New York.  In fact one my disappointments when I moved to New Jersey was the high school, the junior high school that one year didn't have French classes.  But in high school I took French with Vivian Barren, who was an African American.  One of the few African American teachers actually at the school, and she was from the Carolinas, "Geechee" country, studying, had studied French and was fluent in French and one of my most favorite teachers who really an excellent teacher and mentor.  And Mrs. Harburg [ph.] who was my English language teacher, I think, was also a memorable teacher.
Speaker 1: And were you involved in any clubs or activities?
Speaker 2: I was on the student council; I believe I was an officer. But you know what, it's a little dim.  I believe I was an officer but that may be memory working not well.  What else? Well, I took advanced science courses, so we had lab courses and we did you know experiments, a fruit flying project at some point with you know,  dealing with genetics. Genetics of the fruit fly, that was quite a long time ago.  And I was definitely in the honor society that was part of my high school experience.
Speaker 1: And what was your social life like in high school?
Speaker 2: Again, I think I was, I think I became somewhat withdrawn.  You know, I think I did girl scouts for a while, but I really didn't want to, I wasn't that enthusiastic about that.  So I think I was pretty withdrawn, I think I came home, I read, just always reading.  High school, I don't know, I think it was difficult.  There were beach clubs and they were very segregated.  There weren't any--at that time.  I know things have changed a lot.  But a lot of the social life believe it or not, ran around these beach clubs.  So my parents were members of that.  So socially, I can't say that I was at my peak, socially in high school, I really wasn't.
Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts--
Speaker 2: You know, I went to the beach with my family.
Speaker 1: --Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And did that.  But I can't think of a lot of social activities.  I went to the high school prom.
Story_ID: 106549
Speaker 1: What were some of your thoughts about college?  Like you said you knew you were going to college, but what were some of your thoughts about where you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: Well, I was really excited about college.  I think because socially I hadn't really found my place in high school, so I really wanted to go to college that, a university, I was convinced I wanted to be in a university.   A lot of my students--a lot of my high school classmates tended toward the smaller schools because they were used to suburbia and I think there were only a hundred students in my class and I was the tenth in terms of what, you know, they graded us, I think tenth in a class of a hundred students.  So it was a small high school, relatively.  So I wanted to be in a big university, I knew that.  I also wanted to be in a university that had a large number of African American students matriculating, because I felt that I wanted to have more of a social life that I didn't really have in high school.  So those were my two criteria.  And I wanted to go to an Ivy League school, I think I knew that too.  I was very much interested in attending an Ivy League school.
Speaker 1: And what were some of your thoughts about what you wanted to do with your life career-wise?
Speaker 2: Well again, I was very strong in sciences, but I hadn't really zeroed in on what I would do in the sciences.  I knew the careers of choice for a lot of students was medicine or law, but I think I was never that committed to the idea of being a doctor, although I knew if I went into to sciences that's probably what I would do.  My father [Edward James], though, had made up his mind, he wanted me to be a lawyer.  That was just no question in his mind.  He knew I was always interested in politics, very argumentative, very opinionated, and he was convinced that that's what I should be doing.  And I kind of struggled with him 'cause I thought maybe I could actually enroll in an engineering school, 'cause I admired my father so much with his career and what he did.  But he really discouraged that actually.
Story_ID: 106550
Speaker 1: And did you and your family attend church growing up?
Speaker 2: We did in Saint Albans [Queens, New York].  I went to Grace Baptist Church in Saint Albans and was pretty active there actually in that as a child.  Once we moved to [New] Jersey we never quite made the transition into the church.  To be honest, my grandparents were very much churchgoers, so I grew up knowing the church was important.  But somehow or another we lived this middle class secular kind of life and we really didn't pursue church as much as (unclear) come back to it now as an adult; emancipated adult.
Story_ID: 106551
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from high school [Monmouth Regional High School, Tinton Falls, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 1: And what was happening, as you said, you know you grew up like during the Civil Rights Movement. What were some of your thoughts about civil rights and were you thinking that you wanted to be active and involved on some level?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I think I always had a strong interest in justice and social progress.  That's been a theme, I think, throughout my life.  I think I inherited that from my family.  They were always interested in how to make social progress.  I mean, for African Americans, but I think for people in general.  And I think those were some of the things my grandfather and my father [Edward James] sort of fought and talked about.  My father's sister was someone who I was very close to, my aunt, who's now deceased.  She was involved in the Washington, D.C. area actually.  She worked out of Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] at the end of her career, but with early child development, particularly with learning disabled children.  I actually have a brother who's learning disabled.  So that's really interesting to me, but my aunt was committed to particularly children, indigent children, find ways of resources and of helping parents of, indigent parents of children who were learning disabled.  So I think all that informed me in terms of wanting to see justice done for you know just everybody in society, and particularly African Americans--knowing our history, wanting to see us, be able to progress and have, you know, more opportunity to really realize our dreams that maybe our grandparents weren't able to realize, or great-grandparents.
Story_ID: 106552
Speaker 1: And so where did you decide to go to college?
Speaker 2: Cornell. I ended up going to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and part of it--I mean, Cornell has some of the history is rather controversial, but I guess I always wanted, you know, I wanted quick change, and I also was very interested in understanding more about my own history as an African American person.  And Cornell had this rather difficult history and in terms of the students demanding.  And this was in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], tumultuous time in the country in general where the African American students demanded a, that there be an Afri-kind of center started and actually that did happen at Cornell. Again it was not without controversy.  There was the infamous [Willard] Straight [Hall] takeover, a group of African American men took over the Straight.  And I have to say, you know, I was always frightened of violence.  I never an advocate of violence, and to this day, I mean I have struggles over the society using violence, but I understood the realities of violence and that was, really what I think about it, not anything for the students to do perhaps, but at the time I understood and know why they did it.  And, but I think I was wanting to be amongst students who cared about that and again, I was always a pacifist, I think by nature, you know, but it definitely I thought brought into my sight that adversity, at that instant that happened there.  And then there was (unclear), you know.  The white students actually probably also did some pretty things that we wondered, what we were thinking at the time.  But I was at that, sort of tail end of that, the Vietnam War coming to an end.  And you know, again, I was informed by [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s position on that war and on, you know and all that he did for America.  And so that brought me to Cornell. It was a university, that would have you know all the disciplines that I could possibly you know, imagine, people from all backgrounds and that's, that was my choice.
Story_ID: 106553
Speaker 1: And how were you faring socially in college?  Were you really starting to find your place and find yourself and blossom?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think much better, I mean much more than high school.
Speaker 1: --Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I did blossom. And there was some, I mean, that was a difficult period. Things have changed so much, but I think there was I have to say, a certain amount of division, I think about the students around race, and I think much more than today.  So socially most of my friends were African Americans and Korean.  My parents, they were kind of mortified a little bit because they had encouraged me to think about Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And they would sort of think, well why go to a university and then sort of socially be exclusive.  We had actual arguments about this.  But I think it was something I wanted to do, you know, I needed to be around African American contemporaries 'cause I hadn't had that experience in high school.
Speaker 1: What kinds of organizations were you involved in in college?
Speaker 2: Well, another controversy, the-- students decided to start something called the Ujamaa Residential College, which was actually part of this disagreement I had with my parents, and I guess something that you do if you don't do it in high school, I guess you do it in college. My parents and I, we clashed more when I was a college student.  I was a very obedient high school student, I was no problem, but in college, I did clash with them over this but the Ujamaa Residential College was sort of this concept of--there was a gentleman named Julius Nyerere and part of this came out of our studies at the Africana Studies and Research Center.  Julius Nyerere, he was head of, at the time the president of Tanzania, and he had this idea of sort of an African approach to organizing economics and organizing you know society.  And we read his, one of his treatises on this, and we decided we wanted to develop a residential situation around those kind of concepts of Ujamaa, which is community, cooperation, I guess it has now become part of the some Kwanzaa--
Speaker 1: Right, one of the principles.
Speaker 2: --cooperative economics, (unclear) for Kwanzaa, this is actually before Kwanzaa.  So I was involved in that.  I took courses out of the Africana Studies Center as I mentioned.  And it was really kind of a rarified environment.  There was an African American theater group and we'd go and support the theater and, you know, it was really exploring a lot of my African and African American roots.
Speaker 1: And what did you get your degree in?
Speaker 2: Ultimately, government.  I started out indecisive and then my father [Edward James] was right.  I ended up studying political science, that was my major, although I had taken a lot of economics courses and science courses, ultimately, I got my degree, Bachelor of Arts degree, in American Government and Politics.
Speaker 1: What year did you get your B.A. degree?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Story_ID: 106554
Speaker 1: And one of my favorite courses was a course given by Daniel Danowski, professor of government, called the development of African American rights in --constitutional rights of African Americans in the United States.  Really wonderful course.  He used a book by a lawyer named Loren Miller, I think his name was.  And it was just a really eye-opening course in terms of how the rights of African Americans evolved over, over, you know, time since we--our ancestors were brought, for the most part, here, until, I guess up 'til the Civil Rights Movement, and sort of what happened in the law.  And that was an undergraduate course that I took.  That was probably just very, very powerful course, and probably clinched or cinched my decision to ultimately study law.
Speaker 2: And so that's what--that was going to be my next question.  When were you thinking, okay, my father [Edward James] was right, I'm going to go to law school?
Speaker 1: Toward, really toward the--probably my junior year.  We had to sort of declare what we were going to do as a major, and I knew I had explored the medicine and my passion really wasn't there.  So, and there's this is sort of wisdom that says, if you're not sure what you want to do (laughter), you go to law school, so that was the wisdom then.  And I think, I decided, well I'm not sure what I want to do and I get a chance not to make up my mind again.  I mean, I'll study law, but I don't have to actually make up my mind as to what I want to do.
Speaker 2: Until you went to Cornell Law School [Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remained at Cornell.
Speaker 2: Why did you decide to stay at Cornell?
Speaker 1: Well, financially, it made sense, frankly.  Cornell had a great law school.  That was the reason.  You know, and honestly, it was second to Columbia [University, New York City, New York].  That was really my first choice 'cause I wanted to be in New York. You know, I had been away in high school, and I had missed such a--always I wanted to be back in New York.  But financially Cornell made more sense.  My father [Edward James] frankly again, he won on that one too.  He thought, you know can always go to New York, and this is probably going to be an easier adjustment, so you can really concentrate on studying law.
Story_ID: 106555
Speaker 1: And what was law school like for you, what were some of your favorite courses in law school?
Speaker 2: Well, my first year was altogether wonderful because everything was new.  You know, again, I had taken this--several undergraduate courses related to law.  You know Cornell didn't have a pre-law major, so it was really all very new in sort of a--what's that movie about a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professor--I can't think of the name right now, but that sort of that rarefied environment, professors calling on you, you have to be prepared, so I loved all of it.  We took basic--all of us took the same courses our first year, contracts, I took two semesters of that and one semester of constitutional law.  What it does is it, as they say--it teaches you how to think like a lawyer.  That first year, criminal law, we took two semesters of that.  You know, it was a very exciting time that first year because your, like I said, everything is new and I think, who's the dean at the time, I think, [Roger] Cramton had us read a book called-- by Carl(unclear), who's a famous legal jurisprudential philosopher.  But he talked about law being a seamless web, and so we learned just about how it works.  And there was another book we read about sort of the anatomy of a trial, which was very--I think I still have it in the library.  So it was a great--my first year was great.  I'm not saying I was the top student, but you know, very, very exciting.
Speaker 1: And what kind of law were you thinking you wanted to practice?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I told my father [Edward James] poverty law. That wasn't exactly what he had in mind.  In fact we had, sort of like that.  For example, (unclear) you know, character, you know, my heart, you know he was a little concerned and you know and we had a (unclear) what exactly is poverty law, but you know, I wanted to represent again, indigent people and I worked in the, eventually, the Cornell legal aid clinic and that was probably--after that first year when you sort of the glory and the newness wears off, law school did become more of a struggle.  (Unclear) But I did participate in something called Cornell Legal Aid Clinic, which was very satisfying.  And Cornell, and Ithaca, it's a rural area in--a lot of my clients were poor white Americans.  So we had for example, rents cases involving people who lived in trailers, you know divorce cases, some people, rural people who were impoverished.  And I really have to say that was one of the most meaningful parts of going to law school to represent and actually using what I learned to represent people who needed representation.
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from law school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975].
Speaker 1: From law school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978], sorry.
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978].  I began law school in '75 [1975] and graduated three years later, '78 [1978].
Story_ID: 106556
Speaker 1: So once you graduated from law school [Cornell Law School, Ithaca, New York], what did you do next?
Speaker 2: You know my main aim, and I think it was because it was deferred, having gotten accepted at Columbia and not attending Columbia Law School [New York City, New York] and having to sort of settle for Ithaca, which was, it turned out to be wonderful.  I wanted to come to New York.  And honestly, I'll have to say that sort of outweighed anything else more than choosing what I wanted to do, I have to say that.  So I still wasn't clear on precisely what I wanted to do.  I did interview with legal aid and legal services and ended up working for the city, the city of New York.  I think in part and maybe it's in retrospect, what better way to learn about the city of New York than to represent the city of New York, so I ended up working as an assistant corporation counsel.  That was my first job.
Speaker 1: For the City of New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's the mayor's and it's agency's lawyers.
Speaker 1: And were you still longing to work with the poor and to really help certain clients--
Speaker 2: Well, ultimately I knew that one way or the other I wanted to move, see how I could help get the society progress and become fairer and open up opportunities for everyone.  I mean, it's interesting because what I've learned I think over the years is, there are various--the venues that you would do that in aren't necessarily the obvious ones--I can kind of go off on a tangent on that one, but it, wherever you are you can find ways I think of doing that.  But essentially what I wanted to do was gain training.  And in retrospect it was really a good decision working for corporation counsel.  I was not always excited or passionate about some of the positions the city took, but certainly in terms of legal skills, I was gaining them and it was a way of actually getting to courtroom very early.  If I had worked for a firm, I would not have had that experience.  But I had an opportunity to represent the city and its agencies in the courtroom to try cases.  I then did appellate work and I argued all the way up to the court of appeals, which is the top court in this state.  And excellent training.  I, as an appellate lawyer, I honed my writing skills as well, along with reading, enjoyed writing, but I became a much better writer, something I--you don't necessarily--I think law schools are doing this now, but you don't necessarily learn the writing in law school.  I sort of became a much better writer and you know, all the skills I would need to be a fine lawyer.  I have to give the corporation counsel credit, you know, even though it wasn't exactly what I thought I'd be doing as a lawyer.
Speaker 1: --Are there any particular cases that come to mind when you worked for the corporation counsel that really stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, probably those I went to court of appeals on.  It probably wouldn't be interesting to anybody but some of the more academic in law.  But I went to the court of appeals on case involving (unclear) claim, again, rather dull and the idea is, you know, limiting liability on the part of sovereign part of government and there are various policy reasons why you might want to do that but the, there's a requirement that a notice or claim be served on the city before you can sue the city for damages in tort and there was this trio case where the intermediate appellate courts had disagreed and I ended up being assigned that, ended up winning with the case in the court of appeals.  Something typically probably not too thrilling, but for academics and for lawyers, it's probably interesting.  I was certainly proud of having won a case before the court of appeals.
Story_ID: 106557
Speaker 1: So how long were you at the corporation counsel?
Speaker 2: So my tenure there was for five years.
Speaker 1: So around 1983?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did you do after you left the corporation counsel?
Speaker 2: Then my career move was housing-related.  I ended up first in a subsidiary, one of these public parties called, it's a long name, New York State Mortgage Loan Enforcement and Administration Corporation.  The short of it is that the state had built thousands of units of housing across the state, actually [John D.] Rockefeller.  Rockefeller was part of the architect for that and actually that part of the impetus for that was the turmoil out of [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s death, there was a lot of turmoil.  And the idea was again, it's interesting how government moves.  But the idea was housing was in crisis in a lot of areas particularly for people of low means.  So there was a, I forgot how many units of housing, how many projects across the state.  I used to know this by heart, but several hundred projects across the state that were built for people with less means.  And the model was based on interest rates remaining steady and oil prices remaining steady and of course as we know, economics again, has cycles, so many of those projects ended up in distress where the element partners who were the investors didn't meet their initial debt service, because also the electrical court costs escalated.  So this agency was set up basically to, I used to call them the IMF [International Monetary Fund] of housing, to restructure data and in some cases have property foreclosed on and transferred to other owners in order to refinance the debt service and to recapitalize the project so that operating expense could be met.  So again it sounds very technical and it pretty much was, but I ended up being a foreclosure lawyer, sort of a stick, but got the partners together.  The partners of people that owned the property were partners who invested partly for tax reasons.  So the tax consequences if we foreclosed and you know were pretty--more arcane stuff, but related to the question of how to provide necessary housing to people who cannot normally afford what's on the market.
Story_ID: 106558
Speaker 1: And when you first graduated from law school [Cornell Law School, Ithaca, New York], did you find that there were opportunities for Af--well for particularly female attorneys as well as African Americans?
Speaker 2: While almost half my class was women which was new for law school, my class there were approximately only seven of us African Americans.  That was, you know, they had off years, there were larger numbers the year before.  I was the only woman in my law school class actually.  And I have to say I think that's one area where both the law school and society in general has improved, because I think, you know, some of the very best women worked in firms.  And I honestly felt--this is sort of hard for me to say, 'cause I guess I didn't have the focus to work for firms, maybe this is hard to say, but I also felt at the time some of my African American male colleagues had a little more, a slight more opportunity in the private sector than if I would have had I gotten chosen, it's hard to say.  Some of them were athletes and some really pretty amazing athletes.  One was a, I think a tricathlon winner.  And I noticed that they--there were some opportunities that they--because of that connection, they would receive that.  That, perhaps I didn't go after it either, but I kind of felt somewhat neglected.  I mean, I found my job on my own.  I have to say, I didn't have a lot of support from the placement office at the time.  Again, I think all that's changed, probably very much because of women, you know, being active in terms of pushing the placement office.  And I think overall, I think the placement office has improved.  I think people are a lot more sensitive about how important that is.  I think Cornell's gotten a lot more sensitive.  But again, some of my female colleagues ended up with large firms.
Story_ID: 106559
Speaker 1: And when did you start thinking about a judgeship, or did you think about it at all?
Speaker 2: You know I honestly, I really didn't.  It was serendipity.  And you know that may somewhat characterize my career in general. I mean, I knew students both female, male, black, white, who had ten-year plans and I never, I never did, I wanted to be in New York, I knew that much.  I had gotten involved a little bit politically, just somewhat, as a lawyer, helping out with the campaigns.  And as a result of was moving to Harlem [New York City, New York].  That was the other thing, I wanted to move to Harlem because of it's history, I wanted to be part of that history and part of the, what now people call New--Harlem Renaissance but just part of the community that has this really incredible history.  In terms of the activism on the part of Adam Clayton Powell who was the minister of the church [Abyssinian Baptist Church] that I now go to during that period of Civil Rights Movement and have helped [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson actually shepherd in a lot of the civil rights laws.  So I wanted to be part of this community and that was really my focus.  I wanted to become active, I wanted to be involved with young people, I wanted to be involved with trying to again, move social, making society progress in Harlem.  You know which in '88 [1988] when I moved here, was going through a lot of sort of difficult times coming out of, I guess the late '60s [1960s] and the advent of crack cocaine and other narcotics in the neighborhood.  So I knew I wanted to sort of be here and to see what I could do and contribute to making the neighborhood improve.  And I got involved and actually through that involvement I met politicians and frankly was recruited to run for judge.  I hadn't really thought of it as an avenue for a judiciary, but once it happened, it just seemed the logical place for me to be, and so it turned out-- it feels sort of, it was sort of, I wouldn't say preordained, that's a little too dramatic, but you know sort of inexorable journey to becoming judge, now in retrospect even without the ten-year plan or the twenty-year plan.
Story_ID: 106560
Speaker 1: And what was that process like just planning your campaign, what was that like?
Speaker 2: New York is interesting 'cause we do have both elective and appointed judges, and I, mine of course was the elective route.  So I had met at the time, [C.] Virginia Fields, was city council.  I threw my work on something called the community board.  I'd met her, met other elected officials and senators of the state.  And she actually recruited me to run for judge.  So a lot of my political experience was learning through these elected officials here in Harlem [New York City, New York] who had already done it.  And they partnered me with some of the people who had been involved politically.  New York is organized around political clubs.  Much of its power was shifted into community boards which are now governmental agencies, but the power of organizing people, the electorate, is still--resides in these clubs.  So there's one they call the Frederick [E.] Samuel Club named after former council person and they really--I ran here in the district of Harlem even though I'm centrally in Manhattan, some of the judges, myself included, were elected in the district.  So I ran in Harlem, which you know was exciting.  I ran with Assemblyman [Keith] Wright whose father was a jurist and is now retired, Bruce Wright, pretty famous judge in New York. And I learned a lot of my campaign skills through my association with Assemblyman Wright who had run before, and city council Fields, city councilwoman Fields who had run before.  She's now currently the borough president of Manhattan [New York City, New York].
Story_ID: 106561
Speaker 1: And did you have any trepidations about running for elected office, or were you excited about it?
Speaker 2: I had--was excited, but certainly it wasn't something that I really knew a lot about.  Ironically, I majored in and was, graduated cum laude in American government and political science, but I really hadn't had a lot of experience in campaigns.  So yes there were certainly a little trepidation.  As a judge, it's interesting, there's some controversy now about how judges are elected here in New York State. Some controversy over the notion of judges running for office, but--
Speaker 1: Why is it controversial?
Speaker 2: --Well, there are those who think there's something unseemly about judges running for office.  The U.S. Supreme Court has recently said judges have a first amendment right to express their opinions.  So in New York there are rules of conduct for judicial candidates who differ from normal candidates.  And it's not ethical, for example, for a judge to make promises of what he or she will do in office.  It really--we're supposed to run on our, and we do, I think for the most part, run on our credentials.  There's also controversy over judges raising money.  We're required in New York State to form committees, which we do, and the committees may raise money and we're not.  We're allowed to know who contributed to our campaigns.  Some people think that's a little fixed, you see who comes to your fundraiser and so you can kind of imagine that they're probably supporters.  And if they're lawyers, that's particularly a source of controversy.  So there is a lot--
Speaker 1: Because they may come before you.
Speaker 2: --Exactly.  So there's a lot of controversy.  I actually, my opinion is New York has a good system because there are more opportunity for people to either seek office through an elective process or through the appointed process, and I think that is a healthy mix actually.  We'll see that may change.  I also believe that in the appointed process, you know, appointee authorities, whether it be the governor, the mayor and that the governor or mayor, president, you know, depending on that particular person's point of view, you know has a big impact on who becomes a judge.  So judiciary is one branch of government and it represents power.  And wherever there's power there's going to be politics so regardless of what the process is there'll be politics.  The idea is how do you make it, how do you prove a process?  I'm not sure either process is superior to the other.  I mean, and I sound like somewhat of an advocate, but right now there's a lot of controversy in New York about the elective process.  And I believe there was an ABA poll of American citizens, the American Bar Association.  A lot of Americans, I think, citizens like the idea of being able to choose their judges electorally.  They want more information and that's the problem, I think in general with electoral politics, it assumes people are informed.  And I believe that's really where we should concentrate on, how do we inform people better about their choices?
Story_ID: 106562
Speaker 1: And how did you do in that first campaign, that first election?
Speaker 2: Well, again I, I ran--I won.  I mean, I think part of it is, in honesty, in Harlem [New York City, New York], people really embraced me.  I'm not a native of Harlem, but the clubs they just, they really embraced me.  They, I think, in my opinion, you know, saw that, you know, understood the work I'd done on the community board when I was a lawyer.  And it meant buying a house in Harlem and restoring it, I had to basically.  This house has been totally renovated.  And you know, work with young people.  And I think because they embraced me that the electorate followed.  Sure it began some controversy because the most active democrats probably, or do, determine who the judge, district candidates are.  So the most active democrats in the party in Harlem, by consensus, I became the candidate.
Story_ID: 106563
Speaker 1: And did your lack of a criminal background, you know, criminal law background, what role did that play, was that a little discerning [sic, disconcerting] for some people or--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting, New York is extremely balkanized, the city of course here.  The people down state--
Speaker 1: Extremely what?
Speaker 2: --Balkanized, in other words, bifurcated.  So certain judges do criminal and certain do civil.  Now there--the appellate level, of course, judges do both, the civil and criminal cases.  I don't think the electorate typically understands that.  I think New York is unique in that, New York City particularly, is unique that way.  The other thing you learn about law though, there is a seamless web idea, certain experience, one cannot underestimate the importance of experience. But you can learn right there, the criminal objector, the lawyers who've traditionally done mostly criminal work who have become judges and end up doing civil work and vice versa.  It doesn't happen a lot in New York City.  I think it probably happens more in other jurisdictions.  But you certainly can learn, and I as a judge now city Supreme Court I sit in arraignments, bail hearings.  So again, while my criminal law experience has been limited, now that I've done bail hearings, you know, I'm learning more about the criminal justice process, and I think legal training is unique, and certain areas of law that require really specialized training, copyright laws, intellectual property, and lawyers do specialize, I don't want to underestimate that.  But I think law lends itself much more to getting in a courtroom, it seems to go back to the idea of being able to understand another area of law, once you have the principles, overall principles of the law.  So that in New York City actually isn't too much of a question.  Of course the citizens would like to know that their judges have you know, as wide a range of experience.  Actually, I think I came the bench with probably the broader range of experience in life than a lot of my colleagues having worked for Corporation Counsel and then I became general counsel to a small authority that ran--runs a town call Roosevelt Island here in Manhattan.  So my breadth of knowledge, particularly in the civil area, is very much wider than I think typical.  And although the public reception may be different, the volume of work is, particularly now, in the civil area the greatest volume of work, criminal I think is more exciting so people--
Speaker 1: And it gets more publicity and--
Speaker 2: --Exactly.
Speaker 1: --That kind of thing.
Speaker 2: More the subject for the television shows.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: You know, although we have too many, I think, judge shows now that deal with the civil questions as well.
Story_ID: 106564
Speaker 1: So in 1994 when you--that was the first time you ran for office?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for judge.  Do you remember some of the early cases that came to you?  Are there any that really stand out in your mind, that come to mind particularly?
Speaker 2: So many.  Civil court is a, which is, wasn't used--was known as a (unclear) court.  The largest docket is housing, landlord-tenant.  So I spent a lot of time with landlord-tenant, both commercial and residential.  And Manhattan [New York City, New York] being real estate, it's a very contentious kind of area.   So I--there are a few that I put in the brochure actually.  One would be Brown against owner.  Anyway Brown involved a young man who, single parent, who had grown up on 10th Street in Harlem [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Street Realty vs. Brown?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: West 110th Street.
Speaker 2: West 110th v. Brown, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And 110th Street actually kind of stands out because it's the gateway to Harlem.  And it's, it overlooks Central Park, and it's become the Harlem in general, has become very much real estate.  There's a boom going on in Harlem.  And while that's good, I think it's bringing in a lot of services that weren't here when I first moved here.  It's also putting a lot of pressure on the housing prices.  So Mr. Brown, you know, he had--he was actually the brother-in-law of the person who claimed he had, what are called succession rights.  His family had grown up in the building and in New York, again, there are some very strong landlord-tenant laws that enable people to maintain their housing, notwithstanding the rise in the rents.  And so there was pressure and new owners had bought the building and they determined that the lease was not in this person's name and that this person, tenant was holding over, what's called holding, was not--had no rights to remain in the apartment.  And anyway, ultimately, he came in and testified, his brother-in-law testified and some others testified that he had actually--there was some continuity in his occupation of the apartment, possession of the apartment.  And so I found that he had proven his succession rights and he remained in the apartment, with his son.  So that's one that I remember, this is a trial.  I actually have to look at the brochure, I'm trying to remember other, others.  Again, the volume is so great, cases in civil court.
Speaker 1: What about Cade [ph.] v. New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That involved--again, these are all--ironically, those are, these are cases that have to do with Harlem [New York City, New York].  I've had many interesting cases, and I was going to show you one that was in the Law Journal just on Friday, where they featured first page.  But, yeah, Cade involved woman who lived--who worked for many, many years for the Health Hospitals Corporation which is an entity that runs the mutual hospitals that, again, treat indigent people that are uninsured for the most part and Miss Cade had made an error and was, ended up being terminated.  And I determined that she was, had been on probation in this apart--in this position that she'd been terminated from.  But she had worked, I don't know, maybe fifteen, twenty years in the lower grade.  And I found that she did have a right to be restored to that position.  So that was one case where I thought the law was clear and someone's job was, was, you know, retained as a result.
Story_ID: 106565
Speaker 1: And, excuse me,--so you remained on New York Civil Court from 1994 until 2002?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were appointed then?
Speaker 2: Right.  The way it works is, a certain number of the judges are elevated through an appointment process which is in terms of court.  The chief administrative judge appointed me to sit in the Supreme Court which is in New York what's called the Superior Court in other places.  But it's the highest level trial court.  So since 2002 I've sat in that court.
Speaker 1: And so do you hear both criminal and civil cases?
Speaker 2: Again, I'm assigned to the civil side.  In New York City, judges either sit criminal or, or civil, and I sit civil, particularly in New York County.  So I've maintained what a professor called in law school, called the orderly transferal of funds.  So a lot of cases have to do--are disputes over money.  There are cases that involve what's called injunctive relief as well, that I try as well.
Story_ID: 106566
Speaker 1: And what have you found to be the biggest difference between a lawyer, a working attorney, a working lawyer and a judge?
Speaker 2: The greatest difference is the ability to resolve disputes.  Lawyers go in as advocates, and as a judge, you can actually resolve disputes.  So, you know, it's just--I--it reminds me somewhat of the academics, I mean in terms of law academics because you're actually able to do a search and determine, you know, really where is the law and what is, what is, based on the law, how--what should be the decision in terms of the rights of these parties that are before you.  And I find that very satisfying.  You, you know, as a lawyer you don't always, you don't necessarily feel as passionate about each client that you might have, although you will advance and make the best arguments you can on behalf of that client.  But, you know, that doesn't always mean that you're the most passionate about a position the client is taking.  In the law, that, you know, you're--there's no need to do that.  You, you--you're the arbiter so you're able to evaluate the law and evaluate the facts and reach a decision and resolve the dispute.  So it's, I think being a judge is very satisfying that way.  And I really enjoy it.  Oh, and also you have much more, more autonomy.  You, you decide the particular case, particularly as a trial judge.  It's your decision what, what the outcome of the case shall be.  And, as a lawyer, particularly as a trial lawyer, as a litigator, you know you [don't] have that option to do that, unless you, you know, resolve it on your own, you settle.
Story_ID: 106567
Speaker 1: On your brochure, you're referred to as a justice of equal heart and mind, what does that mean exactly?
Speaker 2: Well, I think a judge has to both use his or her intellect to understand, you know, where the, where the law is.  But I think you also have to look toward some degree of compassion, and I guess it's where fairness and equity come in, in terms of people's rights.  So I'm actually very much involved in my free time--you're probably gonna ask me this--in literature.  And one of the, as a reader, again, one of the activities I'm doing as part of something called the New York County Law and Literature Committee, and on that committee, we read books of, written work that either involves a trial or involves a judge or involves some aspect of the law and there are many of them and throughout history there've been many, books about, you know, from [Honore de] Balzac and [Charles] Dickens to more contemporary writers.  Diane Johnson, I guess, one of the contemporary writers who wrote (unclear)--but in any event, there's a book called "Anatomy of Murder"" written by judge--a person who eventually became judge of the Michigan court, chief judge [Justice John D. Voelker].  And it's--there's a Hollywood movie that's made around that book.  But in that book there's a character, a judge who the characters evaluate.  It's a judge who has both a heart and a head.  So I thought, it's a--I think a great novel, in its portrayal of the trial, it's, it was criminal trial, of course.  And the judge to me is very much a hero in the book.  So, you know, it's an old-fashioned, you know, judge before women became judges or even before judges, women were that involved on, on the juries.  There was a time when women did not serve on juries.  But I think it did capture what American, American judiciary is at its best, I thought, in that character, encapsulated.  So that's part of how I came up with that slogan for my re-election campaign.
Story_ID: 106568
Speaker 1: So, Judge James, I know that when we ended you had mentioned one of your cases that was just in the law review?
Speaker 2: New York Law Journal it's called.
Speaker 1: Law Journal, I'm sorry.  Tell us a little bit about that one?
Speaker 2: Well the New York Law Journal just to get a little introduction, is the paper record of, in New York State for the court system.  And it publishes articles about decisions of interest, and many, judges are very proud, proud about our written work, so we're very proud when the Law Journal chooses to publish one of our opinions in full.  So we're even prouder when they decide to do a cover story.  So, on Friday, the Law Journal published a story about one of the cases, one of the recent decisions I made in a case.
Speaker 1: What--can you tell us a little bit about the case [Rochdale Holding Corp. v. Neuendorf]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it began--New York City, you cannot get away from landlord-tenant, I'm realizing that.  You really can't get away from it.   But in any event, it--and again, it, the questions, the legal questions are probably more, of more interest, of more interest to lawyers than academics, frankly.  As is the Law Journal in general.  But in short, it involved an international art dealer name Har- Hans Neuendorf, who lived in New York for a few years in Manhattan.  And he and his family rented a mansion.  He fell behind in his rent and was brought to court, and the civil court, the lower court, determined that he must pay $112,000.  Well, his--he and his family moved back to Germany, and he still runs a business here in New York.  But what the interesting legal question was, whether or not, the--my court, the higher level court, maintain jurisdiction over him, does the lower court have jurisdiction?  And again, it sounds fairly straightforward, but it's pretty technical, I mean, the question of whether or not the power of the court, it's called, over Mr. Neuendorf would continue in the [New York State] Supreme Court.  And there really haven't been a lot of decisions about it.  I mean, it's partly because--a question of whether it continues in this other court, which process was not served on him in that new court.  And part of the question was, when does personal jurisdiction, once you're before a court, and again, in personam jurisdiction means power over the person, I mean it's sort of the essence of what law is about.  I mean the people subjecting themselves to the power of the court, when does that end?  And there have been some indications under New York State law that it only ends when judgment is satisfied.  But it was not a foregone sort of conclusion.  And this gentleman had moved out, not only out of the state, 'cause there are limitations on the state's power over people who do not--no longer live in the state--but moved to Germany.  And so I found that because the state had effectuated its power over Mr. Neuendorf in the initial court, that that jurisdiction and that power remained.  And particularly, it was important because the asset, his company, is still here in New York.  So the question was whether that company was required to make good on the debt.  And I found that the company, you know, would be required to make good on that debt.  So he's required to make installment--the company is required to make installment payments toward this $112,000.  And then Mr. Neuendorf does come back into New York, 'cause that was part of the equities when we talk about heart and head, the heart and mind.  There's a law that says the person--the power of the, the court's power extends, you know, until the judgment is satisfied.  But then the equities of it, he was coming back to New York and staying at some very famous, (laughter) you know, hotels and clubs while he stayed here, and so there's some equity, I think there that the court was influenced by, the judges were influenced by.
Story_ID: 106569
Speaker 1: What are some of the biggest changes you've seen occur in terms of being a judge in New York, like during the last decade that you've been on the bench?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say the advancement of women is an obvious change.  There are many, many more women on the bench.  I mean there were--certainly I would say, I'm not the first and not the only.  So I'm not the first African American, nor am I the first woman, nor am I the first African American woman, which to me is wonderful.  But during my tenure over the last, well, this is my second term, my second tenure term on the bench, there have been, you know, numbers of women who have elevated to the bench and just the overall diversity of the court. I think we had our first, Sikh American lawyer, elected here in New York last year.  Our first Chinese woman who was elected to the bench, the [New York State] Supreme Court bench that is, a couple of years ago.  So just a, very much diverse bench.  I meet--in fact, I meet people, some young and some older who see me and say, you're not the kind of judge that I would (laugher)--you don't look like what I picture as a judge.  And I think that's very good, 'cause I think people did picture--I have a portrait of some of the women judges and there's a portrait--actually I think it's of the Peter Zenger trial, colonial trial, but they're all men.  And there're many places, even now where you'll go and just recently you'll see portraits of women, you know, portraits of African Americans who, who served in the judiciary, who served as heads, the bar, bar, of the--very established bar associations.  And all that's starting to, and it has changed.
Story_ID: 106570
Speaker 1: What kind of judge are you, what kind of judge do you think people say you are?
Speaker 2: Extremely patient and because a judge must monitor time, that sometimes becomes a struggle.  I mean one has to be patient, one has to give everyone a hearing, but one also has to be careful of time, which is our--everybody's--in the law, that's the, probably the biggest resources is time. Very patient. I think very thorough.  I would like to think that lawyers think of me as scholastic and scholarly and knowledgeable, knowledgeable with respect to the substantive law, but also in terms of how to run a trial.  Those would be in a nutshell, how I think I'd be described as a judge.
Story_ID: 106571
Speaker 1: And what advice do you have for lawyers who come before you?
Speaker 2: If it's a trial, it would be good if they would brush up on their rules of evidence.  That makes for much more, a prepared trial, a much more efficient trial.  General preparation. Lawyers must be prepared, so they have to do their homework.  And I have adopted an order that other judges use, use that require that lawyers, for example, know which, with trials, know what evidence they're going to introduce and then have an idea of how, what order they're going to introduce the evidence and get--and believe it or not, again, because the trial docket is so busy in New York, lawyers aren't always, haven't always done their homework as much as they want.  I mean, we have some extraordinary trial lawyers, but the homework is really, really key.  I'd like to also say though, I must add that I would hope that the lawyers find that I'm--because I'm patient and a good listener, that I'm really, you know, listening to each side and thoroughly understanding what each side's position is before I would make a decision.  And that is certainly my goal to do that.
Speaker 1: What advice to you have for someone who might be interested in a career in law?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I mentor quite a few young people.  My advice to young people would be, I ask them usually, "Do you enjoy reading?" (laughter)  You'd be amazed at how some of them don't realize that that's a criteria.  And you have to really enjoy reading.  And so then if you do, I wouldn't worry too much about concentrating in law right now. Read, read and learn as much about the world as you possibly can.  I usually also tell them to, you know, find something that they're passionate about, because law does lend itself--no matter what the industry is, to, you know, its application.  So I usually tell young people--what I would tell them, I think, about any career, you know, find something that you're really passionate about and then do your best to study and understand whatever that area is and then you would bring that, you know, to your, to your studies.
Story_ID: 106572
Speaker 1: What are some of your thoughts about the prevalence of so many judge shows on television?  You know, there's Judge Judy, Judge Mathis, Judge Joe Brown.  Do you think that those are accurate portrayals of what happens in the court room?
Speaker 2: I mean to some degree, but I'm generally not a major fan of those reality, I mean, I think reality TV, there's, it's a craze now.  I'm hoping that it passes.  I don't wish any of my colleagues who have made that transition to lose their jobs.  But, yeah, I think there's, there are false impressions made.  I mean, for example, and not to pick on her, but Judge Judy, I don't think people realize that neither side loses essentially.  When she makes an award against one side or the other, monetarily, the show does what it's called indemnifies that person and their, all their expenses are covered of, you know, their travels to California.  I know about that because I--actually, a case came before me which the parties were being invited, invited to travel to California and participate.  So it's really a voluntary process.  They both have to agree.  But then the show pays, underwrites all their, their costs, so I think it's, it's--people have to be aware that it is entertainment.  It's not--they'll learn a lot more by exercising their right to serve as juries, and that's--jurors and that's, I think, a concern of the court, that people are maybe not so interested in taking time out of their lives to act as jurors.  And I think it's so important, similar to voting, it's very important that people exercise that right.  It's, I think, one of the most democratic institutions that we have, is the jury, a process where, you know, twelve people in the case of criminal cases, six in the case of civil cases, determine the facts of a particular case and the ultimate resolution of the case, so that's so important.  And I think that is the best way for people to learn about the system and how it works and also how to improve it, if there is a need for improvement.  I don't know other, no better way than to, for example, vote or to serve on the jury, to maybe figure out how this could work better.
Story_ID: 106573
Speaker 1: Have you ever reversed a jury verdict?
Speaker 2: Twice, I think.  And I think in both instances, I had to, where the jury evaluated a case monetarily, differently than the courts have upheld.  And it stands to reason because the court has a benefit of knowing what the appellate courts have done in terms of damages.  The juries have, wouldn't have information as to what monetary amounts first, for example, are justified for a particular injury and, I mean it usually happens in personal injury cases, medical malpractice, motor vehicle accidents, etc. where juries, they really don't know what the courts have upheld.  And so I think that's really only, only time I've found, I had to disagree with the jury and reverse the jury's decision.
Speaker 1: Is that controversial sometimes when that happens?
Speaker 2: Rarely.  I mean it's, again, it's part of--I mean, I think judges are very careful and exercise their discretion very carefully, about upsetting a jury award.  I think all of us, you know, because we really respect what the jury does.  But there're probably more reversals because of maybe--and I have never done a study of this, but errors that maybe the judges made, probably they're more reversals based on that.  But in terms of the monetary damages, probably not.  I mean, I think it's unfortunate that jurors aren't aware of what appellate authority there is.  Not, this is--probably what I'm saying is probably controversial, but they're not aware and so I think for that reason, it's not terribly controversial.  They're not aware that they've been reversed and only lawyers and judges would know about reversals, very interesting.  So when you hear about the controversies over tort reform, some of that controversy, I think, is because people aren't aware of the appellate progress.  I think they're more aware of, for example, in the most dramatic situation you have with jurors which are--and they may not even be aware but with, you know, for example, death penalty cases.  That law's has been struck down here in New York, but it persists in other jurisdiction.  They might be more aware of, and often I think it's really the court that's been in error when the cases are reversed.  Some error on the part of the court, on the part of the court in evaluating judges--lawyers' performances, for example.  So, that's a, I mean that's a really interesting question that you asked actually (laughter).
Story_ID: 106574
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: Wow, what stands out the most?  Probably this whole, you know, idea of, I think of Africans Americans.  I think where we, you know, where we've come in terms of, you know, the United States and for most, for many of us, you know, our ancestors came in bondage, and the idea of that we have this history-- and this is probably--I'm not sure if this is responsive because I'm talking sort of more, much more globally, but I, (unclear) just this sort of this awareness of what, you know, our ancestors, and my grandparents and their parents struggled through, you know, to allow me to be here in the position that I'm in.  And I think that just informs me.  I--(unclear), stands out, I have to say.
Story_ID: 106575
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: Only fleetingly.  I think only because life has been so grand, you wish there could be more of it and that you could do more of it and only from that standpoint.  And I feel that's what, being a judge is what we're supposed to do.  So I have no questions about that.  And I think I'm fortunate that way.
Speaker 1: And what haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: I think I'd ultimately I'd like to be a member of appellate, an appellate bench.  That would probably be my ultimate career objective.  I want to be also elected to the higher court.  I'm sending my designation and that's at the pleasure of our chief administrative judge.  But in order to have tenure on that, office, one must be elected still in New York, although, again, there are reformers who, who are wanting to move into the exclusively appointed process.  But so in order to gain--actually, it's fourteen years on the trial-level court, the superior court, it's called supreme court, I would have to be elected.  And I haven't had that opportunity to be elected by the, well, I have not been nominated, by the party to run for the higher trial office.  And that would be my most immediate goal.  And then ultimately I think I'd like to work in the appellate court.
Speaker 1: Why would you like to work on the appellate court?
Speaker 2: It is related to my, my love of writing, writing as a means of communicating.  I'd like to be in a position to, you know, have that kind of impact on the law, in terms of, you know, appellate authority.  I love the scholarship of, of research in terms of the law and trying to resolve disputes through applying what in law's called suri-decisive [ph.].  It's legal precedent that under the British American system is built through judges determining how to interpret in New York, I'm sorry, in America, it would be the Constitution and other, in statutes.  But how to apply those to particular engagement among people.  So I'd like the idea of being able to further define the law as an appellate jurist.
Story_ID: 106576
Speaker 1: Do you think that you're a role model?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As I say, I, I've always been involved with young people. I mean, they've worked in the court system with us, both high school students and law school students who, who worked as interns in the summers and actually sometimes during the year.  So absolutely, regardless of whether they're interested in moving into judiciary ultimately and have any aspirations that way.  Yeah, I think it's our responsibility to--I heard a great quote, and I'm not gonna remember who said it, but a great leader is one who develops other leaders, not someone necessarily who has follow--many, many followers.  So that's the kind of leader I think I wanna be.  I wanna be able to develop other leaders to the extent that I'm a leader (laughter).
Story_ID: 106577
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you've already done that you wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: It's nuanced.  I think I would have--having majored in government, American government politics, perhaps would have gotten involved more than I did in terms of electoral politics.  That's the one, and judges are certainly, that's not gonna change even with any reform.  We're certainly not permitted to be involved.  We may run, for example, I ran with the assemblyman, Assemblyman Keith Wright.  We may run with other candidates, but we're not allowed to endorse any other candidates or work in campaigns.  And one judge recently in New York State actually got in trouble for that because it's--there's an ethical rule that says a judge may not campaign.  That's really one, my one, one that I would have done differently, gotten involved, more involved politically.  That is my one--did you ask me regret, regret or something I would have done differently?
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would have done that differently.  And, and, you know, it's interesting 'cause if you're--and with this movement in New York State to have all judges appointed, I've sort of--I did some research on the federal judges.  And if you look at federal judges who are appointed by the president, as we know, tenured for life, a lot of them were very involved politically before they became judges.  I mean again, politics is power.  So it stands to reason that they would have been involved.  (unclear), I don't think there's anything wrong that.  I think that's important, that judges understand the other branches of government, and maybe even serve in the other branches of government.  So that's something I would have done differently.
Story_ID: 106578
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: That each young person has an opportunity to find their--can I call it a muse?  I mean I'm, you know, very trusting of art, the importance of art, but I'm using muse in its broader sense, as something that really impassions them.  It doesn't have, have to necessarily be, you know, particular art area.  And it's not going to be, but something they really, you know, wanna do and wanna strive toward.  That, to me, is the most important, not only for African Americans, I mean, I think for everyone, but I think what's important for African Americans is important for all then.  So that's my biggest concern, that that happen, and I--you know I think we're all talking about it and we're trying to move that way, but I, you know,  there's just so much more I think we need to do in that area.
Story_ID: 106579
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?  When you're no longer here, what is it that you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: Judge James was a fair jurist.  And the way American jurisprudence works is that you're pretty much, for the most part, deciding particular disputes. That Judge James gave me a hearing and maybe even if I disagree with her decision, she made the best decision she could, given what she, she had.
Story_ID: 106580
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: It's the only way to understand yourself.  So in order to understand myself I need to know about, I think my family.  I mean I marvel at people who for one way, reason or another aren't connected to their birth parents or who have family and how--and some of them have, notwithstanding that, achieved just wonderful things.  But I think it, you know, it's very important to know where you're coming from, to understand, you know, where you're heading, where you're, what, you know, what informs your aspirations.  And I think it, you know, to have a full realized life, you have to understand something about your history.  And, you know, I think that's true for nations, you know, as well, I think, that as citizens we need to know our history as Americans in order to progress, I think, as humans.
Story_ID: 106581
Speaker 1: And what values do you consider most important and why?
Speaker 2: I think it's just very important to endure.  You have setbacks, notwithstanding that, that's life.  It's understanding that that really is what life is, that there are obstacles, there are setbacks, there--you make errors, I think.  So it's important to persevere, notwithstanding the inevitable difficulties that arise in life, you know, whether it be with health or, you know, just making ends meet.  That's part of life.  And so I think perseverance is the, I think, the most--and love, I mean, (unclear) I think love, really, it's a spiritual question regarding others and this is a Christian sort of creed, but I think most--all the religions have this thread, you know, regarding other people as you  would, yourself.  I think there's a thread (unclear) all the world's religions to that, to the extent that I understand.  So I think that's important.  I mean maybe that, part of that endurance is in the love, I mean, how to make that love endure notwithstanding the--the struggle.
Story_ID: 106582
Speaker 1: And what do you believe your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: Well, one reason I like to publish is the idea that the decisions will remain.  Sometime we joke--we'll find precedent, the judges will find precedent--and lawyers too that are in 1800, 1915.  We'll joke, "Well couldn't you get something a little more recent than that, and there are instances where you really, you aren't able to.  But, you know, that, to the extent there's something truthful and reasonable in law, you know, again, I think you're advancing human progress.  So I would like to have building up, you know (laughter), of this body of decision-making that I hope people will find helpful in resolving their disputes and maybe even in planning ahead so you don't end up in court, because, of course, I think ultimately, what lawyers would like--everyone would like is people being helped to resolve their differences, firstly, peacefully, through the court system, but also anticipating, so that the disputes can resolve without having to, you know, give it over to the court system.
Story_ID: 106583
Speaker 1: And what would you say has been your greatest accomplishment?
Speaker 2: Probably in becoming a, I think, a quality jurist.  I think I--that, I would have to point to that as my greatest achievement becoming, what I think is a quality jurist.  I'm learning all the time, but I've learned a lot over the first ten years, and I intend to learn more for the second decade of serving on the bench, so I would point to that.  I think doing the work, doing the work would be my greatest accomplishment.
Story_ID: 106584
Speaker 1: And is there anything else you'd like to add that perhaps we didn't touch on, something else you'd like to mention?
Speaker 2: Well, I mentioned it, but I want to re-emphasize.  I think the importance of art.  I mentioned the muse, have children find their muse.  But I'm saying that it doesn't have to be, but narrowly-defined category of art.  But I do think that we all need art in our life and we should all have it.  And that's sort of the end point.  I think part of that process of children revealing themselves is being exposed to art and being able to try to create, I think that's a very basic human endeavor.  So I think that's so important.  And I do surround myself with art and, you know, I've gotten into trying to collect a little art, as you see around my apartment, but I, you know, have taken up the piano.  I think it's really important and I do, and I talked about the social dancing I did as a child, as a girl.  I've taken up something called swing dancing.  And that's like kind of hobby I have and it's great for the mind, and it's great for the physical activity.  And it's a great purveyor of history and I'm also a big jazz fan.  You'll see in the lobby I have photographs of some of our jazz artists who are no longer with us, but I'm celebrating the ones that are still here as well.  But I--all I have to say, I think everybody needs that in their life.  I mean it's very important.  And, and even judges (laughter).
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: We need some type of art in our life.  And, you know, and for me the first thing is books, the word.  So I wanna sort of an advance that as a theme.  And I had a--my first campaign was around a group of people I read with, and we had a very literary campaign with writers who lended their readings to some political campaign fundraising, so I thought that was sort of unique in the annals of American electoral politics, usually the two things don't mix too much.  So, yeah, I would emphasize that as being central to who I am and to what's really I think important.
Speaker 1: Great.  Thank you very much, Judge James, for your time, and--
Story_ID: 105300
Speaker 1: That is my father Edward Cornelius, Edward C. James.  I imagine it was about 19--, sometime in 1940s before I was born, probably soon after he graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Engineering, School of Engineering.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That photo is of myself, I'm in my mother's arms, and my--the oldest of my three brothers, Edward Kevin and my parents.  And that would have been approximately, I would say '56 [1956], '57 [1957]? Fifty-six [1956], I would guess.  So I would guess that would be 1956.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There Craig.  Craig S. James, Craig Steven James.  And that's a high school photograph.  That would have been 1975 perhaps? I'm really guessing.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine.  So you want to say late '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I would say late--it was actually '70s [1970s], late '70s [1970s] is more accurate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is a photograph of women judges in New York County.  I'm all the way in the back there to the left.  My photographer friend said never do that, never stand in the back that way.  But anyway, somebody has to be in the back.  I'm right there.  But many of my women colleagues are photographed there, and that was taken in the ceremonial court room, which I mentioned, the photograph or portrait, I think it was the Zenger [John Peter Zenger], the famous trial for journalist, New York State.
Speaker 2: And about what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: Probably '90s [1990s], late '90s [1990s], '99 [1999]?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine.
Speaker 1: This is a group of judges of color.  We call ourselves judicial friends, and we meet every year at a law sermon in one of the churches in the city.  That was a church in the Bronx [New York City, New York].  I think it was Saint Benedicts, I'm guessing, Bernardine.  It's a church that I think is actually having some troubles--maybe in Manhattan [New York City, New York], I'm not actually sure.  That was--I think the date is in the photograph, 2000.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We do this every year, and if I had thought about it, I would have brought, I have another one, larger number and all the corps officers, but I forgot to bring that one.
Speaker 2: You can send that one to us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'll send it definitely.  But that's many of my colleagues.  It's something I put together with a photographer friend of a current portrait of my parents on a cruise that I took with them, and then portraits of them when they were younger.  They've been married for fifty years, so I put that together in the year 2002.  The date--occasion was their 50th anniversary.  We had a big party for them.
Speaker 2: I think we have that one of your father.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you do.
Speaker 2: Can we get the one of her mother?  We shot a bigger one like that of her father.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I hadn't thought of it, but I would have--I would have gotten the other one, the source of that, one of mother.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that one was taken of your mother?
Speaker 1: I think around the same time as my father's photograph.  She was graduating from nursing school, so it would have been again before I was born, so the late '40s [1940s], 1949, maybe 1950.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now that would be on my mother's side.  Matilda Shelly Walker, my mother's great-great-grandmother who actually bought property there with a deed in Georgia.  So it would have been among the blacks who came out of slavery and bought property, but she's a great-great-grandmother on my mom's side.
Speaker 2: About what year do you think that was taken?
Speaker 1: Well 1900? Maybe.
Speaker 2: That's fine.
Speaker 1: What's the year on top?
Speaker 2: Eighteen sixty-five [1865].
Speaker 1: To 19-something?  Yeah, so--1920s probably.
Speaker 2: And that's my brother who's a physician on the left, the older of my brothers.  I'm very proud of him.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: Edward Kevin James, he's a neonatologist up in Connecticut, and that's me in the middle and my other brother, who's an investment banker on the right.
Speaker 1: His name?
Speaker 2: G.--Gary Aaron James.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year do you think that was taken?
Speaker 2: Probably 1993, I'm going to guess.  That's another picture of my father on his ship in the [U.S.] Navy, and that would have been 19--early 1940s, probably late 1930s, World War, well when you think about it, World War II, I'm probably off a little bit, the end of World War II would have been when that portrait was taken, that photograph.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that there, she wants to do the top one.
Speaker 2: That's a photograph of myself being congratulated by two of the Harlem elected officials, Keith Wright, Assemblyman Wright is in the middle and he had actually announced his candidacy for a second term and to the right is our current borough president, E. C. Virginia Fields, who was then city council personnel--is what's called the borough president of the County of Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year was that?
Speaker 2: That would have been about 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: May I look inside that because I have no idea what year that is, '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: Okay, start with this one.
Speaker 2: That's all right, these are kind of easy.  That would have been 1998 in Cancun, a trip to Cancun, a group of alumni from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  That would have been probably 1994, after I became a judge, after I was inducted, I think January there was an induction for judge, not judge, city councilwoman's, Field's second term as city council person.  I think that was that.
Speaker 1: That was 1971, '72 [1972] Cornell University, undergraduate.
Speaker 2: That's about 1961, I was eight years old, probably second, third grade.
Speaker 1: That would be 1953 in my mom's arms in Knoxville, Tennessee, where I was born.  My guess would be about maybe 1955, probably about two years old in that picture.  And I guess I was about three years or four there so 1957.  And that would have been '58 [1958].  I may have the years a little off, but '58 (1958), '59 (1959).
Speaker 2: Kindergarten?
Speaker 1: Kindergarten picture, that date I'm sure of because that I remember vividly--my first day of school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.   That, I'm doing what I like to do socially whenever I can, dancing to a live 16-piece orchestra on a cruise trip where we were celebrating the birthday of Frankie Manning who turned ninety.  So that was in 2000.  Actually, no, that would have been 2002, who turned eighty-nine.  That's me and Betty Bebop Carter, one of my favorite artists.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's one of my favorite jazz artists and I got to actually have my picture taken with her through my cousin who's by the way a jazz musician.  My cousin is Steve Williams who plays with Shirley Horn.   But anyway that was--
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: --That would have been '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That would have been the year 2003.  You asked me what I would have done, maybe I would have been a tap dancer.  But I tapped my way into the New Year.  I took about three classes and that was my one and only performance.  I would never perform again, but anyway it was a fun thing to do.  But I had a big birthday party in 2003.
Speaker 1: That is my aunt, my Aunt Virginia Williams, who is my father's only sister, and that would have been probably around the time of those other photographs 19--, my parents graduating, 1947, '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: That was my first trip to Africa.  I went to Senegal and Mali and I went, it would have been in 1980s.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, the door of no return, right.  That's one of my in-between jobs as a lawyer, I actually, it would have been 1994, because they were celebrating my elevation to the bench with some former co-workers.
Speaker 1: That is actually a picture at my induction.  The woman with the hat is one of my favorite people, in fact two of my favorite people in that photograph.  The one with the hat is, her name is Lana Turner, believe it or not, she's a pretty extraordinary person and I'm with my other friend, Gail, one of my other favorite friends, Gail Edwards, two of my friends.  They're non-lawyers.  We're in a reading group together and we bond through reading.  And the reading we do in that group is African American writers.
Speaker 2: And this one was 1994?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, that's in Queens [New York City, New York] with some of my friends who I used to play Double Dutch with and other games.  That would have been '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: And which one is you?
Speaker 2: I'm on the left, second going right, no second going right to the left.
Speaker 1: Right here?
Speaker 2: That's me, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That's my paternal grandmother, Virginia, Virginia Logan.  Logan was her maiden name, (unclear) Williams and her mother, my grandma Susie.  I had a chance to meet my grandma Susie.
Speaker 2: This was in 1971?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  That's my father's grandmother and my father's mother.
