Story_ID: 180278
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Fred Jones, Jr., F-R-E-D, J-O-N-E-S J-R.
Speaker 1: Now do, do you have a nickname or--
Speaker 2: No, no, just Fred Jones, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 2nd, 1948.  I was born here in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I guess I could write down as a, an entertainment consultant.  I work with the corporations managing special events or private, or special projects in the entertainment industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of Summit Management?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Summit Management Corporation is the company that--the umbrella company that we have.  And I'm the, the President of, of Summit Management Corporation.
Speaker 1: Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June, June 26th, 2003.  I kind of paused a minute cause it's getting down to the end of the month and I got a project and I can't--kind of keep up with the, the, you know.  I know what day it is, Thursday, but you know there's a lot of things going on right now.
Story_ID: 180279
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I'm compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer.  The first one is sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Okay, time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably Hot Springs, Arkansas, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was asking you about your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: It's Hot Springs, Arkansas.  It's amazing, that seem to be a nice, quiet place.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I got it from a, a friend of mine.  And it's--you can't use yesterday's ball scores in today's ball game.
Story_ID: 180280
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history; about your ancestors.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: With reliability, you know it's really back to my grandmother on both my mother's [Lula Jones] side and my father's [Freddie Jones] side.  Like my mother's mother is still living and she's 100 plus years old.  And you know I'm--back beyond that, I don't have that much recall about them.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your, your grandmother could tell you about who her mother was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and the one thing I do know that on both my mother and my father--just tremendous longevity.  My, my mother's mother is over 100.  My father recently passed, he was eighty-nine plus.  And I say that only because we had difficulty getting a, you know a birth date, which will, you know people back in that early, you know, 1900s had that problem because they didn't have the recordkeeping that we have today.  His, his aunt, his mother's sister--one was over 100 when she passed, the other I think was ninety-seven.  So it's, you know, tremendous longevity you know, in, in, in the family on both sides.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now tell me about your grandparents.  Where were they from, are they--
Speaker 2: My father's mother and father--and his father died early.  I didn't never--I never knew him.  His name was Sam.  His mother was Carrie and they both came from Mississippi.  My grandmother, my father's, my father's--my mother's mother, who's 100, they all from Alabama.  So from you know, deep south roots on, you know in the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well you know what, what, what city did these places (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well you know they, you know they aren't cities.  I mean they're all, you know--
Speaker 1: Rural--
Speaker 2: Rural, plantation.  Father was born in a place called Farrell, Mississippi, you know which is not far from Clarksdale, Mississippi.  And my mother and her family is a place called Nanafalia, Alabama, which is near Butler, Alabama.  So it's like, you know over the levy, over the river.  Just like go over the river to get to Nanafalia from Butler, which is not very far from Meridian, Mississippi.  In fact when we go there, you have to go through Mississippi to get to, you know to, you know to--cross the state line to go into Alabama.  So--but it's a little, small town and, and like with all these, you know, small towns back then, you know some of them, most of them didn't survive, you know.  Or very few people still left there.  I mean maybe--not the, the original people, but some of their family.  But it's a lot of them have moved on to, you know, moved to Cleveland [Ohio] and Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] and what have you, you know.  That seem to be that, you know, that migration [Great Migration] that happened, you know, you know, during that you know the--during that time in this part of the country.  Now as you notice, kind of reverse the people that, you know, that live in the northern city are going back down South or coming back down South, you know, to live.
Story_ID: 180281
Speaker 1: Are there any migration stories of why they migrated?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Opportunity.  It was opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean you, you know, you on the plantation, the only thing you can do there is farm.  Someone else own the, own the, the plantation and you just was, you know, you know, like the crop.  You just came with the plantation.
Speaker 1: Well the reason why I ask is so many black people could not leave, you know, sharecropper situation.  I mean it was hard to leave cause the (unclear) owned the land, claimed they owed 'em money.  And often difficult to--
Speaker 2: Well you never could pay it off, you know.  I remember, I remember my [maternal] grandfather on a farm in Al--in Alabama, you know make twenty-five dollars a week, five and a half days, you know, five and a half days a week or you know, for years, you know.  So unless someone left and went to another city.  Like my mother [Lula Jones] left and she came to Memphis [Tennessee].  And then you know she was always--she got a job here and you know, that was a part of you know, now she worked to, to take care of herself, but she also had to take care of people back at home, you know back at home, so.  That was always a part of everybody's story that that happened.  You know I was--always said that, you know, being born in 1948, was a chance to get part of the old and, and the new, you know.  I mean I was on--I saw, you know by going to the, you know the cotton fields and chopping cotton and picking cotton and I was a little, you know, a little boy chasing behind my, you know, my grandmother.  But there were other people that were older than me, that you know, that was their life.  That was, that was livelihood, so--
Speaker 1: So saw in passing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  You know I was a little boy so I wasn't expected to, to carry that on.  In fact I was encouraged by my parents to, you know, to education and education and education.  That was a way to, to, you know to break that cycle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any stories in, in your family from--that talk about what was going on during slavery or, or during Reconstruction.  Well which was still going on till 1960.
Speaker 2: Well I remember we used to go to my [maternal] grandmother's house in Alabama and we were going through--they had a, you know, everything was--you had a house, you know you had a outhouse over here, you had another house where you kept--where you stored things, it was all outside of the main house.  And I remember going through there one day and I don't know why we, we were just going through there.  Maybe just, you know, it looks--this is what we found.  I mean we saw these coupons that they were giving, you know for to get food, you know, back during the [Great] Depression.  You know you had to have a--you know where they was rationing food and you had to have these coupons.  And some of the stuff I wish I could have, I should have kept at the time.  But I, you know 'cause I was just a little kid then.  You know and they, they had all of this stuff where you had to have a--the, the, the coupon to get some food, you know.  And it's kind of hard to--for me today to, to really have an appreciation for that.  But that's something that they all lived through.
Story_ID: 180282
Speaker 1: Tell us about your father.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name is Freddie Jones, F-R-E-D-D-I-E, J-O-N-E-S.  Now maybe I'm able to take this time to explain you know, kind of the, you know why my name is Fred Jones, Jr.  On my birth certificate, you know he was, you know for whatever reason, everything for him at that time was, was Fred Jones.  So when I was born, it was Fred Jones, Jr.  You know when you go back and find whatever records that you could find, and it was kind of scarce.  It was, it was Freddie Jones.  So he had to really, you know, continue to use Freddie Jones and, and, and especially when you started dealing with Social Security and those kinds of things.  So we just, you know my name was always left to be Fred Jones, 'cause that was on my birth certificate and that's the way they had it at that time.  So it's just something that, you know, that it wasn't a problem for me; it wasn't a problem for him.  So we just, you know kept it like that.  But as I said he recently passed and he was a genius of a man, and he was--because you know for a person with a, a fourth grade education, and he was very wise and knowledgeable about you know what was going on.  Not only around us, but around the country and around the world.  I remember had some conversations that he and I had about the Middle East and I'm sitting there listening to him and he was talking about it, you know, like he could have been an advisor to anybody over there, realizing that they were not doing the things that they needed to do to get that done.  And he was very special, he was--we were very, very close.  And I think that because of my parents, my mother [Lula Norwood Jones] and my father, I was able to achieve some of the success that I've had.
Speaker 1: Now I'm gon' ask you about, about your mother too.  But you know what, what did your father do, do for a living?
Speaker 2: Whatever he could.  One of the things that really kind of stand out for me in terms of the contribution and the dedication that he had for his family.  You know when they tear down buildings, and they have these bricks and they have these people to come out to clean the bricks and they stack 'em up and they, they sell 'em.  Well my father couldn't find a job and he did that.  And I, I think on this particular day I went with him.  It wasn't a lot of money, but that was the only thing--and I remember you know because it was, it was real cold that day and it was like got to be like in the evening time.  So it must have been maybe in the fall of the year.  It was kind of cool and--but that's all that he, that he had and you know he cleaned those bricks just to do that.  For, you know, to have money for the family.  And he worked for a good portion of the time at a place called St. Louis Terminal, it was a longshoreman.  They unload barges and what have you.  And I remember that when I was doing well in school, in fact I flunked out and I left school, left college.  And, and I was saying well you know--couldn't try to find a job and maybe I can go to work with you.  He said no, you can't do that.  He said, you know, you don't wanna do this.  In fact, you can't.  You know he refused to even let me you know, even try to apply for a job there.  And he said you need to you know, go back to school.  And I did, I got out in, in I think in the spring of '68 [1968] and, and in June of '68 [1968] I went back to college and I finished in, in, in August of '71 [1971].  But it was his encouragement and, and you know and his stick-to-it-ness that he was gone push me and push me and to you know to do better.
Story_ID: 180283
Speaker 1: Now, now did he [Jones' father, Freddie Jones] have relatives here in Memphis [Tennessee] when he, when he finally moved to Memphis?  Now he was born--
Speaker 2: In Farrell, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you say you're not sure exactly when.
Speaker 2: Well it--we, we--for Social Security, it was 1913.  But because that's all we could find.  I remember looking in a Bible on--I think it was in a Bible.  I can't--but I couldn't find it.  'Cause a lot of people did that in the early years where they put down their birthdays in the Bible.  And I remember something that said 1905, but I couldn't find it.  You know I just remember seeing it and I just couldn't find it.  Some of his cousins, in fact one of his cousins is eighty-nine and she knew that he was older than she was, but we couldn't prove it.  If you go back in the State of Mississippi, they only go back to 1910, but we couldn't find any of that, you know, because they were on the plantation and you know they--the recordkeeping and what have you wasn't that good.
Speaker 1: So for real, on the real side, he, he probably was, was older than, than (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  He was older than eighty-nine at his death.  You know he was--there's no question about that.  But I couldn't prove it and we kept working with Social Security and when we was trying to get his, his Social Security taken care of.  But we could only go back to, you know to October 16th, 1913.
Speaker 1: So he was doing like hard work, you know, at a more advanced age than, than--
Speaker 2: Well that's all, I mean that's all that was available to him.  That's the--you know you, you're talking to people and why I have so much pride for, for, for older people, especially older black people, that they, they worked really hard most of their lives.  You know my father worked on a job and probably never made more than twelve thousand, thirteen thousand dollars a year.  A year, I mean you know and that was--I mean you know, I mean I have events now that I, you know, have a, a reception and it's--it might be, you know, fifteen thousand or twenty thousand dollars just depending on what we're doing.  And he worked a whole year, and they did this year in and year out.  I mean I did the--his taxes.  So I knew what was--what he was making and it was--but they all had longevity.  Didn't have the best of health care, didn't have a lot of money.  But they had tremendous will and, and ethics and that's something that we all can learn, can learn from them.
Story_ID: 180284
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about your mother.  What is her full name and, and what is her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her name is Lula N. Jones.  Her maiden name is Norwood.  She was born in, I think in Nanafalia, Alabama, October 25th, 1920.  In fact, my grandmother's--her mother's birthday is October 26th in '02, 1902.  So they were born a day apart on their, on their birthday.
Speaker 1: Now what was she like and what did she do?  Now she's still alive, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  She was--she kept the family together.  You know although we were older, have two older brothers and older sister, have a younger brother he--that's, that's here.  But she was more or less the rock that kind of kept everything together.  You know kind of, you know you have--I guess we'll call it a mediator.  You know she just, you know she could do that.  Tremendous pride and I remember the thing that I can remember about her is that, that when she would, you know, when she would dress, you know and, and she was going to church or whatever.  Man she was just--she walked with her head up and you know just, you know it's like I look good, you know, but you know say it.  You know it's like, so you know here everybody wants you to tell 'em how good they look, you know.  She was just--she knew that she could walk back and with her head up and it was just, it was just a tremendous sight to see.  You know I always, you know and she would just have that step about her.  And then when she was, you know and, and, and for all of my life has been like that, you know.  And always encouraging.  And I, I said to--before to a lot of people that to have had this kind of success that I've had and to have your mother and your father you know, along for that ride during that time is just, just tremendous.
Speaker 1: And did your mother have to work too?
Speaker 2: No, she just--she stayed at home.  That was something that she wanted--she worked for a long time when I was you know, really young.  But as we started to get older, she, she wanted to be at home for us and she was able to do that and--
Story_ID: 180285
Speaker 1: Now is there, there a story that, that you were told about how your parents [Lula Jones and Freddie Jones] met?  Did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  I, I never heard that one.  I just know that, you know they, they were know because Memphis, it was the place for everybody coming out of the, out of the south, especially maybe married on July 1st, 1945 in Horn Lake, Mississippi, which is not very far from Memphis [Tennessee].  Think it's Horn Lake.  And fifty-eight years that, you know, they stayed together and I never heard the story of, you know, 'cause it was like, you know he's being from Ala--I mean she being from Alabama and he's being from Mississippi, so you wonder how that happened, but don't know.  They--I can only imagine that you know, they met here in Memphis and, and you in, in northwestern Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas.  You know Memphis was a, was the place and then the rest left and went on up the river to St. Louis [Missouri] and you know, and Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 180286
Speaker 1: Can, can you reflect back on growing up and give me a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in your neighborhood?  You know, kind of describe the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Well I had occasion recently to, to, to go back into the, you know the, the neighborhood.  Early up until I was six years old, I, I lived in--I've always lived in south Memphis [Tennessee].  And if you know anything about the history of Memphis, south Memphis was always (unclear) advanced part of the city versus north Memphis.  People, people would leave north Memphis and move to south Memphis 'cause that was--they were moving up kind of in the world.  But the first six years I, I lived a place called 91 West Olive.  It was a, like a tenement flat, you know.  It's--you know you had common restrooms and it was, you know just two, two rooms where, where my younger brother and I--and he wasn't there very long, but--and my mother [Lula Norman Jones] and father [Freddie Jones] lived.
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: It's five.  But my two older brothers and my sister lived, lived with my mother's mother, my grandmother in Alabama for--
Speaker 1: So your household was just you, you and your brother and your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yes, early on.  But she made sure that you know, that we spent time you know with, with my grandmother and my, my other, you know, family members.  Every year, every year we went to spend, you know, most of the summer in Alabama for years and years and years.  Take, take the train and go down there, they would pick us up in Linden [Alabama], which is not very far from--twenty miles or so.  But everybody kind of traveled by train then.  And later on they traveled by bus.  But train was a way that pe--most people got around.  But--and I was talking about--and we moved from 91 West Olive to the--to--now we moving up, we moving to the projects.  Which at that time was a, was a big deal, Cleaborn Homes.  I had a chance to recently to go back and at the, the elementary school that I, that I, I went to, Alonzo Lott, W. Alonzo Lott Elementary.  I was able to give the school some money through our foundation, Southern Heritage Foundation.  We gave 40,000 dollars, and it was honor of the forty, the forty years that my first grade teacher spent at the school.  She stayed at this same school for forty years.  So I went back to--we picked her up and--'cause I didn't tell her what we were doing.  I told her I, I was going to the school to speak and, and she didn't know what.  We kind of, kind of played a trick on her, but I think she really kind of knew that we had something up, though.  And we had a chance to drive around the neighborhood.  And I had a chance to, to think back on when I was young living in this community.  And it was a nice neighborhood versus the way it is now.  At the time that we, we made the presentation was a couple of years ago now.
Story_ID: 180287
Speaker 1: Now, now you said moving to the projects was a step up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And people today wouldn't understand that, but in those days--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's, you know, so that was, I was gonna make the comparison.  When I drove around and looked at where we lived and what was going on now versus when we were there, it was light years.  It was like, you know it was like somebody had bombed the place.  You know it was, you know there was no grass, you know.  There was--it, it just looked destitute.  But this was the community that I lived in, where people knew each other and, and the kids grew, you know, grew up together and we attended the school.  I mean we walked to school.  I walked to school for twelve years.  That's unheard of today.
Speaker 1: How far did, did you have to walk?
Speaker 2: Not, not very, you know I went from elementary school to Porter Junior High School, to Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee], all in my neighborhood.  It wasn't very far at all.  So you had a sense of community.  A sense of, you know, when we played sports and where we had a good time and just kind of grew up in this community, in this neighborhood.  And you know that was the biggest thing that I was able to reflect on, and I can reflect on now, that it was a, it was a good community, you know.  You know you knew people, the kids and the parents and you understood what was going on and you know it was, it was just great.  You know, we livin' in the projects, but that was a great experience.
Story_ID: 180288
Speaker 1: Yeah well tell, tell us about growing up, you know.  What kind of kid were you when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, pretty active.  You know my parents [Lula Norwood Jones and Freddie Jones] kept us, you know, you know pretty disciplined, you know.  Just kind of keeping track of what you're doin' and where you're going.  But I mean it was, it was a pretty good situation.  I mentioned, you know about the, the housing project [Cleaborn Homes, Memphis, Tennessee].  I mean just had at one time they would have inspectors to come out.  So you know, check and see what the--upkeep of the apartment and what was going on with that.  Of course when they--every time they would come out, everybody in the neighborhood would know that they were over Ms. McGowan's [ph.] house or, or the Terrells [ph.] or some, you know some (unclear), you know we would know.  And so you had to make sure that everything was in order when they came in for this inspection.  They probably would call it invasion of privacy now, but that was part of--one of the--that was requirements that you, you go through these inspection.  I mean like you could cut the grass.  I mean it only cost--I mean they had push mowers, but it only cost 50 cents to rent it.  So--and we would go rent 'em and, and then we would go cut other people's yards.  Kind of like an enterprise, you know, the, you know.  So we'd go rent it for 50 cents and whatever we could make cutting other people's yards, we would do that.  But it was, it was a good, it was a good quality situation.  Most, you know both of my parents were there.  Had relationship with the teachers, whether it was Bobbie Mathis [ph.], who was my first grade teacher.  And I told her--she knows--how many people actually know their first grade teacher, you know?
Speaker 1: Not many.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When my mother--when my father passed, she called me.  I mean this was my first grade teacher all these many years ago.  And that's, you know that's pretty special.  But there are a lot of people that you remember from Ms. Simon [ph.], Ms. Falls [ph.], Ms. Walt [ph.] and all those were--Ms. Thornton [ph.] during the, the years at Alonzo Lott [Elementary School].  But it was a great experience.  And then you go to junior high, you got Mr. O.B. Johnson [ph.] who, who had this idea of putting select students together.  And all the feeder schools that were feeding into Porter, they selected the best students out of that group and put 'em all in the same, all the in the, in the same homeroom together in the seventh grade.  And it's amazing the--what has come out of that group even today, lawyers, doctors, you know, entertainment people like me, like myself who, you know, done very well.  But, but we all maintain a relationship all that time.  Ms. Gilliam [ph.] remember, Art Gilliam, her, her son owns WLOK here.  She was my ninth grade homeroom and English teacher.  I remember Ms. Freeman I think was her name, she had a stroke in the classroom, you know.  You know during our--I think, I think I might have been in the seventh grade, I can't remember.  You go to, you know to Mr. Bridges, never forget him, it's my basketball coach.
Speaker 1: What happened?  What, what did you all do when the teacher had a stroke in the classroom?
Speaker 2: Well we, we knew something was wrong.  I mean you know it's, you know as kids you just think, you know she just acting funny, you know.  But it was--became pretty obvious, you know, that it was something wrong and we called one of the other teachers and he came in and they took her out.  And she passed.  But you know we didn't, you know as students, you just kind of, you know just kind of didn't take it as much seriously as now.  But we did have the wherewithal to, to go and have the--get one of the other teachers and they responded.
Story_ID: 180289
Speaker 1: What were your favorite sub--subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Math.  I've always been good with numbers, still am now.  Originally I wanted to be an accountant, a CPA [Certified Public Accountant].  As I told you I did my father's [Freddie Jones] taxes.  I was, I mean I was in junior high school doing taxes.
Speaker 1: So in junior high, high school you actually wanted to be an accountant?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wanted to be an accountant.
Speaker 1: Doesn't sound like the most exciting you know, occupation for a young man.  You know mostly young people dream about you know, action jobs.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: Did you know some accountants?
Speaker 2: Well Jesse Turner, Sr. was I think one of the first black CPAs you know, and I just--and in later years I got to, he got to be a great supporter of, of me and the things that I was doing.  But he was--I mean he was a CPA and I was good with numbers, it was always, you know, I was always something that I felt comfortable with.  Got my degree in finance with a minor in accounting.  So I'm still dealing with numbers, so--
Story_ID: 180290
Speaker 1: But in school now were you involved in any school activities?  Did you run for office, or--
Speaker 2: No, I was--
Speaker 1: --play sports or anything?
Speaker 2: I play, yeah I played--the first game I, I started playing was, was, was baseball, started really in the fifth grade.  That was one of the things that we did all summer was play baseball.  There were a lot of--there was a baseball league that WGIA radio station would sponsor for years at L.E. Brown Park where--which was right near the Cleaborn Homes [Memphis, Tennessee].  We would all play baseball all summer.  Have so many teams and the baseball was a real big deal.  People would come out and play and, and we would play against the semi-pro team.  I think the, the Red Sox, the Federal Express, the Federal Compress Red Sox.  We would play against them and watch them play and it was a big deal, so--
Speaker 1: Did you ever see the Memphis Red Sox play?  The black team.
Speaker 2: No, I think that one of the things that if I go back, I think about it, I can--I never did go inside the stadium.  And I remember looking through the, the cracks in the, in the, in the wall on the Lauderdale side and saying one day I was gonna go there.  But you know as, as what would happen with a lot of things, black enterprises and, and things like that, they just kind of went away.  So I never got the chance, but that's probably the one thing that I, that I regret that I never did go to Martin Park, unaware of the, the Martin brothers [J.B. Martin and B.B. Martin] were the ones that, that did that.  And I just, you know I just never, never, never, never did it.  All I can remember is just looking through the cracks of the--I could see the, I could see through the cracks enough, wide enough for me to look in there, but I always wanted to do it but I never did.
Speaker 1: Now did you play a little sports in grade school and high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--played basketball.  Started with Mr. Bridges [ph.] over at, over at Porter Junior High School [Memphis, Tennessee].  Never was really that good in any of this stuff.  You know I still participated.  I started playing football in the twelfth, in the tenth grade at Booker T. Washington [High School, Memphis Tennessee].  And what I remember, I guess by that--whereas I--there was a guy by the name of Oscar Reed who had a, a program at Booker Washington that if you had five touchdowns, you would get to go over and choose and he was, he was the man by far.  He went on and went to Colorado State [University, Fort Collins, Colorado] and went on and played for the Minnesota Vikings.  He was a senior when I was a, when I was a, a sophomore.  And I guess the only other thing that, that I remember significant about that year was that I met Wilma Rudolph, the--we played a game in Clarksville, Tennessee against Burt High School.  And they said we want to introduce you to, you know she just had one, you know she was the Olympic champion and all that.  And you know and I thought she was the most gorgeous woman I ever seen in my life.  Tall, statuesque.  I mean very beautiful.  And I met her that, that year.  And then that night after we finished the game, we--there were a lot of people from Memphis [Tennessee], Memphis has always been a big feeder into Tennessee State.  So the next day Tennessee State was playing Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, FAMU, Tallahassee, Florida].  And they had Bob Hayes on the, you know, so you, you know, you don't think about all that now, I mean then, but you know reflecting back now when you get the opportunity on one day to, to meet Wilma Rudolph.  And she got to play a, a big part in what I was doing [unclear] later.  And the next day you, you know in the same stadium where there's Bob Hayes.  You know so that was--
Speaker 1: Bob Hayes was the world's fastest human then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Yeah I think he had been to the Olympics.  He was playing for Florida A and M.  And I think Tennessee State beat them, you know.  But those were kind of experiences that you, that you--that ended up playing a part in you know, other than what you--what I'm doing now, I mean I tell students all the time you know, you never know which way you're gonna go.  You know in life and you just have to be prepared.  So that was an experience I had back then in the tenth grade and played a small part in what I'm doing now.
Story_ID: 180291
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other activities in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] besides sports and--
Speaker 2: Well in junior high school [Porter Junior High School, Memphis, Tennessee] I was, I was in the first--Mr. Johnson [ph.] was a teacher there, O.B. Johnson, started the, the honor society when I was in the ninth grade.  And I was a part of that.  But there's a story that goes with that, you know.  We were--I was selected to be in the first honor society at Porter and they were having the ceremonies.  And we had been prepared for that, so we had to all had to wear you know, black pants and, you know, you know, black shoes and all that.  So at that time you only had one pair of shoes, and mine was gray and black bucks.  So my daddy [Freddie Jones], we didn't have no money, so he--and, and he said well when I get paid, I'm going to go buy you the shoes.  So I'm sitting and waiting and waiting and waiting, he didn't get home until late.  And I rushed downtown to buy me a pair of shoes.  Now this is the night before.  And when I got down there, the place was closed.  Man, I mean I was like devastated, you know.  Here I was gone be in, you know the Honor Society and I couldn't participate.  So I came up with this idea the next morning, I said well maybe I can borrow somebody's shoes.  So I go to school and stand around and, and you know, man I need to borrow your shoes, you know.  And, and finally a guy by the name of Napoleon Young who ran track and lives in the LeMoyne Gardens [Memphis, Tennessee], which was another housing development, said I will let you use my shoes.  But the only thing it was, was I wore a nine and a half, and his were a nine.  I didn't have any choice, you know, you know so I had to--I gave him my shoes, I took his shoes.  Ran back home.  So I lived, you know like in the--not too far in the projects.  So I was able to change clothes and came back with these shoes on.  Man, my feet were killing me.  But you know that was the only chance I--I mean that was the only, you know only chance I had to, to participate.  I didn't want to lose that opportunity of participating in the first Honor Society.  And I don't what would happen if Napoleon hadn't loaned me his shoes, you know.  I don't know what would happen with, with you know with that particular event, but it goes to show you that you know, you never know who's gonna help you at any given time in your life.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now so when, when you were in high school, you had the idea that you would be an accountant?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Although I was--I, I started playing football.  I was playing in the band at Porter, I played trombone.  And started to really get into the music a little bit, but in all--you know [unclear] whether, you know I mean it's like with any band, the glamorous positions are the saxophone players and, and the drummers and the trumpet players.  But you know everybody wanted to do that, so he needed a trombone player, so I played trombone.  Harry Winfield was the, was the, was the Band Director at Porter.  I mean we had great bands, great--I mean we played stuff then that, that high school students today don't even play.  It was a, it was a good experience with that.  But I still--was still wanted to be an accountant, you know, but although I was, you know, into sports, into the music.
Speaker 1: Now did you have much social life in high school?
Speaker 2: I mean when you, when you on the team, now let alone be the star, you know, you know you, your social life is okay, you know.
Speaker 1: And since you were a star football player?
Speaker 2: I, I wasn't a star, I was on the team.  Oscar, Eddie Richards, they were the stars.  But you know I was on the bench, but I was a member of the football team, so, so that you know always kind of, it worked out, you know.  So you--it's, it's the same way in our society now, today.  You know you see the stars of entertainment or sports and what have you, they're the, the big celebrities and you know.
Speaker 1: So by being on the football team, it gave you some celebrity standing.
Speaker 2: No question.  I was in the band also.  The band was a big deal, so I played in the band as well.  So I had a--I guess we'd call it a--consider a twofer, you know that, you know I didn't have to worry about socially, you know, you know that was fine because I was in sports and, and in the band.  And that was at a time too at Porter when things, things were going well and with the music that they started developing these bands.  You know, you know you have, you know, like the Earth, Wind and Fires and, and all that.  But although that may have come a little bit later in terms of the Earth, Wind and Fire, and I got a story about that but--
Story_ID: 180292
Speaker 1: A lot of them are from Memphis [Tennessee]?  I know, I know Maurice White is.
Speaker 2: Is from Memphis, right.  But during the time, you know the Bar-Kays were, were you know were, you know were getting going.  I mean Steve Holt was the drummer.  You know Phalon [Jones], who I was very, very, very close to, good friend.  You know Ben Cauley, and James Alexander.  We played in Porter's band and Booker Washington's band, so--and I remember the night that the plane went down with the Bar-Kays.  And the word started circulating, you know, I was working at, at Baptist Hospital in the, in the dietary.  You know that was a part-time job that I had.  And I remember coming home and listening to the radio man, and it was like man you listen to it and, and you know I was thinking, feeling because the day before they left to go with Otis Redding, Phalon Jones who played the saxophone player, lived across the street in the, in the, in the, in the Foote Homes [Memphis, Tennessee].  And you know back during that time everybody was, you know, processing their hair and all that.  And Phalon had done a beautiful job with his hair, man.  It was, it was, it had grown out and it was just--you know he said well when I get back, I'm gone, I'm gone show you how to do it, you know.  And--but he never came back, you know.  And it was just like one of the most sinking feelings as a young man to, you know, all these people that you knew, you know, you know they were, you know they were gone.  So--
Speaker 1: That's like 1966 or '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the exactly, not exactly the year, you know.
Speaker 1: You still in high school I think?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the year, 'cause I was [unclear] transition.
Speaker 1: I think it was like '67 [1967] I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was right after we was--during the high school years that, that you know that that, that that happened.  But I remember just sitting by that radio, man and hoping that it wasn't true.  That, that the plane had gone done.  But especially when you know all these guys and Jimmy King and Cauley, [Carl] Cunningham, you know.  I mean man it was--you know, and they were just getting started.  They were so excited about being in the business.  I wasn't in the business at that time.  I mean I'm just trying to go on about, you know and they got off when they was like kids.  I mean you playing behind Otis Redding, man that was--man they was excited about that.
Story_ID: 180293
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], did you know what college you were going to?
Speaker 2: No.  I always wanted to go to Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] you know because of a lot of people from here had gone to Tennessee State.  You know I seen Wilma Rudolph and, and Bob Hayes at the game and the excitement of, you know, black college game and I was there as a kid.  Man it was, it was, you know it was just tremendous.  So that's where I thought I wanted to go, but what happened next to the last football game in my senior year, I had, I tore up my knee.  Which was a--I graduated in '66 [1966], but it was in the fall of '65 [1965].  And you know what they do to knees today and what they did then is like light years.  I got this big scar on my knee that I had to have a second surgery on that same knee thirty years later.  I mean you can't find the scar where I did the second surgery, but the, the first surgery I had a big scar where they took out the cartilage and all that.  So my athletic career, endeavors or whatever, was over.  I didn't have the surgery on the knee, which I should have had it before then and not until February of '66 [1966], and didn't rehab it properly or anything.  So I just kind of suffered through that for years of, of, of not doing it properly and that kind of thing.  So I know my parents encouraged me to go to college.  Didn't have the money to go.  Took the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test].  Didn't do well on it the first time.  Took it the second time and averaged a score, well my average score came out on the number that you needed to get in the--it came out on the number, and also I got the notification on the, the day before the deadline to go, you know, to go to University of Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee].  Where at that time it was Memphis State [College].  And you know it only cost sixty-five dollars a semester.  So I had to--we didn't have the--even had that money, you know, but I was able to--since I was staying at home with my parents and taking little odd jobs, I was able to, to, to go on to college and with their encouragement and what have you.  But I got in on the deadline, I got in on the number that I needed to, you know, to, to get in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did, did, did you try Tennessee State?  Were you--
Speaker 2: No.  I mean I couldn't afford to have gone to--out of town anyway.
Speaker 1: Memphis State was the--
Speaker 2: Was really my only option.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right well how, how was Memphis State?  Well you said is that you didn't do too well the first--
Speaker 2: Well you know I really, I really wasn't prepared, thinking back on it I really wasn't prepared the way that I should have.  I took accounting courses when I was a freshman.  Had to retake them again.  I mean you know you go from making an F as a--or a D as a freshman and go back and take the courses again as, as a, a junior or senior.  I mean you make A's.  So you kind of understood what you needed to do.  And a lot of times you know, you're just not prepared; I wasn't prepared to go to college.  I went on anyway but you know I wasn't prepared.
Speaker 1: And Memphis State was an integrated school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But yes and no.  Yes it, you know obviously blacks could go, but you know we kind of stayed to ourselves.  You know we had this little corner where we used to all hang out and what have you.  And you know that was kind of--I, I went there in the fall of '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 180294
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], at that time period, did you follow the Civil Rights Movement?  You know did your parents [Freddie Jones and Lula Norwood Jones] like talk about it, people in your neighborhood talk about what was going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, talk about it but didn't really participate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't really participate at all.  Not to the level other than being a spectator.  One of my other regrets as well that, that I should have been in the forefront of that a little bit more, but you know I guess I was trying to go to college, Vietnam War.  Then if you stayed in college, then you didn't--you weren't gone get drafted.  And then I remember going--they sent me another notice.  I think if you, if you were 4F if I remember this right, you didn't have to go.  But they changed it, the classification, then you'd have to go.  So I went to--went to, to--they sent me another notice to come, that I was gone get drafted.  And they took--finally took a look at my knee and said no.  The doctor came after he checked 'em and x-rayed it and done everything, he came out and said well you'll never hear from them again because your knee is so--I didn't go into the service because of, of my knee.  But that was all a part of what was going on during that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so they tried to draft you and what year was it, '67 [1967], '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: Somewhere, when I--right after high school.  I mean they sent me a notice to say you know we need, you know that one if I stayed in college, but once I got out of college 'cause I was, you know it's like they were sitting at the door waiting.  And now you're, now you're out of college, you can--so that was sixty, '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '67 [1967], it probably was in '68 [1968], you know.
Speaker 1: Okay now, now how long did you have to stay out of college when you didn't make it the first time?
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't stay out very long.  I didn't' stay out very long at all.  I mean that was the amazing thing.  I, I was flunking out and I quit and that, that summer I was back in school.
Speaker 1: Okay, well it didn't, didn't take long.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay but you had a, a different attitude this time?
Speaker 2: Got encouragement from my parents.  I always tell this story about I was on--looking for a job.  And I was going to talk to several places and I would hang out on Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee] there with my little suit on and you know.  And you know back during that time, everybody, every little kid wants to--you know these kids talking about being a player now and, and pimps and pretty girls and you know, long collar shirts and all that stuff was, was the rage at that time.  And the guy at the pool hall name was Lewis [ph.], I remember going to this, this one interview and on this job, and, and he, he told me that I needed you know--I went, I stopped by there.  And he said well you know you don't need to be down here; you need to keep on going, keep on looking.  And I left and went to Union Planters Bank [Memphis, Tennessee] that same day, sat there all day and got the job.
Story_ID: 180295
Speaker 1: You were tellin' us about startin' a job at Planters Bank [Union Planters Bank, Nashville Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Yeah well like I said, after Lewis [ph.] had encouraged me, said you know, I didn't want that life on Beale Street [Memphis, Tennessee] and the pool room and all that, you know, I went on down at Union Planters and I stayed there all day.  I remember (unclear) if I hadn't have been the first one in line, I, I--you know there was whole people, whole list of, line of people there trying to get jobs.  And whatever the, the guy was named Mr. Raucher [ph.], whatever he was doing that day, he was just out most of the day.  So I stayed there the whole, the whole day and he came in and said you know, Fred Jones come in and gave me a job.  I worked at the audit department, which is kind of strange 'cause usually you have, you have your seasoned people in the audit department and I was here, I came right off the street, you know, into that job.  But I got it that day, started working in May of, of '68 [1968] and then, and in June of '68 [1968] I started going back to school [Memphis State College, later University of Memphis, Memphis Tennessee].
Story_ID: 180296
Speaker 1: Okay.  I wanna backtrack a little bit now, now [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed in April of '68 [1968] here in Memphis [Tennessee].  And you said there were very, it was a small group of students at Memphis State [College, later University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee] when you were there.  Did, did you all have any kind of a black student organization there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't recall.
Speaker 1: So no, no students really kind of tracking what was going on politically in the city or anything, or organized?
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall.  Like we were all just in college and trying to do the best we can.  You know University of Memphis more was the kind of a transit kind of a college situation where people live, you know you live in the city or live in the surrounding areas and you come in and go to class and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Commuters.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did, did you live at home when you were going to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I mean as I said I was at my parents' [Lula Norwood Jones and Freddie Jones] house and it only cost sixty-five dollars a, a month to go to school and I was struggling to pay that.  One of the other--during the time of '68 [1968] and, and years prior I was working at a place called Flora's Flower Shop, Flora's.  And Ms. Flora [Cole Cochran] was a, was a, an institution in this community.  Flowers and churches and communities and weddings and whatever.  And but she was also a tough, a tough business person.  And I got a--learned a lot of, a lot of things from, from working there.  And I remember the day that Dr. King got killed, I was working from the shop going home, and I had to go through what was then Owen College campus.  It's where Vance Middle School [Memphis, Tennessee] is now.  And by the way, I recently went by there, that area, and there's no reference to Owens College nowhere in the area, that Owens College was at this spot.  And that's one of the things that has happened a lot in the black community in Memphis.  It's like you remember there--where things were, but there's no really recognition of it.  And that's something that we've got to change going forward then.
Speaker 1: Maybe some historical plaques.
Speaker 2: Yeah, something, some, something, some reference to it.  I mean there was nothing, there was nothing there.  But I was walking through, going from Flora's Flower Shop going home.  And I could--if you--I, I'm looking back west and I knew something was going on back toward downtown.  Not knowing that I had--when I got home, when I got--until I got home, that Dr. King had got shot.
Speaker 1: You see a lot of sirens and--
Speaker 2: Some--it was just bustling of activity, bustling of activity.  I said man, something's going on.  And not knowing that, you know, what had happened.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about it when you heard?
Speaker 2: You know it kind of reminded me for some odd reason about Emmett Till.  The, the kid from Mississippi, went to Chicago [Illinois] and had come back and supposedly had whistled at this white woman and, and you know a brother or whomever had killed him, dropped his body in the river.  And you know it was just another black man for whatever reason, gets killed.  Dr. King is a whole 'nother level, but he gets killed, you know.  And you know it's like man, not again, you know, not again.  And it's--you know not knowing that, you know, what kind of--all this is going on at a time that, you know, at a time where you don't really understand all of the things and you know now you've had the luxury of years to reflect back on it.
Story_ID: 180297
Speaker 1: Were riots in your neighborhood [after the assassination of Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in 1968]?  I mean did people riot, riot in your neighborhood, or--
Speaker 2: They didn't riot in the neighborhood, you know they had--I think it was just prior to his getting killed, they had the march downtown.  And then that night I remember, or during that time, buses were going down the street and people were throwing bricks and bottles at the buses and that kind of thing.  But I don't recall any rioting of any kind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was Memphis [Tennessee] changing then?  I mean you know we think of the South and that Memphis is in the heart of the mid-south, 1968, you know there was some integration going on in Memphis.  But you know were things really starting to change without, without a lot of civil disturbance?  How did they--
Speaker 2: You know Memphis, you know Memphis, you know, for, for only for a few people really actively in--involved and in the struggle as I remember it.  You know there wasn't--you know they started organizations in different part of the city that were doing--considered radical things.  But as I recall now, it wasn't any big organized, you know, organized efforts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But did you have a sense when you were in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee] that this was something new, you know, trying to go get a job at a bank, you know, a black kid trying to get a job at one of the bigger banks downtown.  That's not something that was kind of a new thing, or was that something that you--
Speaker 2: Well I, you know I mean you know I wasn't--I was going to college.  You know then--since I was out of college now, you know, I got out, you know I needed to--I needed a job.  I end up taking a job for 235 dollars a month, and having turned down another job for 190 dollars a month.  So you know it wasn't, you know a lot of money, but you know, I was thinking about getting my degree.  And I needed a job in order to do that.  My parents [Lula Norwood Jones and Freddie Jones] couldn't do it.
Speaker 1: Yeah I just wondered if it was unusual though for a black kid to work in a bank, a downtown bank [Planters Union Bank, Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Well they were--those were change--you know they, you know they were trying to get with the times.  Because I remember there were, you know, there was Gene Fentress [ph.] at First Tennessee [Bank].  There was Wallace Callahan [ph.] at NBC, you know, you know there were--always one or two, you know that, that break through that system and what have you, but you know things were, you know, were changing.  In fact that's how I ended up at the Bellevue [Tennessee] branch of Union Planters [Bank], which at the time was the, the branch that was handling the business for Stax [Records].  And [HM] Isaac [Hayes] and David Porter and Al Bell and Jim Stewart, all did their banking at this Union Planters Bank on Elvis Presley [Boulevard, Memphis, Tennessee].  And they didn't have a "black presence" out there at all.  So they said well Fred we want you to be--go out there and work in--at this branch.
Speaker 1: Now, now Isaac Hayes was telling us yesterday that one of his reactions to the death of Dr. King was to go in Stax and demand that they have a black secretary in Stax, in Stax, at least one, and demand some other things.  (Unclear) over there at Stax, they started to deliver some of these things.  And I just was wondering the general tone in the city was hey, we better get (unclear) people something because things are real tense, you know.
Speaker 2: Well you know that's the strange thing about that though, is that as history--when the history recorder--I mean all of this sanitation workers strike and all that, was about a nickel an hour, and self-respect.  Talking about five cents.
Speaker 1: Well [unclear] it really was 15 cent I think.  But the--the settlement was around five cent difference between one settlement--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.  It was a difference of five cents, you know.  Think about it.  I mean you don't even have to know a person to say well here's five cents and some respect and some dignity.  You know so we, you know we--as much as we like to, you know at the time you talkin' 'bout changing, you talkin' 'bout five cents, man, you know.  You know and we're part of history forever over five cents.  And you know some respect and as a man, you know.  Yes, we, yeah you know, we gon' give Fred Jones this job and you know he's gonna be, you know, a part of what we're doing.  But you know in essence you really not a part of, of what's going on.  I mean that's something that needed to happen at that particular time and I happened to be the right hue, so you have to--you have to understand that.
Story_ID: 180298
Speaker 1: Now, now, so, so you worked at Planters Bank [Union Planters Bank, Nashville Tennessee] and you, you went to school [Memphis State College, later University of Memphis, Memphis Tennessee] at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was going to school at night.  And I did that all the way until the, the summer of '71 [1971].  Along the way I met, you know, [HM] Isaac Hayes, David Porter, the group The Soul Children, Jim Stewart, Al Bell, Otis Redding would come in there, Mack Rice who wrote 'Respect Yourself' and 'Cheaper to Keep Her.'  You know it got to be [unclear] all these people.
Speaker 1: I didn't realize the same person wrote 'Respect Yourself' and 'Cheaper to Keep Her.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Mike Rice, Cadillac assembly line.  He's a character, yeah.  Bonnie Mack Rice from Clarksdale, Mississippi, lives in Detroit [Michigan].  And he--but I was, I was still going to school, you know and I went nonstop from the time that you know that I, that I started back in, in the--in May of '68 [1968] until I, you know, I got to the summer of '71 [1971] and I didn't--I couldn't take the--the couple of classes that I needed to finish at night.  And I didn't want to wait until the summer, so I took off during the summer from the job to go--to finish.  And when I came back to talk to the bank, you know about what was gonna happen.  You know, I graduated from college now and what was gonna happen at the bank.  I remember the guy made a call to somebody and said well you know Fred Jones is here and you know, what we gone do with him?  I'm, you know I'm sitting there listening to him and got off the phone and he said well, we don't know what we gone do with you.  In the meantime, Isaac Hayes offered me a job working for him.  Say he needed, you know, his 'Shaft' was just breaking, breaking big and they finna go on the road and they needed somebody who, who could handle money.
Speaker 1: 'Shaft' was breaking real big.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was the biggest thing in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so actually the biggest thing in the world.  And said, you know we want you to--you know, we gone go out on a tour and we want you to, you know, somebody who can count money.  Obviously with my experiencing in banking and--so my first day on the job, I was on a plane going to LA [Los Angeles].  And they say the rest is history, you know.  And, and I left the bank and went with Isaac and that was my real--although I had done some things for the Soul Children on the weekends.  But that was the real, the real big thing for me, going with Isaac and learning how to do manifests and count tickets and all those kinds of things, how all that worked.
Speaker 1: Okay so your, your responsibilities were primarily counting responsibilities.
Speaker 2: Well here again, I've always liked numbers.  So you, you'll probably hear this kind of a, a central theme through my whole career.  You know, you know my job was to pick up the money and account for it.  You know if it was, was spent somewhere, then you just make sure that you get the, the receipts and you account for--I, if I picked up 15,000 dollars then the money might go wherever it was, you know it was to go, but at the end of the day I needed to have you know, if it was less than 15,000, I have that, you know and an accounting of it, you know.  Which was a thing that you, you know that you kind of learn going on that you got to, you got to make this money, but you also have to account for it, especially the expenses.  So you know for income tax purposes and all that.
Story_ID: 180299
Speaker 1: Now is that, is that a big challenge?  In a, in a music operation like [HM] Isaac Hayes who is sort of like an industry in and of himself I guess in those days, all the people and everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean he was the forefront.  I mean he one of the few people that had his, you know that, that ultimately have--ended up having his own sound system and what have you.  'Cause you know we look at the stuff now and say you know here's thirty years later and I mean, and you know it's like, you know we got everything, you know, Internet and fax machines and computers and digital and all that is a part of the music business.  There was none of that back then, you know.  I remember I used to go to the studio [Stax Records] and Ronnie Capone [Ron Capone], who was an [studio] engineer over there.  You know when they got ready to edit, they had to edit with a, with a, with a--take the tape and, and kind of guess at where the, where the spot was that they wanted to edit, then take a, a knife and cut it, and cut it with--at that particular, you know, razor blade, it was a razor blade and you cut it at that particular point.  Now you do it on the machine where, wherever the numbers is kind of, kind of add up, you--I mean kind of come together, you can know exactly where to edit [unclear] are gonna be.  So you there, you know kind of at a crude time, you know the touring industry as far as entertainment wasn't anything close to this.  Nothing at all.  So the job I--first day I went--the first show I went to with Isaac was in Macon, Georgia.  And second one is, was Miami [Florida].  And the opening act was Earth, Wind & Fire, you know.  They got paid 500 dollars.  And the guy didn't wanna pay 'em that.  I remember that as, you know, nobody know who this Earth, Wind & Fire is, you know.  But you know it goes to show you how things over, you know over a period of time where you--you know Earth, Wind & Fire was an opening act for Isaac Hayes and they got 500 dollars, whoa.  And look what they, look what, what they've become.
Speaker 1: Today it's like six of 'em in the group [Earth, Wind & Fire], right?
Speaker 2: Well they had--when they had the, the young lady.
Speaker 1: Jessica Cleaves, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she was [unclear].
Speaker 1: And they're like six, six people--no that's a lot.
Speaker 2: No, it was a lot more people, they had a big group.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a hundred dollars a, a person.
Speaker 2: It was less than that, you know, but expenses weren't as much as they are right now.  We had a sound system that we were charging the promoters 500 dollars for, and we owned the sound system.  Now I mean you have production costs that could, depending on the show, that could be in the millions, be not--well put it like this.  You can have stadium show that it cost a million dollars just to do the production, you know.  And back then, early '70s [1970s], you know it was really inexpensive in comparison.
Story_ID: 180300
Speaker 1: Was it really tough trying to set up a system where you could get receipts back from everybody, you know?  How did you, how did you work that?
Speaker 2: I mean you know that's a--I mean--
Speaker 1: People doing things and--
Speaker 2: Yeah well, yeah well you just--that's part of what you learn how to do.  You know, you know if I give you some money, then I need to have a receipt for it.  So and that's what my response--my responsibility was.  Like some other people's responsibility was to sing background or play in the band or drive the truck, or, or do the sound or do the lights, or do the wardrobe, you know.  My job was to figure up the money and account for it.  And the way you account for is having receipts.  So if I give you 200 dollars, then I got--I need to have a receipt for 200 dollars to account for the 200 dollars I gave you.  So it was easy for me because I had that background.  It wasn't a stretch.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have to recommend that people be let go because of the--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--that wasn't--you know I wasn't there, you know I wasn't in that part of it.  My job was--
Speaker 1: All right, but--
Speaker 2: To deal with this, this money.  Now who, who was out there, how much they got paid, you know, that wasn't my responsibility.  My responsibility is whatever money that was due us, or due [HM] Isaac [Hayes], get the money and then if I just told to spend some money for whatever reason, hotel or whatever the case might be, then I need to have, you know, to have the receipts for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: I was with Isaac from '71 [1971] to '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: And did you do a lot of travel?
Speaker 2: Man.  I mean the first day on the job, I was going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I'd never been to LA before, you know.  We went to Europe and we went to Maui when it was like real rural, you know.  Played in a, you know, all down in the--played down in the, you know, down, down in the Caribbean.  You know that was the experience of a lifetime, you know.  I don't think that I could--aside from my parents [Lula Norwood Jones and Freddie Jones], you know probably the other person that gave me that kind of opportunity that really propelled me forward, you know working for Isaac.  The, the best decision that I made.  One of the best I made.
Story_ID: 180301
Speaker 1: Well what happened in '75 [1975]?  Why did you stop working for [HM] Isaac [Hayes] in '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: I mean you know things just changed, you know.  It kind of, you know growing apart.  You know I still learned a lot about the business 'cause I continued on in the business.  Started my own promotion company, started doing shows, started doing that kind of thing.  And think just kind of grew apart.  It was, you know make a change.
Speaker 1: So you started your own pro--production company?
Speaker 2: I started doing shows.  I don't think I had a company at that point, you know.  When you, when you, when you're doing what I doing, you, you was--you had a relationship with, with different promoters.  At that time the biggest promoter, in fact the biggest black promoter in the country was a guy by the name of Henry Wynn.  Had a company called Supersonic Attractions.  He took [HM] Isaac [Hayes] out, convinced Marvin, Marvin Gaye to go out on tour.  HE did the collaboration with Sam Cooke and Jackie Wilson.  He was a--he, he, he you know he kind of ruled the, the big promotion business as it were during that time.  Henry Wynn, Supersonic Attractions.
Speaker 1: Is he still around?
Speaker 2: No, no.  He's deceased now.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so what was, the, the--your, your favorite to pro--produce?
Speaker 2: Of all these years you mean?
Speaker 1: Well no, not during that per--period.
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to do any--you know trying to do anything that I could.
Speaker 1: So, so you didn't have a special niche you would do like gospel.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: R and B, were you in jazz or something.
Speaker 2: No.  With my experience, it allowed me to be--do anything, you know.  Know how to promote it.  And that's something that's always fascinated me about people.  They came, really came at a part when we started trying to do the Southern Heritage Classic.  Because I had spent the better part of my career promoting entertainment, how do you know how to promote a football game?  I mean but if you're a, a marketer and a promoter and you know you understand the concepts and the fundamentals, you can promote anything.  It doesn't really matter, you know, I just happen to be in the entertainment business.
Speaker 1: But you--I, I guess you know--don't you have to kind of understand like the audience you're dealing with?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's part of it, though.  You know it's, you know it's not only the audience, but the, the demographic of the audience, you know.  The age, I mean the ages and the lifestyles and all that play a part in it when you, you know, when you trying to get in the--you know down to the, the intricate part of trying to identify your, your--the source for the people that you're trying to, to, to buy your product.  So you know it's just a--when I could--you know I promoted shows later on at the Hilton Hotel, and then that was--could be considered a predominant white audience, didn't matter to me.  I just do what I have to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So not so much, yeah okay, so you could apply the same principles to any--
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean it's, it's, it's like accounting.  Doesn't matter who--whether you doing the President of the United States, he still got the same accounting principles as you had to deal with.  A guy who's making--like my daddy was making ten, twelve thousand dollars a year.  You know you still can do the taxes and do whatever.  It's not gone change because a person's station in life.  You just have more--probably have more options.  You'll have more people working on it.  You'll have, you know you have better talent in terms of a quality of a lawyer or, or an accountant.  But still the principles are the same.
Story_ID: 180302
Speaker 1: You came up with the Heritage Classic--Southern Heritage Classic in 1980?
Speaker 2: No, actually it was 1990.
Speaker 1: Ninety [1990]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I mean before then, I had tried different--always tried different concepts of different things.  I always been trying to come up with something in the entertainment--you know just like I went over to--start to doing things over at the Hilton Hotel.  Told the guy that I had all these connections 'cause I had been with [HM] Isaac [Hayes] and did a little few name dropping.  He said okay, well we'll let you do it.  But the first show I did was Lou Rawls and Nancy Wilson.  We were doing like two shows a night, 1,100, 1,200 seats.  And we sold every seat for eight shows, completely sold out.  And the guy said man, this is fantastic, you know.  Hotel is full, you know.  People--I mean it was just in terms of great, you know.  So from then we, we ended up doing Count Basie, Billie Eckstine, Bill Cosby, Tony Bennett, John Davidson, Sarah Vaughan, just to name a few.
Speaker 1: Now are certain entertainment personalities--well I know they are, but some are more difficult to work with than others.  And that can be a challenge for a pro--promoter.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well and, and I think one of the things that--[HM] Jerry Butler, the Iceman in Chicago [Illinois].  We was talking about politics in the entertainment business and people really underestimate the, the, the people in the entertainment business, especially promoters, that you know, you know the, the level of, of sophistication that they have because they have to interact with so many people to get things done.  You got the radio stations, you got the--all the media outlets that you have to deal with.  You gotta deal with the artists, their managers, their agents, their PR [public relations] people.  And you have to mold all that together.  And then you got to go out and you got to try to sell it to people.  So you had to have a kind of a, a skill quality.  'Cause at the end of the day, you gotta get the show done, the show gotta go on.  And all whatever difficulty that you might have with a artist or what have you, is, is--you had to find a way to get it done.  And most promoters, especially if they been around as long as I have, you just learn how to get it done.  Whatever it takes to get it done, you get it done.
Story_ID: 180303
Speaker 1: Tell, tell me some of the stories about trying to manage an artist on the road.  I mean in these promotions and so forth.  You must have some good stories.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You don't have to name names if you don't want to, but, but--
Speaker 2: I mean it's, it's fine.  I mean these things actually happened, you know.  I remember a story with Count Basie.  Had to rent a, you know a grand piano.  So he was at rehearsal and the key kept sticking.  And so we called the guy over again and he worked on it and, and it would, you know he would play it and everything was fine.  And, and then soon as the guy left, the, the--it would break again.  Man, I'm 'bout to die then, 'cause the show getting, you know.  And he said don't worry 'bout it.  He said I'll just play around it.  I'll just, I just won't play that, that, that, that note tonight, you know.  Or you know [Bill] Cosby, I did a show with him and I had all kinds of problems with the show.  The opening act, a girl named Jerry Palmer [ph.] got sick.  We had to replace her with somebody else, with one of the ladies that was working in the lounge at the Hilton Hotel on (unclear) at that time.  I mean whatever could go wrong, went wrong.  And I was still going to Bill and don't worry 'bout it, I'll, I'll, you know we'll work--I'll do a longer show.  The sound system went out, you know.  And, and at the end of the run--he had told me like on that Saturday.  He was with a group of people and they was having, you know, drinking coffee or tea or something.  Come and sit down and talk with me, come and sit down and talk, you know.  Say Bill, man you know, my, my philosophy is I'm working for the entertainer, so I don't socialize very often with 'em.  But he said well come on and have a--you know with my friend, he introduced me to him.  We sat there and had some tea or whatever.  Then he pulled me to the side and he said now if you lose any money on this, on, on this run, let me know and I'll write you a check and we'll pay for it.  And I remember Ford Motor Company, we used to do Ford commercials.  They had sent a private plane to pick him up to take him to Detroit [Michigan] to cut the commercials.  And he held, he had held up everybody.  He said Fred, he said, he said if you lose any money at the--this show, I will you know I will, I will pay, you know I'll pay you back.  I send you a check and he gave me his card.  Well we end up making a little, you know making a little money so I had to, you know--but he's the only somebody--only artist in all the years, all the shows I've ever done, that ever told me that they'll, they'll--if we lose any money, they'll write a check to pay for it.  Also there's one at--with Bill that, that came up with my father [Freddie Jones].  You know my father, like I said, my father and I were very close.  So all of this chaos going on with this show.  I mean I'm talking to him, man, this thing is crazy.  So he called me up, he decided he wants to go it, he, he--I wanna go to the show.  This is a Sunday night and we're doing two shows and he stayed for both of 'em.  So he was just standing, you know, standing around.  My father was, like I said a, a laborer.  He's not an entertainment person at all.  I mean--you know but he wanted to be at the show, he wanted to go to the show.  So I saw Bill and I said well Bill I want to introduce me to my father.  And so Bill say--(unclear) you know Bill, hey Bill.  And he said so you came to see me--you wanted to come to see me on the show tonight.  My father looked right in his eye and said no, I didn't come to see you, I came to be with my son.  And my first thought was man, but as I think back on it now, it was like that was, that was 'bout as strong as you can get, you know.  He just said no, I didn't come to see, Bill Cosby, I come to be with my son, you know so that always kind of stuck with me.  I did John Davidson, just a lot of Hilton stories.  John Davidson--most people maybe today didn't know John Davison was a singer.  He had a great show, great show.  And so what I had to do was hire a white guy to, to kind of--I didn't have to do it, but it was just kind of my sense--you know the sensitivity was to, to be with John Davidson.  Whatever John Davidson want and what have you.  So as it, as fate would have it, I'm walking down the stairwell.  I didn't even--he said he never did know who I was.  That he didn't know that, that, that, that he was working--at least I didn't think that he knew that he was working for a black man.  So at that time you had to kind of, you know in my mind you had to kind of keep a low profile, so I stayed in the suite and everybody did everything.  I was walking down the stairwell and they was taking him down the stairwell to take him in the, you know, take him into the show.  And they said hey, John this is who you working for.  And you know he was very cordial and everything, you know and I was, you know I kind of stopped in my tracks 'cause you know you just had this, you know I didn't--you know he's gotten, you know--had everything he wanted, paid him and the show was great, we sold a lot of tickets.  But you know that was some sensitivity at least on my part of, of you know a black man doing a, doing a show like this, you know.
Story_ID: 180304
Speaker 1: Did you ever have any unreasonable demands from artists around things or, you know you hear these stories about these rock artists that have--
Speaker 2: Well I think some of that, some of that is overblown, though.  I mean the rider is what it is.  Everything is outrageous, you know.  I mean you know from certain kind of water to this--you know if you got, you got spring water.  I mean you know they got different brands of it, you know.  So one artist may want one brand, the other might want something else, you know.  Somebody want this kind of beer and want this kind, you know the other kind of beer or this kind of drink.  But I, I didn't find anything really unreasonable, you know.  Let's see I remember a time where all of this stuff was at its infancy.  So a lot of these things just got to be in the development stages.  So as you get to be a big artist, you have bigger demands, you know.  It won't be like Frank Sinatra, man you know he--all he--they say he wanted was a, you know cup of coffee, you know.  That might, you know--in, in, you know in this business that's kind of strange.
Speaker 1: Now what's the most that somebody wanted, can you remember?
Speaker 2: You know like I say, I didn't find it unreasonable.  I think I find it more fascinating that people were writing about it and what they were writing about because they wanted you know, green M&Ms versus, you know have a different variety.  I mean that, that wasn't really strange to me.  You, you working for somebody--
Speaker 1: Had to do that?  Just, just (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You know if that's what they wanted.  But it wasn't--you know what they wanted and you just, you know, you working for them.  You working for the entertainer.  I think sometimes people get lost on people.  You know I'm not the star, you know.  The artist I work and the people I've done things with, they, they are the stars; I work for them.  When I was with [HM] Isaac [Hayes], Isaac was the star.  I was behind the scene person.  But I, I couldn't think of anything unreasonable, you know unreasonable that I--that anybody ever demanded, you know, that I thought was unreasonable.
Story_ID: 180305
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Southern Heritage Classic.  How did you get the idea for that and when did you start?
Speaker 2: Well let, let me make--let me mention one thing here.  I don't wanna let that go.  One of the other groups that I've gotten really close to over the years was the Isley Brothers.  And it's, it's strangely how that happened, they were gonna go out on a tour in the late '70s [1970s], can't think of the exact year.  And think it was '77 [1977], '78 [1978], I can't--one of the years.  And a guy named James O. Thomas [ph.] who I knew from working with [HM] Isaac [Hayes], was working with them.  And they had tried some promoters and things didn't work out.  He said well I know this guy who can--I know he can get it done.  So he called me up and said you know, we want, you know they want you, to consider you to do this tour.  Really?  I don't have no money.  I ain't have money to take the trip to New York.  They gon' take care of that.  They just want somebody to take care of it.  So that started a relationship that I still have with the, with the family from, from, you know from that point.  And it kind of showed me a side of what, what can be done in this business 'cause they were one of the first groups that--they were doing their own shows, writing their own music, playing their own music, had their own business.  And I remember we doing the, the tours--the times that I--when I first started it, they were financing it.  I did everything else.  Only thing they did was sing.  Where, where the arena they played, how much the ticket prices were, where they stayed, all of those kind of things were taken care of.  All they had, had--what time do we go on stage?  And, and we took care of that.  And that was a tremendous relationship that I still have with the, with them right now, with Ronald [Isley] and Ernie [Isley] and they're the two ones that are still in the band now.  But Kelly [O'Kelly Isley, Jr.] who's the older brother, who kind of--everything kind of flowed through Kelly in terms of the business and what have you.  And he was telling me one time, he say you know people don't realize about the entertainment business, how emotional it is.  You're on a tremendous high, and tremendous low.  And you know that's kind of tough to take.  You got a record that you put a lot of things in and goes to number one, then you have one that, that could flop.  Fortunate for them, once they start, you know, started churning out hit records with, with the younger brothers, you know and, and Chris [Jasper], you know, the brother-in-law, man it was--they had a tremendous run.  And I was right, right there for the, right there for that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the few groups that they had a hit almost every year for the last thirty years.
Speaker 2: It's tremendous.  You know then you hear the stories about the time when they went to Motown, or hear the story about the (unclear), you know, how they--nobody would that take that record and they took they last money and, and, and produced it themselves, one of the biggest records in their history.  You know just, you know they were--at the time I was, when I was with them, it was like when I was with [HM] Isaac [Hayes], I was right in the forefront of what was going on with, with music.  And you know not people--not that many people get that opportunity to, to be where the action is.  When I was with Isaac, Isaac had the number one record in the world.  I mean all the Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] shows was doing the theme from 'Shaft.'  We went to Europe, worked with Burt Bacharach.  We--one of the first artist that sold you know, a million records--equivalent of a million records in Canada, you know.  It was tremendous.  The Isley Brothers came along with 'Fight the Power' and all that stuff.  Man, you right there in the middle of it and doing their own shows and doing you know, national tours and that kind of thing.  It was tremendous.  So, you know that was, you know I--being close to that, you know that family and that group for a long time.
Story_ID: 180306
Speaker 1: But getting back to the Southern Heritage Classic, I had a streak in the early '80s [1980s] where as a promoter, things didn't go well.  In fact, I had to file bankruptcy.  And one bit of advice that my father [Freddie Jones] gave me during that time was that I, I told him that things were bad.  I went to him and told him that things were bad.  He said I'm gone tell you what to do.  I mean this guy was just as smart as--he said you go to everyone of those people and you tell them how bad things are and what you're gonna do.  Don't let them get a notice in the mail or something of your filing bankruptcy.  You go, you go to 'em and you tell 'em what the problem is.  What you're going through.  And I followed his advice and one of the--some of the best advice I've ever had is that when you have a problem, you just go straight to the people and you tell 'em I got a problem.  Not one person--caused a lot of people money--I think, I think my landlord at the time had the best--he just said, Fred you've done the best that you can do, and you've done--try to promote this city.  And just, just send my key, clean up the place, we'll call it even.  And everybody in this community kind of--was you know they--nobody came after me and tried to make a, a big stink about it at all.  And it was because of my father's advice.  I've done a lot of business with all of these people since then.  You know these same people I went back to, they didn't have any ill will or anything.  Did tremendous business with all of 'em since then.  And that's something that's been invaluable, again that, you know to have the insight of a, of an elder like your father to, to help guide you along.  So after the bankruptcy and trying to figure out what I was gone try to do going forward, I came up with this idea of, of trying to get involved with corporations.  Say you know, everybody takes the, you know take these sponsorship things for really for granted.  But in the early '80s [1980's] that was almost--it didn't exist or was very limited.  It was very small in terms of you know, sponsorships being involved to the level that it is right now.  So I thought that I needed to try to do that.  And I wanted to created a festival and I was gonna call it the 'Southern Heritage Festival.'  So I spent the better part of five years going down to the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival [New Orleans, Louisiana] trying to get a sense of what they were doing; how they were doing it.  I looked at all of their, their startup organizational things.  They had a nonprofit organization that they started.  When they first started the event, they had more performers than they had people at the event, now it's one of the biggest ones in the world.  So I started working on that but I couldn't really get any, any sponsorship, get anybody to really get into it here.  It just, I just couldn't get it done.  So I, I was able to talk to a guy by the name of Clyde Allen who was working at the House of Seagram at that time.  And he was on, on my list of corporations that I had made to try and, and--to get involved with this, with this music marketing, marketing.  And I went to, I went to Clyde.  I went to New York [New York] and there's this picture of this.  I went to New York, called Clyde on the phone and said I wanna--I'm in New York and I would like to see you.  Now you know as tough as New York is, you can't hardly get to see people if you have an appointment.  Went to see him.  He listened to this idea that I had about Seagram's being involved with music.  Said okay.  I left, he threw the package away, but he kept my card.  They were talking in a meeting about getting involved in the music, in the music marketing and that kind of thing.  Took my--he called me up on the phone and said I still had your card.  I think we might be onto something here.  And we started with that, with the 'Seagram Gin Presents a Taste of the Blues.'  And they wrote me into the proposal, that I was gone be the one that was gon' execute it for 'em.  And we started with that, working with Mississippi Delta Blues Festival, San Francisco Blues Festival [California].  Some of the biggest in the country.
Story_ID: 180307
Speaker 1: And I start tinkering with this idea of this--doing this football game.  And as we got into starting to develop this idea about the, about the football, I didn't have a name of this event.  So I just arbitrarily called it the Southern Heritage Classic.  'Cause I had this, this, this design on this festival.  And if you go back and if you would look at some of the early design, I had a man sitting on a stoop, playing a left hand guitar player that we had for the 'Southern Heritage Festival.'  We took a white out and whited out 'festival' and wrote in 'classic.'  That's--that was the Southern Heritage Classic.  That's how we got the name 'cause it was--I knew it needed something.  I needed the, the kind of move--once we got into it, to move kind of fast.  Once I got the schools involved, and, and got over their reluctance to, to letting me do it because they didn't think that I was capable of doing it because I hadn't done sports before, so--but that's how that--we, we started with the--just the--as we were watching around the country other cities, Atlanta [Georgia], Indianapolis [Indiana], New Orleans [Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Chicago's [Illinois] got one.
Speaker 1: Chicago got one now, I don't think they had one then.  The biggest ones, the bigger one was the Bayou Classic [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And in Indianapolis.  Atlanta [Georgia] had just, had just started theirs.  And I thought that we, we had the right ingredients to, to do one here in Memphis [Tennessee], and that's how we started.
Speaker 2: Okay, now the past couple of years it's been Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and--no, Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and--is it always Jackson State and Tennessee State?
Speaker 1: Well it's--Tennessee State has played in all of 'em.  This year will be number fourteen.  Jackson this year would have been played in twelve.  Grambling [State University, Grambling Louisiana] played one year and Mississippi Valley [State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi] played one year.  But the best model was the Bayou Classic where they had two, the same two schools playing in, in the city, in New Orleans [Louisiana], you know and--
Speaker 2: Southern (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, and we, and we wanted to do the same thing here with Jackson State, 200 miles south of Memphis; Tennessee State, Nashville is 200 miles north of Memphis, and Memphis like kind of right in the middle, so--it made logistical sense to do that.
Speaker 2: Did you depend on the alumni of these two schools, largely to--for attendance?
Speaker 1: Well we started off as that base because they have--when you say Tennessee State and Jackson State, nationally, people know you know, know about the schools.  You had Ed "Too Tall" Jones, Wilma Rudolph, Ralph Boston.  Tennessee State, the Tiger Bells, John Merritt the coach, then on Jackson State side you had Walter Payton, W.C. Gordon who's a long time coach there,  Jackie Slater, a lot of Hall of Famers from, from Jackson State.  So you, you, you had something that was already in place.  And what we were able to do was take that base of the alumni and you, you had to learn early on that you--not only you, you take the, the ingredients of Tennessee State and Jackson State, but you had to build the event.  So Southern Heritage Classic the event featuring these two schools, along with the other things around it, was what we had to do.
Story_ID: 180308
Speaker 1: Now what, what are some of the other things?  I know there's 'The Tom Joyner Sky Show.'
Speaker 2: Right.  Well there's--it's [Southern Heritage Classic], it's similar to--I say it's similar to the, to the Super Bowl.  When you had a Super Bowl, you have a football game.  You have these parties and events around them.  You have, you know, political people that are there, sports people that are there.  People travel, come in from around the world to come, to go to the Super Bowl, but the, the ingredients are the same as with the Southern Heritage Classic.  You have a football game, you have a tremendous tailgate, you have 'Tom Joyner Sky Show,' you have concerts.  You got Ed "Too Tall" Jones Golf Tournament, all those ingredients make up the Southern Heritage Classic.
Speaker 1: That's a lot.  How long does it take to unfold--the whole weekend?
Speaker 2: Well, we work on it the entire year.  The one thing that I've, that I learned a long time ago that I can't do all of this by myself.  So we have people for each one of the events we have a producer for that event.  Person who's in charge of the event.  And which gives it constant attention.  'Cause one person, you know you got 13 events in two days.  And you know, Murphy's Law doesn't set in, then most time they tell us you got the--you know you can't be all the places and do all the things and have it come out to with the kind of quality that you're looking for.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of events in two days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you had to have a lot of advanced planning, a lot of committed people, and a lot of people that are working on the Classic have been working on it from almost--from the, from the inception.  So you have a lot of familiarity of the event from the staff standpoint.  But you also have a tremendous amount of commitment in order to, in order to get it done.
Speaker 1: Well what, what, what's the most rewarding part of this event?
Speaker 2: It happened the first year, first year.  We did the event--I mean I always talking about have this thing about black people and the weather, they don't go out in the weather, like they don't vote.  Probably just some, some history with that, but it only rained on the event the very first year.  It rained for a short time right at game time.  People never stopped walking, they just kept going.  That's--you know it was amazing to some, man, you know that's the first thing go through your mind.  So we did the event and a lady walked up to me on that Monday with tears in her eyes.  She said I mean I've never felt like this.  To see all those people and, and you know and it was a wonderful experience.  And she was--tears--I don't even know the lady.  She just walked up and hugged me and I'm glad you doing this, it's great for the city, great for the community.  And just, you know--so I think from the, from the very beginning, the people in this community knew what this Southern Heritage Classic was, was about.  Knew it was gone be difficult to keep it together and keep it, keep it going.  But they knew and they've always wanted it.  And that lady's expression kind of summed it, you know for, for me and it still, still strong even today.  That, that the people really--that they really wanted it, she wanted it, she felt good about it and people still feel good about it to this day.
Story_ID: 180309
Speaker 1: Now Memphis [Tennessee] is an interesting place to--city, and that's it the heart of the South, everybody knows that.  But it's, it's a city that in some ways has not, has not reached its full potential in terms of all the black people that live in, in this surrounding area.  All the economic power and political power, you know too.  But you know there's a black mayor in the city now.  It's--I mean its black mayor of the county now too.  I mean it's starting to come into its own in a sense.  Do you feel (unclear) part of that?
Speaker 2: Well I been able to show because I'm from Memphis, with, you know with the background, that you can, that you can get it done in Memphis business-wise.  You know we've been able to, you know, do with the Southern Heritage Classic as an eco--as an economic, financial powerhouse in terms of the amount of money, the millions of dollars that it generates.  I've been able to get involved with the, the, the Memphis Grizzlies and NBA [National Basketball Association]--our first major franch--you know major league, you know, franchise for Memphis, that it can be done.
Speaker 1: Yeah and you, you were head of something called the NBA Now in Memphis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--part of that organization to make that happen.  You know there, there have been some progress individually, but there's still so much more to do for, for other black people, business people in this community, to, to move that along.  That's where I think that we still are very lacking in that area.  Not like Atlanta [Georgia] where they were able to, to really show it and document it and see it firsthand.
Story_ID: 180310
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us about the Memphis Grizzlies.  How did you all get the Memphis Grizzlies?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a, a Herculean effort that a lot of people in the community, led by you know, Pitt Hyde, Barbara [Rosser] Hyde, Andy Cates, Staley Cates, Charles Ewing, Gail Rhodes, Marty Regent [ph.], one of the attorneys.  We all--we got to be known as the Pursuit Team.  And it was strange how I got involved in it.  When they were--when I heard about that, they were, they was pursuing the N, you know the NBA [National Basketball Association].  Didn't know it was the Grizzlies or whatever at the time.  They had a meeting talking 'bout buying suites and one of the things that I wanted to, to do, me as an individual, was not let what happened to Memphis' [Tennessee] NFL [National Football League] effort, where a lot of people felt that because Memphis is a really poor city in a small market, that because we have so many disproportionate number of black people here, you know, low income and, and that kind of thing, that, you know that Memphis was, was not--you know that was one of the reasons why the NBA, I mean the NFL did not pick Memphis.
Speaker 1: They went to Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Well, well in reality is that Memphis was the only city that did not commit to build a new stadium.  New stadium in St. Louis [Missouri], new stadium in Baltimore [Maryland], new stadium in Cleveland [Ohio], new stadium in Charlotte [North Carolina].  Over 135, 40 million dollars in the renovation of the stadium in Jacksonville [Florida].  The only thing they did with Memphis was expand the number.  So the reason--every team, every city that committed to, to build a stadium, got a NFL franchise.  And Nashville was, wasn't even in the picture, but they committed to do a stadium and as they say the rest is history.
Story_ID: 180311
Speaker 1: So I wanted to, to, to let that rumor, you know, my little part if they was gon' sell a suite and I wanted to say I'm wanna be the first one to say I was gon' commit to buy a suite.  And we went to the meeting, I was one of the first ones to stand up and say I'll buy a suite.  You know, here's Fred Jones, he's producer of the Southern Heritage Classic and he's gone buy a suite and here all these other heavyweights in the, you know, in the town, they were all there.  Business people and started making these commitments.  And as we--things started develop, I was approached about being involved in the pursuit 'cause you know I understood sports, entertainment, which is entertainment and sports is kind of like they're together.  And I understood how it all, how this all--you know much--how this all was going much more than the people that was in the pursuit of it.  You know I was saying you don't have that kind of money, I don't, to have that kind of money to, to you know, to do you know, what you need to have done.  But I was able to play a part.  So as we kind of developed it, it was like okay we need an arm to go out here and talk to people in the community about, you know, what we're doing with this pursuit of the [Memphis] Grizzlies.  And that's, that's how the NBA Now was born.  And it was a perfect fit for me because that's what I do.  I mean I try to get people to spend money on entertainment, the sports, music or whatever.  And all with the, with the NBA [National Basketball Association] like with all major league franchises, it's very expensive.  So you know you have floor seats that are gonna cost you 500 dollars.  So it's--gone have a certain market and what have you, that you can be able to go with that, so--the NBA.  Now was a--we got, we, we went all--we were all part of it and we were all going all over this community talking to people about the NBA and what it was gone mean to the community.  We had the, you know we all were politicians, we had to go to all the politicians, all the business people, all the grassroots people, everybody, you know to talk to 'em about this, this, this NBA or major franchise in the community.  And I was glad to be able to play a part in that.
Story_ID: 180312
Speaker 1: You know at the time Vancouver [British Columbia, Canada] was trying to move its team.  Was there any--but I, I remember there's another team trying to move too.
Speaker 2: Charlotte [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Charlotte and Vancouver.  'Cause they was having issues with the, with the owner down there.  And you know so and, and like Michael Heisley, when he bought the team in Vancouver, he realized that he, he needed to move the team from there.  So he was looking to move it.  So it was at a time where there were two possibilities and the Grizzlies were the ones that came forth for us first.
Speaker 1: Well how's it work out so far?
Speaker 2: I think it's been fantastic.  We got--we gone have a new arena.  Got a, got a nucleus of a really good team.  Jerry West is, is a part of, of what we're doing.  He's one of the, you know, legendary basketball minds, you know in the business, who's, who's leading the, the basketball operations for the Grizzlies.  It's just a tremendous amount of upside.  And what we wanted to achieve in part was to be able to, to draw the community together and have it to be, you know, our team, the community's team, and being, being that you know race is a big deal here.  Somebody once described Memphis as if they wanted to change a stop sign, you know it comes down, you know a, a racial issue, you know, what blacks and whites or how they gone view it, so--we--our hope was to be able to have this viewed as Memphis' [Tennessee] team and, and be able to for now and in the future, be able to go forward with a unified effort in the city.
Story_ID: 180313
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: That we finally get our act together.  That we realize that we are our brother's keeper.  And that if we can band together, have a oneness of mind, that we can really get something done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that, that you would do differently if you had it to do over again?
Speaker 2: Probably be a lot more aggressive, you know as you start to getting somewhat successful, you get a lot more conservative.  You have a lot more you know, pressures that you have to deal with, political and what have you and I think I would have been a lot more aggressive.  I probably would have been one step lower than a militant with a, with a blue blazer on.  Just need to be a lot more aggressive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what are you future plans?  Do you have any big plans in the future you're, you're looking at?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that my future is--I think I've been preparing for my future.  I don't know--it's like the Southern Heritage Classic, I had no idea that it was, that was even gone get involved in something like that, 'cause it wasn't a Southern Heritage Classic as a, as a, as a guide in Memphis [Tennessee].  I don't know what the future holds for me.  I think I'm getting prepared for it.  I think the recent death of my father [Freddie Jones] has made me more determined.  I think I'm more prepared because that's what he wanted me, you know to be, to be prepared and to work with people and, and, and, and do more to, to help people.  How, you know how that's gonna unfold, I don't know. But I'm gone--you know once--and it's, it's, and it's like this with me, you know if I see something or I feel something, then I can move on it pretty quickly.  I don't, I don't need a, a long period of time to say now I wonder if this the right thing to do.  I almost will know it instantly.  So the big future for me, I'm prepared for it, I just don't know what that is right now.  But I know it's gonna involve people and trying to get our people to understand that we got to be a, a lot more unified in the efforts to, to move forward.
Story_ID: 180314
Speaker 1: At this juncture as you look back on--I know you've won numerous awards for civic activity and involvement, and the kind of stuff you do, promotional kind of thing you do, seem to help people feel better about Memphis [Tennessee].  But if you--looking back on all of it, what would you consider at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I actually helped you know that I actually able to help, help people.  You know and I, I don't wanna just continue to, to wail on the--on my father [Freddie Jones], but I mean I think people that know me, know, know you know, that he and I were very, very close and it got to a point that he--my father would tell me something and I would go tell someone, you know my father said this.  And then people would call me up and say well man, what--go ask your father what he think about this.  You know say he was got to be, you know, you know it's just I got to, I go to really, you know, move forward and, and, and take what, what he brought and, and go forward with it.  Kind of lost my train of thought there a little bit, but--
Speaker 1: We're talking about legacy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The fact that you're gonna be able to, to help people.  And when he, when he died, people across this community, people I didn't even know, 'cause they announced it on the radio, I never heard it, that my father had passed.  And everybody responded.  And tell me well you know your, your dad--you know especially in our community when you do something for people, people look for opportunities to, to really say you know, thank you very much for--you did this for me at this particular time.  And I would walk into places and, and people would just have nice to things or whatever the case might be.  So you realize that you, you have had an impact on people, you know.  People responded that way.  And, and, and that's what we--that's the--what we do, what we do with the Classic, what we do with anything else that we do that, that, that I'm associated with.  That we, we try to leave a footprint you know, that we tried to do it the right way and we had people in mind when we did it.  It's not a selfish act at all.  My--at all, and that was my father's [Freddie Jones] phil--my father's philosophy, not a selfish act.  You can be, you, you know you had to pursue what you're trying to do, but it's more people that are gonna be impacted by what you do.  And I have an, I have an audience, an arena, to do that.  And it would be short sighted on my part to, to do it just for me, you know.  So if, if the Southern Heritage Classic--if all the other things I might be involved in can impact people in a positive way, then that's the legacy that I want to be able to, to leave.  Because that was the, the legacy that he had, that he wanted to do something that, that, that would impact other people.
Story_ID: 180315
Speaker 1: Okay.  The one final question is--this is slightly different from legacy.  But how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a person who, who put it all on the line and to do it whatever that I was trying to do, live my life, run my business, whatever activity I might be in, you know, that I put it all on the line and that I did it the right way.  You know with, you know with honor and respect.  Very, very important to me.
