Story_ID: 660501
Speaker 1: So I'll begin by slating. My name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our video- videographer is Scott Stearns. We are at the Skadden, Arps building [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York]. Today is December 1st, 2016. Sir, would you please say and spell your name, tell us your birthdate and what you do?
Speaker 2: Wow (laughter). My name is [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson, R-O-B-E-R-T, J-A-C-K-S-O-N. Born December 18th, 1950, and what do I do? I am a consultant, lobbyist, legislator, and a parent education advocate.
Speaker 1: Excellent--
Speaker 2: All of those things wrapped in one.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: At the same price.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 660502
Speaker 1: We start with what we call People magazine type questions--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) easy quick questions.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chinese food and Tanzanian food. My wife's [Faika Rifai Jackson] from Tanzania, East Africa. So pilau, biriyani, sambusas, things like that, delicious.
Speaker 1: Sounds like. Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Who knows, dark blue, business suit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Business suit blue (laughter). Time of year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: And vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Some place warm, water, mountains. So, we often go to Tanzania and Zanzibar [Tanzania] where my wife's from. Zanzibar is a beautiful island. Can I--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --sip while this--while we're talking (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you--yes you may. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Wow, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, I can--
Speaker 1: Nothing comes to mind?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Story_ID: 660503
Speaker 1: What we wanna do now is talk about your family. We'll talk about both sides of your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's start with your father. Would you tell me your father's name and birthday, where he's from and about him please?
Speaker 2: Okay, well I grew up with two fathers, and I respect them both as if they're my biological father. And quite frankly I don't even know who my biological father is, but it doesn't matter to me. That I know who my biological mother is and we were all together as a family--so, my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] married Eddie Chu, Eddie York Chu, who is from China. Where in China? I don't know, but it's probably the southern part of China, who came here to the United States in around 19--maybe 1920, something like that via the West Coast and moved to the East Coast sometime in I guess the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]. So that's Eddie York Chu.
Speaker 1: And what--and what does Eddie York Chu do?
Speaker 2: My father was a partner in one of the large laundry companies that basically all of the Chinese laundries used to send their sheets and shirts, and everything to, which was located in Harlem [New York, New York] on 155th Street near 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. In the '50s [1950s], I remember going there with him. And then after that, he was in the Chinese restaurant business as a waiter. And then my second father is James Robert Rudd [James Rudd] from Danville, Virginia, born April 2nd, 1926. And he was--came to New York [New York] in, I guess, the '40s [1940s] and he was a hustler and then subsequently became a CHOW worker [community health outreach worker] in the ACS [New York City Administration for Children's Services], which is, I guess, the children's services for New York City.
Speaker 1: And do--how far can you trace back James Rudd's family?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean we looked at the census data. His mother and father were from the Virginia area, in Danville, Virginia. And I know that he had a picture I think of his uncle with the World War I [WWI] uniform on in--in the frame in the house. Quite frankly, we have not researched that far back, but his mother and father was in the 1930 census data because obviously we saw that and we have not traced it back further than that. And my father, Eddie York Chu, as I said to you I have two dads--or had two dads rather. When I was in San Francisco Bay Area [California], I, I went to the archives to try to get the information about him, but they brought up several Eddie Chus with the picture and they said that they needed the ship that he came over on in order to really pull his records. So they asked me to contact the Immigration Naturalization Services [U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service] since I have his naturalization papers and we have his alien registration number on there. And with that, if they--if we got that particular file, then they would be able to know what ship he came over on and pull the file. I have not done that as of yet.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's left to be done (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we, we plan--I--that's something that I hope to do soon rather than later (laughter).
Speaker 1: And when you say you have two dads, were--who was living in the home with you?
Speaker 2: Eddie, Eddie York Chu was married to my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My other dad was not married to my mother, but I do know that several of my brothers and sisters, clearly in my opinion and in their opinion also, James Robert Rudd was their father biologically, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Was, and was Rudd in--an active part of your life?
Speaker 2: Yes. He was because we lived on Sugar Hill [New York, New York] and 148th Street between St. Nicholas [Avenue] and Convent [Avenue] and he lived right in the area where we lived at. So, he was involved when, you know, (gesture) the way things were.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 660504
Speaker 1: What is your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Zelma [Zelma Jackson Chu], Z-E-L-M-A, Chu, C-H-U. Married to my father, Eddie York Chu [Eddie Chu]. But my mother's maiden name was Jackson. My name is [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson. I'm named after her father [Robert Jackson]. My sister's name is Emma Jackson, named after my mother--my mother's mother, our grandmother who we never knew because she died giving childbirth back in 1932.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And how many children are in your family?
Speaker 2: There were nine of us.
Speaker 1: Nine.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. There were nine and now there are five left.
Speaker 1: And your--where's your mother from?
Speaker 2: Athens, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about her family, her (background noise)--?
Speaker 2: I do. We, we, we've done some research. When I say we, my daughter, Saadiya Jackson [Saadiya Jackson Owens], who is the oldest of my kids, she's forty-one, an M.D., lives in Virginia area. But we have done some research and we've traced my mother's family going back 'til like 1820. And obviously some research we've done before, and we just came back to it over the Thanksgiving Day holiday, so for example the 1930 census in Athens, Georgia we found my mother who was about three and a half years old living in the household with her mother, Emma Jackson [Emma Willingham Jackson] and her grandmother, Emma Willingham, all in the same household in Athens, Georgia. So there were three generations in the 1930 census that were living together in this particular household.
Speaker 1: And when you say you can go back to 1820, as you have traced your family back, do you find evidence of slavery?
Speaker 2: With- without a doubt. My mother and her siblings never had birth certificates.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, because one of the reasons why is birth certificates were not required by law in Georgia until 1930. And so my mother and her siblings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For everyone?
Speaker 2: It was not required, I did not say you didn't have it, but it was not required by law until 1930. And so my wi- my mother and her siblings never had birth certificates, and so my mom never had a birth certificate. In fact, she thought that she was born in 1927 or '28 [1928] or '29 [1929], and by me doing the research found out that she was three and a half when the 1930 census that made--and her birth date was June 6th. So she was born June 6th, '26 [1926]. But mind you, at the time in 1932 when my grandmother, her mother died, my mother was a young child. So she only knows what has been told to her and she told me that her mother died giving childbirth. And, and then doing research, you know, we found this woman, Emma Jackson, and I sent for the death certificate from the New York State--Georgia, blah, blah, blah, and it came back that this Emma Jackson was a white woman and so for--and her parents were not Emma Willingham who is my great-grandmother and what have you. So in essence, it was the wrong Emma Jackson. But just subsequently during this Thanksgiving holiday season, my daughter looking up the death records found out that my grandmother, her--my daughter's great-grandmother died in 1932 and was buried in such and such cemetery. And so we looked it up, but this cemetery, the Brook- old Brooklyn Cemetery in Athens, Georgia and the old Brooklyn Cemetery is a black cemetery, and basically it was almost defunct, totally abandoned and a group of organizations, along with college students are basically clearing out all of the dirt and shrubbery and markings and what have you and they're trying to reclaim that as a burial ground for blacks in the 19--from 1880 until--I think, 1882 up until 1990. It was a burial ground in Athens, Georgia, the old Brooklyn Cemetery.
Speaker 1: So, that's the--that's tracing--that was the black cemetery correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 660505
Speaker 1: As it relates to pointing to slavery, what did you find in your research?
Speaker 2: Well, if you, if you look at the census data going back and obviously as I told my daughter [Saadiya Jackson Owens] in discussing with her and doing the research, we make an assumption that the information on the census data is correct. But you and I know that it's only as correct as the people put it down to be correct, and it may not be correct. So I told her you have to take it all with a grain of salt. But knowing that, for example in 19--in 1860, if you look at the census information, they did not list the slaves or black people that were slaves of the Willingham family. Willingham is our slave name. And the Willingham brothers owned a lot of farm and what have you, so even now in 2016 if you look up in Athens, Georgia you still see a lot of Willinghams because that's where the owners, the slave owners, that were their name, Willinghams in that area. And so it shows in 1860 census information that it only named the individual and then it listed the slaves by their age and male or female and not by the specific name of the individual. So, and that was a clear indication to me at that point in time it's very, very difficult to trace because--but then, in looking at the census data from obviously, I told you 1930, 1940 is the latest that came out recently in the past year or two or couple years, but we traced it from 1930, 1920, 1910, 1900, 19--1890 up to 1870. So when they list a 1870 relative of mine that were born--and they were sixty-five years old, then you could--if they're sixty-five and listed in 1870 census, obviously can go back and then you look at the names and what have you and so forth. And so as a result of that, I can't--I know my daughter has all that information. We're tracing our family via my mother back then. It was kind of difficult to, to do the trace on Robert Jackson and his family, the Jackson family. But the Willingham family goes all the way back there. Because in the 19--1910, 1910, 1910 and 1920 census you had Robert Jackson, a young boy, living with his father and then you know, the 1930 census you see Emma Jackson [Emma Willingham Jackson], my grandmother, and it says in the census with a W, assuming that the information is true and W (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, Willingham.
Speaker 2: No, W means widowed.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh yes, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. So you know, and then so my daughter doing more research, she looked at information besides death. She looked at those that were in prison or in jail, and we found out that Robert Jackson, age twenty, and my grandmother was about age twenty at the--was in jail. And also in jail at the same time was Robert Willingham. So obviously (laughter) and Robert Willingham was the husband of my great-grandmother, Emma Willingham. Emma Willingham, my mother's--her daughter was Emma Willingham and when she got married, Emma Jackson. And so that's why my mother was named Zelma Jackson [Zelma Jackson Chu]. So basically at the time the census was taken both Robert Jackson and Robert Willingham were in jail at the time. It doesn't say what they're in jail for, but it's obvious, it's clear to me based on the census data, Robert Jackson, age twenty, at that time and Robert Willingham, age forty-five, those were the family. And that's why they were not listed in the household at that particular time.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating.
Speaker 2: So you have to do that type of detailed research to verify, you see. When you asked me earlier, you have a phrase, you know what the phrase is?
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: Trust but verify.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: Trust, but verify. And so we, we trust the information but we have to verify in order to know that we tracing our family, it's really our family.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Excellent. I'm glad you know so much about your family.
Story_ID: 660506
Speaker 1: --Important to me understanding, I said to you, my mother was separated because my grandmother [Emma Willingham Jackson] died at childbirth. And an aunt from Chicago [Illinois] went to Athens, Georgia and took my mother and her young- younger sister Mildred [Mildred Jackson], Aunt Mildred to Chicago. Family, family ties. And then, my aunt--my mother's aunt Bobbie [Bobbie Willingham], my great aunt Bobbie from New York [New York] went to Chicago and brought my mother to New York.
Speaker 2: Independent of her sister?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Sh- Mildred stayed in Chicago.
Speaker 2: And Aunt Bobbie brought your mother to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Zelma [Zelma Jackson Chu], her niece--
Speaker 2: Zelma, to New York.
Speaker 1: --to New York, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: How old was Zelma at this time, do you know?
Speaker 1: Don't know, maybe ten.
Speaker 2: So a young child.
Speaker 1: Maybe ten, twelve, I, I don't, I don't know. But my mother told me the story and she made a pledge, her and her sister Mildred that no matter what happened to them, they would never separate their family because that's what happened to them. And nine of us, remember I said to you I don't really know who my biological father is, but I grew up with two fathers [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu and James Rudd] and I accept them both as my father, my father they both were. We have never ever been separated and we've never ever considered my sisters or brothers a half-brother or half-sister, even though many of us are. And I sit here now in talking to you and am proud of my heritage, because my heritage and now my upbringing has brought me to who I am today. And the family bond is so strong, that's why my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] and I we have three daughters and we're always together.
Story_ID: 660507
Speaker 1: So your mother [Zelma Jackson Chu], as a child, maybe ten, came to New York [New York] to live with Aunt Bobbie [Jackson's maternal great aunt, Bobbie Willingham], where did they live?
Speaker 2: Sugar Hill, 148th Street between St. Nicholas [Avenue] and Convent [Avenue] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Same place--
Speaker 2: Same place.
Speaker 1: --same place.
Speaker 2: Where, where she met my dad.
Speaker 1: So yeah, I was gonna ask you how did they meet?
Speaker 2: Aunt Bobbie was married to Uncle George [ph.], in my opinion he was Uncle George whether he was actually married or not, but we referred to him as Uncle George. Uncle George was Chinese. And that's how my mother met my dad through Uncle George.
Speaker 1: How old was see when, when she and your dad, Eddie [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu], got married?
Speaker 2: I don't know that--I think they got married in nineteen forty something or 1950, I'm not absolutely sure. I do have their marriage certificate, it may have been 1954, it may have been earlier. But I know it was before 1955 for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For sure.
Speaker 1: And so, your mother met your father, Eddie, through Aunt Bobbie's husband, Uncle George?
Speaker 2: Uncle George.
Speaker 1: Who--and what did Uncle George do?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: No, but you lived in the ho- she, she lived in the house with him?
Speaker 2: Yep, and in fact when my Aunt Bobbie passed away, my mother took over the apartment and we lived there at 148th Street, 402 West 148th Street, which is a six story apartment building.
Speaker 1: A six story walkup?
Speaker 2: No, no, an elevator.
Speaker 1: Oh, good (laughter). And do you know how she met your dad, James?
Speaker 2: From 148th Street.
Speaker 1: Same?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right 'cause--
Speaker 1: He was in the--
Speaker 2: --because he, he and his friends migrated from Danville, Virginia and they migrated to Harlem [New York, New York] up on Sugar Hill. So for example, my dad died--Eddie died in nineteen ninety- 1994, 1994. My dad was much older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Your dad Eddie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, much older. And so he died in 1994 and he was, at the time of his death, eighty-eight years old. And he had said to me even earlier that when he came here, he, he put down the wrong age, so he was really older when he died, he was like ninety-three or ninety-four when he died. You know, people change, you know, information on documents in order to get over and whatever they're doing. And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And when you say much older than your mom--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what do you mean, like how old?
Speaker 2: Well see my mother died in 1999, in fact April 19th, 1999, my mother died in the hospital in the Bronx [New York]. And at that time, she was seventy-two. So here he died in '94 [1994], his birth certificate says eighty-eight, but he told me he was a couple years older and she died in 1999 at seventy-two. So (laughter).
Speaker 1: So significant age difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Whereas James Robert Rudd, my other dad, he was born April 2nd, 1926. And I--you know remember earlier, I told you my mother was born on June 6th, 1926 'cause they were about the same age (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-six [1926], so they were about the same age, right. And James Rudd, is he still living?
Speaker 2: No, he died on January 19th of last year, 2015. And that's why my daughter, her youngest daughter Sumaya [Sumaya Jackson] now has inherited his coop apartment on Sugar Hill.
Speaker 1: Got it. Now, you--what were--you told me what your fathers', your--both of your fathers work was, what was your mother's work?
Speaker 2: Work?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Homemaker, baby maker, no I'm joking.
Speaker 1: Well she had how many (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well she had nine children (laughter).
Speaker 1: Nine children, so that's a--she had a big job.
Speaker 2: That's a full time job, yeah. So my mother basically was a homemaker. She, she didn't work.
Speaker 1: And, what--do you know what Aunt Bobbie did?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know. I don't think Aunt Bobbie worked, you know, I don't think so. At least I have no knowledge, or someone telling me that she was like a social worker or a doctor or an engineer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you don't have that.
Speaker 2: --or even a salesperson.
Story_ID: 660508
Speaker 1: I want you to think about your childhood and go back, back, back, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Growing up on 148th Street. (Laughter) Growing up on 148th Street between St. Nicholas [Avenue] and Convent [Avenue]. Going to the elementary school there. Selling newspapers on Sunday from Mom's Newsstand [ph.]. Working in Mom's Newsstand on 148th Street and St. Nicholas. Working in Rob's grocery store, barbeque place on the weekends, going--
Speaker 1: At what age?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What age did you start doing that?
Speaker 2: Soon as you can carry newspapers, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen. I remember working at Rob's Barbeque Grocery Store [ph.], it's a small one, not a big one, I'm talking about small--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and up until--through high school [Benjamin Franklin High School; Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And where are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To earn money.
Speaker 1: And where--where are you in the birth order?
Speaker 2: Oh let's see. Raymond [Raymond Jackson], Chu [Edward Chu], Jack [Donald Jackson], Ruby [Ruby Jackson], Emma [Emma Jackson]. Raymond, Chu, Jack, Ruby, Emma, I'm number six. So that's, you know, that's what I remember around 148th Street. I remember coming from school running after someone. I went to the Alexander Hamilton school, which is the old P.S. 186 [New York, New York], which right now is, is called P.S. 186 housing development.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it's not a school anymore?
Speaker 2: And it's--it's the home of the Boys and Girls Club of Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a beautiful, beautiful--basically they were gonna tear down the school and after years of negotiations and what have you, and they got grants and this and that for federal and you know, historical perspective, they actually saved the actual school and it looks beautiful.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: Just had ribbon cutting no more than two months ago.
Story_ID: 660509
Speaker 1: When you go back to 148th Street to your neighborhood [Sugar Hill, New York, New York], as a little boy what are the sights, sounds and smells that you remember?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the sights, sounds and smells. Well obviously if I worked at Rob's Grocery Store Barbeque [ph.], barbeque ribs and barbeque chicken I was working around all the time. So obviously that's the smell of, of, you know, barbeque chicken and, and ribs. But the sounds are, you know, working at Mom's Newsstand [ph.], which basically she sold newspapers and smoking cigarettes and tobacco, chewing tobacco and cigars and stuff, so I was around that smell of environment. And also newspapers, 'cause I used to help, you know, put the papers together and what have you and then I'd go out Sunday selling the newspapers and Mom's didn't take any mess. If in fact you brought back some newspapers because you couldn't sell them and they were stained, then she would have--she would not be happy. She used to let you know that, and in fact she used to tear off a small piece of the newspaper and make you eat it so that there's a lesson, you know, "You have to sell these papers when you're out there. Don't bring back any stained newspapers 'cause I can't use them." So it was a symbolic way of trying to teach you. And so I remember that loud and clear. And I've told that lesson, in essence, don't take more than you can chew. And for me, even when it comes to food, I do not like when my kids growing up, even now, to take food on their plate and don't finish it knowing that there are people starving right now and hungry, and not only in today's time, how expensive food is, and here you're wasting food, unh-uh, not acceptable, not in my household, not from me. 'Cause when you grow up with nine kids, if you're late for dinner, there may not be any- anything left. So (laughter).
Speaker 1: Literally.
Speaker 2: And I don't know if you know, teenage boys eat you out of house and home (laughter). And anyone that has teenage boys know that they eat you--they're just constantly eating, eating, eating, like where's it all going (laughter)?
Story_ID: 660510
Speaker 1: You just told me that part of the reason why you did the research, off camera, was because you didn't know your family growing up, could you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean for me it's important to know your family. And I got--I know my immediate family, my brothers and sisters, my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu], my father [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu]. I remember sometimes my sister Ruby, Ruby Mae [Ruby Jackson], you know, old southern name, my mother named her girls Ruby Mae Jackson, Emma Mae Jackson, Zelma Ann Jackson [sic. Zelma Chu], you know, I'm saying to myself where you get these old southern names from, my mother was from Athens, Georgia so that's south (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: But--go ahead.
Speaker 1: Did your mother ever tell you stories of her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember, I remember some of them, but I remember her saying that when their mother [Emma Willingham Jackson] died, that they were separated. It came across very clear. I remember her saying that she had a brother and her brother, some doctor and his wife who didn't have children took their brother. And I remember her saying her brother name was, what was his name, Randy or something like that [sic. Sandy Willingham]. Anyway, I found out through the census data that no, she didn't have a brother, but her uncle was--is--was the individual and that when she was a child he was only fourteen. So, I, I don't, I don't know that she had a brother. All I know is she said she had a brother and this doctor and, and his wife took their brother. And she said she remembers that when they used to go by his house she used to see her brother in the yard. So I don't know, and looking at the census data though in 1930 I, I see my mother and Mildred [Mildred Jackson], the two girls, I don't see any other children at, at that point in time. And so this is 1930 census and my grandmother died in 1932. I'm not saying she didn't have a brother, but that's, you know, that's what she, she told us. But so it's important for me to try to find family, understanding that I grew up--my--we grew up not having cousins. Aunt Mildred in Chicago [Illinois], we weren't in contact with her, but I do know that one of Aunt Mildred's children got into trouble in Chicago and she wound up sending him to New York [New York] to live with us because they were looking to kill him, so it was pretty tough, you know and so--
Speaker 1: So there were ten children within the household?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, we were all adults at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, this was after.
Speaker 2: But I'm just saying at that point in time, Aunt Mildred felt it was extremely important that he leave the venue of Chicago, South Side of Chicago where he was and shipped him to New York. And he was in New York for a good year, year and a half, two years before he went back. And I subsequently found out that Aunt Mildred, named one of her daughters, Zelma [ph.], after her sister. And if you look at our family's history, my mother named me after her father [Robert Jackson]. My mother named my sister Emma Jackson after her mother. We have like four generations of Emma in our family and about three or four generations of Robert. My, my sister Diane [Diane Chu], who is sixty years of age now, when she had her son many years ago, he's--Robert's about maybe thirty-eight something like that. She named her son Robert [ph.]--
Speaker 1: For you--
Speaker 2: --(laughter) after me.
Speaker 1: --after the family, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And he named his son Robert [ph.], so in my family we can, from my, my great nephews we can trace back six, seven generations where their first name is Robert.
Story_ID: 660511
Speaker 1: Among your siblings, while you, you've said clearly that you had two fathers and you didn't ever differentiate between the two as being your fathers did any of the children look like Mr. Chu [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there, there was clearly--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, clearly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) both fathers had fathered children.
Speaker 2: Right because when my, when my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] died? Either when my mother died, I think yeah, or my father one or the other it may have been my father, Eddie, 'cause my father Eddie died in '94 [1994], my mom in '99 [1999]. I'm trying to remember I think it was when my mother died, I did a pictorial booklet and I made about thirty-five copies or something like that and it cost like six hundred dollars or seven hundred dollars at, you know, a copy place and I gave it to every one of my sisters and brothers and every sibling either grand or whatever that was an adult, eighteen, sorry. And besides the first picture of my mother, their grandmother, the first, I think page after that was a picture all nine of us, of when we were young and so when you look at that you can clearly see who's who and what's what, you can clearly see that my second oldest brother, his name was Edward Chu, my father's name was Eddie Chu, you can clearly see that he's Chinese, half Chinese. My brother, now half of us was named Chu, half of us was named Jackson, so when it goes down from my oldest brother, Raymond Jackson, Edward Chu, Donald Jackson, and when you look at the nine pictures I'm talking about the names are not there, but it's in order of age like that (gesture), you can see clearly Donald, my brother, my--he's older than I am, he, you can clearly see the Chinese in him also. You don't see that in Ruby Mae Jackson [Ruby Jackson] and Emma Mae Jackson [Emma Jackson]. You see, their features are more like James Robert Rudd [James Rudd], dark skinned, black man with thick features and what have you and so forth. And so with me--
Speaker 1: And you as the question mark (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah me, a big question mark. Some people say maybe my father was a Latino, who the hell knows. I don't know, but it doesn't matter to me, I know who I am as an individual, I know who I am as a man, I know that I'm a black man and always been, as far as my census data an African American. And I grew up in a black household eating black eyed peas and rice and cornbread, and all of the things that are typical from way back in the southern household from my mother from Athens, Georgia (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now for your mother this, this is a fascinating story because--let me ask, did the dads have a relationship with each other?
Speaker 2: Not really. I think that my dad, Eddie York Chu, knew about James--Jimmy, Jimmy, they called him Jimmy. Some, some people called him Fat Daddy, I mean so his name was James Robert Rudd, but they call him Jimmy Rudd, Fat Daddy. These were names that, you know, 'cause he grew up in that neighborhood [Sugar Hill, New York, New York]. So I think that my, my dad, Eddie York Chu, knew that, you know, looking at my sister Ruby and Emma, you know, coming out like I said with clearly black, African American features, you know. When you look at my brother Chu, my brother Jack. But the bottom line is, we were all his children. We all lived in his home. So when I graduated from college--when I graduated from college SUNY New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York], Upstate New York, my mother and my dad--all--both fathers came up there. And I'm, I'm not saying they sat together, but I'm saying to you they both came to my graduation from college (laughter). So you know sometimes you just have to juggle, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: Hats off to your mama, she handled her business.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, whatever (laughter). You know so, I'm just--like I said to you, growing up with nine of us we never referred to each other this is my half-brother or half-sister. And I've, I've heard that in different family. Obviously, you know, in my opinion if we grew up in a different household, a different mom, a different environment, you're not the same, you know, you grew up in a different environment, different mother, maybe the same father, but you know, we all grew up in the same household.
Speaker 1: And did Eddie Chu treat all the children the same?
Speaker 2: Yeah. My dad treated all the same, you know. Understanding we were not wealthy. We, we grew up poor in my opinion. So my dad gave us whatever he could give us. And he was there for us whenever we needed him.
Story_ID: 660512
Speaker 1: As children did you--you know, children can be mean. Were you ever--were, were siblings ever ridiculed or?
Speaker 2: Of course--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's, that's normal. You know, we used to tease (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you all handle that?
Speaker 2: Oh you handle it, sometimes you handle it and you brush it off, sometimes you get upset and you get mean, and you push your brother, your sister down or what have you, you know. Just like I said, I may have said to you earlier, that some people used to ask me as a kid growing up, "Why's your name Jackson [HistoryMaker Robert Jackson] and your father's name and your mother's name Chu--or your father's name Chu," you know. That's you know, sometimes you get annoyed. You know, "I don't know, go ask my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu]. I didn't name myself," and I didn't name myself, my mother named me. My mother determined our names on our birth certificates. So you know you--ask, "Your father's Chinese, how come you don't look Chinese?" Or they used to tease us, you know, like you know, mocking like your Chinese (imitates Chinese language), and kids laugh at each other. That's normal, you know, laughing, playing around, ridiculing like that growing up. But now, especially in 2016, you know they do that in school, you know, you're bullying you know and stuff like that, that's totally unacceptable, but that, in growing up that was the norm and that's the norm outside of a formal education environment with kids on the street, you know what have you and so forth. But you know, when we grew up on 148th Street [New York, New York], you know, the other kids up there they knew our family, they didn't really mess with us 'cause, you know, you had a big brother or sister--I was gonna say something else. You mess with me, I'll get my brother, my sister on you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did your father, Eddie [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu], speak Mandarin?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, did he speak Mandarin?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I'm sure he did. He definitely spoke Can- Cantonese, probably Cantonese, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh Cantonese, he spoke Cantonese.
Speaker 2: And sometimes he used to get mad at us and then he used to say a few words in which I--I'm sure was curse words, you know what I mean.
Speaker 1: But it was in another language?
Speaker 2: It was--it was in Chinese, so Mandarin or, or Cantonese, you know.
Speaker 1: Did your mother learn to speak?
Speaker 2: No. Did any of our siblings learn? No. Oh we neve- we learned a couple of curse words and I'm not gonna say them on--
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: You know, but (laughter).
Story_ID: 660513
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to--I grew up, as I said to you, I grew up in--on--up in what they call now Hamilton Heights [New York, New York], used to call it Sugar Hill. I grew up on 148th Street. I went to P.S. 186 [New York, New York] as I said to you before, earlier, it is now a beautiful (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was the elementary school.
Speaker 2: --it's a beautiful housing development, affordable housing for families and it's the home of the Boys and Girls Club of Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So you were in--
Speaker 2: So I went to school there, and in fact I told stories of, of people that went to the ribbon cutting ceremony. And as a member of the city council [New York City Council], you know, I allocated $3 million of capital money to ensure affordable housing for that particular school. I used to tell stories of when I was in school there on the fourth floor, you used to have to push back these big doors in order to--from five or six--eight classrooms in order to make the auditorium. And so I remember that very, very clearly. And--
Speaker 1: Was (cough)--
Speaker 2: So I went to P.S. 186 and that's on 145th Street between Amsterdam [Avenue] and Broadway, and the building is like an H. And so it basically goes from 145th Street to 146th Street, both entrances there. So the building looked like an H.
Speaker 1: Was it--was the school integrated?
Speaker 2: Integrated? It was our school. Integrated, I wasn't looking at integration. I'm growing up as a little kid. In my opinion, all of the kids looked like us, they were black, mainly. If you look at Hamilton Heights section in the 1950s--
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was the neighborhood like then?
Speaker 2: Black. Basically all black, maybe some Latino, but you know, all of my neighbors--all of my neighbors were black or shades of blackness, you know what I mean. So, basically African American community, because when you look at Harlem [New York, New York], Harlem overall 1940s, 1950s it was basically all black. And up in Sugar Hill people would say, "Well, why you call it Sugar Hill?" Because in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] Sugar Hill was where all of the quote, unquote middle class, some of the high society of the African American community lived on Sugar Hill. For example, right now people would say 409 Edgecombe Avenue, which is on the corner of 155th Street. And basically if you go in there, it's a big beautiful--it's a coop right now, you oversee all of the valley. Now people say, "Well, what is the valley?" People that don't know, the valley is down in the valley, 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard], 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], that's the valley. And so when you're up on Sugar Hill the people that lived in the valley, you know, they know that if you say the valley or up on the hill, you've made that particular reference because that's, you knew what it was. But then also 555 Edgecombe Avenue, you know, where famous black people lived, you know. And so basically we lived up on Sugar Hill and I went to P.S. 186. My family moved from there in January of 1963 into the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: So before we go to the Bronx, I want you to share a little bit more because you mentioned the address 555 Edgecombe Avenue where famous black people lived. Tell me who, who was living there? Who were some of those people, do you remember?
Speaker 2: You know, between 40--
Speaker 1: Between the two buildings?
Speaker 2: --409 Edgecombe and 555--I mean 409, you know, Robeson [Paul Robeson] and other notables like that lived up on Sugar Hill. And in fact, as a member of the city council, we have done street co-namings for luminaries that lived in 555 Edgecombe Avenue and 409 Edgecombe. So if you go up there now and right on the corner I think is 161st Street, is right near the Hamilton Grange [Hamilton Grange National Memorial, New York, New York]--not Hamilton Grange, I'm sorry, Hamilton Grange is where Alexander Hamilton house was, is now in St. Nicholas Park [New York, New York], a national, national landmark. But there's another one up at 163rd Street near Edgecombe where [President] George Washington actually stayed at during the revolution [American Revolution]. So, but you know, we, we co-name streets after African American luminaries up, up there.
Story_ID: 660514
Speaker 1: So your family moved from Sugar Hill [New York, New York] to the Bronx [New York] in January of 1963. What prompted the move?
Speaker 2: I think that we were nine children in a, in an apartment and, you know.
Speaker 1: How big was the apartment?
Speaker 2: Two bedrooms with bunk beds on each side obviously. You know, I think we became too much for the owners (laughter) and we had to move. So I mean, for me that's, you know, we--my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] said we move, we move, we moved.
Speaker 1: And what, what type of dwelling did you move into?
Speaker 2: We left, as I said to you, a six story elevated building that was probably built in 1920s and so even now you're talking about a nice, you know, apartment building up on Sugar Hill at that time, we moved to a five story walkup in--on Franklin Avenue near 165th Street and Third Avenue right around the corner from Morris High School in the Bronx. I'm just giving you a point of reference for people that know New York City [New York, New York] know the Bronx, Morris High School which was right around the corner is a big public high school. And the armory--and armory was there also. So we moved into a one, two--I think a three bedroom apartment on the first floor.
Speaker 1: Oh so you didn't have to walk up (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right, didn't have to walk up, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was that neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: African American neighborhood, working class people. Right near the Third Avenue el [elevated train]. In fact, subsequently the Third Avenue el was torn down. So in order for us to go downtown, we'd have to get on, I think at 165th Street or the el station at 165th and 166th [Street] and ride down to 149th Street to get the number 4 train to go downtown. So, it was a, you know, I guess a working class community.
Story_ID: 660515
Speaker 1: And so did you go to Morris High School [Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: No. I--so I told you I went to P.S. 186 [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I did not graduate it. I finished the last six months of elementary school at P.S. 146 [P.S. 146, Edward J. Collins School], which was up the hill from where I lived in the Bronx [New York], and then subsequently two blocks down, Junior High School 120 [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York], which was, the name of the school was Paul Laurence Dunbar. And as you know, Paul Laurence Dunbar was a famous African American, I think, poet.
Speaker 1: Poet.
Speaker 2: Yeah. And then subsequently to Benjamin Franklin High School [New York, New York], because my brother, Raymond Jackson, the oldest of nine of us, he went to Benjamin Franklin and got a scholarship for track and went to Maryland State [Maryland State College; University of Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, Maryland] and he wanted me to follow in his footsteps and so he wanted me to go to Benjamin Franklin High School. And I went to Benjamin Franklin High School where most of my colleagues, my fellow students in junior high school went to DeWitt Clinton High School [Bronx, New York] or Morris High School, other places in the Bronx.
Speaker 1: So you followed your brother?
Speaker 2: I followed my, my brother's wishes and I ran track, but I didn't get a scholarship. I was a mediocre runner and he was a serious runner who won scholarships and what have you and so forth. And then from a history point of view, his daughter who he named one of his daughters after my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] and her name is Zelma Jackson [Zelma Jackson Gordon]. She won--an excellent runner, she won scholarships to Midwest--She went to Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York] where she held the record for one mile run, and long distance runner for Syracuse University. Her daughters are running right now as little kids nine, ten, eleven, and one of the top runners in the country like top fifty in the country. So it's in the blood (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A legacy, absolutely. And Benjamin Franklin High School is where?
Speaker 2: In East Harlem [New York, New York], 116th Street and--
Speaker 1: Right, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: --FDR Drive. It's now Manhattan High School for Math and Science [sic. Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics] I think--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: You see it from the highway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, from the highway.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 660516
Speaker 1: So what were you like as a kid?
Speaker 2: Always willing to work to earn money (laughter). Because when you're growing up with nine, and you're growing up on welfare, you know, you have to earn your keep. So I used to, going back in Harlem [New York, New York], I used to collect bottles and return them in to get money or carry people's groceries. I used to go to store for people. Sundays I used to sell newspapers. And then in high school [Benjamin Franklin High School; Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York], I used to work at Rob's Barbeque and Grocery Store [ph.], you know, doing the cashier, putting stuff on the shelf, doing--fixing chicken and what have you and so forth. And I remember one incident when working the barbeque pit and this guy came in, you know, they had, we're, we're on St. Nicholas Avenue between 148th [Street] and 149th Street and they had--they had the 400 bar [400 Tavern, New York, New York] on 148th Street, they had another bar 721 [Silver Dollar, New York, New York] and then they had the Pink Angel [New York, New York], so there were three bars within one block. So a guy came in, I think he was a little drunk, and he asked for a pound of ribs. So I get the ribs, chop, chop, chop, chop, chop, barbeque sauce, the bread on top, put it in the bag. "There you go sir, a pound of ribs." He said, "I didn't ask for a pound of ribs, I wanted a half a pound." I said, "No sir, you asked for a pound of ribs." "I wanted a half a pound of ribs." So Rob [ph.], the owner, said, "Bobby [HistoryMaker Robert Jackson] don't argue with the customer, he want a half pound give--," and he took it and he, "Don't argue with the customer, the customer is always right." Man got a half a pound of ribs, let me tell you that. He didn't want you to argue with the customers. And so that's a lesson to be learned. Don't argue with the customers, customer is always right. If you argue with the customer, you may lose a customer for life.
Speaker 1: Well, that's good advice.
Speaker 2: So anyway, so, you know, earning a living was very important, you know, with nine kids you make some money then you have spending money to buy you--
Speaker 1: And, and when you made money, was part--like a, a southern rule in many houses--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that you bring part of that money home to your mama. Was that part of your family's rule?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think that was a family rule. Whatever money we earned, we earned ourselves. Obviously if there was a need and she asked, you gave. If not, she took it (laughter). No, but I don't remember that at all and that was not really an issue for us because, you know, my mom [Zelma Jackson Chu] was married to my dad and so he was there, and then also my other dad [James Rudd], so.
Speaker 1: Did he contribute to the household, your other dad?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for sure, yeah. That's why he was like a--because my father, Eddie [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu], after the Chinese laundry where he was a partner which was in the neighborhood at 155th Street near 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard], then he went to go work in a Chinese restaurant on Long Island [New York]. And so would be working all week and come home on weekends.
Speaker 1: So did the, did the laundry close?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I don't really know what happened. I mean it's not there now. It subsequently closed, but you know, I don't know whether or not his partnership or shares he had in it, I don't know the details of what happened there.
Story_ID: 660517
Speaker 1: But anyhow, he left the laundry and went to work at the restaurant, so?
Speaker 2: In Long Island [New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: And so he was away during the week?
Speaker 2: During the week, yeah.
Speaker 1: So when, when he was home, did--what did you all do as a family?
Speaker 2: He would fix Chinese food for us. And basically, I'm trying to remember, it's not like we--let's all twelve of us go to a movie (laughter). Basically dad [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu] was home and he would relax because he worked all week. He'd be reading, smoking his cigarettes and with mom [Zelma Jackson Chu] and what have you. He would--we would sometimes go down to Chinatown [New York, New York] with him and order--he'd buy food and bring it home and cook it, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to cook Chinese food?
Speaker 2: No. But I love Chinese food. But to go down to Chinatown with him and--and purchasing food and eating Chinese food, and even some point in time, and I'm going to speed up because we're talking about my dad. You know, my dad, even when my mo- my mother moved to certain parts of the Bronx [New York], my dad used to go to Chinatown and then he required a pacemaker because he used to faint. And so we had to get a pacemaker. And it came to a certain point in time my dad was getting too old to be traveling to Chinatown. So when my dad wanted to go get a haircut and get his news--I used to, I used to--the newsstand, I used to tell them, I want you to save every Daily News [New York Daily News], two papers for my dad and I'd pick it up every three or four days and I'd take it to him. And even at a certain point in time when my dad had difficulty walking, I used to go with him, put him in the car and drive down to Chinatown and the barbershop was in the basement. And so my dad was only about maybe five--maybe 5'2", 5'3", maybe five--I don't know. I used to pick him up, literally and carry him down the stairs because he couldn't walk down the stairs. And so here I am carrying my dad into the barbershop, Chinese barbershop, you know I mean so. Get his hair cut and what have you and so forth. Pick him up and carry him back upstairs, put him the car, go pick up some, some duck and some other stuff like that and take him home, you know. And so it came to a point where my dad, the doctors they think we should put him in a nursing home 'cause he's getting very--my mother said, "Not my husband, we gonna stay right here." So my dad died at home. He passed away at home, which is a good thing, so, you know. Didn't have to put him to a nursing home or anything like that, which is very comforting, you know when you take care of your parents, 'cause your parents take care of you.
Story_ID: 660518
Speaker 1: You went to high school in Manhattan [Benjamin Franklin High School; Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York]. What were you interested in in high school?
Speaker 2: I ran track, like my brother [Raymond Jackson] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were following in his footsteps, but academically, anything, was anything striking you?
Speaker 2: No, not really. I mean, you know, I was a high school student from the Bronx [New York], used to have to travel over an hour each way taking train--two trains and a bus to get to high school.
Speaker 1: So what is that leaving an hour and a half early?
Speaker 2: Hour and fifteen minutes, something like that--hour and a half, you know, and if the bus going across 116th Street wasn't coming you would walk from Lexington [Avenue] to Pleasant Avenue.
Speaker 1: Which in the winter was cold?
Speaker 2: But we had a ten block walk even from where we lived on Montgomery Avenue in West Bronx [Bronx, New York] to get to the number 4 train on Jerome Avenue. I remember some people--some people walking towards the subway 'cause you're going downhill, used to slip and fall because of the ice and snow and you're going downhill, turn around and go back home, some people, 'cause now you've got slush all over your clothes and everything like that. I remember that very clearly, you know. But in high school, I was just an average student on academic track and what have you.
Speaker 1: So were you close enough in age with your siblings if you were going to school together? Were you all--we're you going independently or?
Speaker 2: No not really. I mean when I--in hi- in elementary school, yeah my brother James, his name is James Chu, and clearly, remember the pictures I told you about, you can clearly see that James Chu is James Robert Rudd's [James Rudd] son, 'cause they looked just alike (laughter). And I remember, and we talking about going back to 148th Street, I remember at a certain point in time they used to buy us the same pair of pants, same shoes, and what have you. And my brother James, I guess at a certain point in time, he used to walk on the side and wear his shoes down. And so I remember clearly one morning getting up and damn it, my brother wore my shoes instead of his shoes and now I'm walking on the side because the way he wore it. And I remember going into his classroom, "Give me my shoes," you know, because he wind up putting my shoes on instead of his shoe (laughter) as little kids, you know what I mean (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 660519
Speaker 1: When it comes time to graduate from high school [Benjamin Franklin High School; Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York] you already had one brother who'd gone to college, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. At that time yes, my, my brother Raymond [Raymond Jackson] went to Princess Anne--Maryland State [Maryland State College; University of Maryland Eastern Shore], Princess Anne, Maryland]. He ran track in college.
Speaker 1: Right. And you go to the State, State University of New York at New Paltz [New Paltz, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but in high school, you know, I ran track under the same coach as my brother. Our coach was Irwin Goldberg, and Irwin Goldberg was an instrumental person in my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in fact, you know, when I was interviewed many years ago by The New York Times they did a profile of me in The New York Times and I mentioned Irwin Goldberg because he was instrumental in my brother's life, who went to college and ran track, and my life. I remember Irwin Goldberg saying to me in the tenth grade, "Bobby [HistoryMaker Robert Jackson] take this application and get it signed by your mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] and bring it back tomorrow." That application was an application for Upward Bound. And if you don't know Upward Bound, it's a program where, you know, they work with students in order to help you get into college. And so in Upward Bound, I remember in 1967, I graduated from high school in '69 [1969]. In 1967, I went away up to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] with the Upward Bound program and, for the summer. And then in 1968, Upward Bound program we were at Hofstra University [Hempstead, New York]. So that was the first time for me going to a university campus. And you know, and then I remember at Hofstra University where we were with other children from, I guess, schools where, you know, had blacks and Latinos and what have you. There was some students on Long Island [New York] who had never met anyone--black people from Harlem [New York, New York], and so you know, there was like that intimidation or you know, "These kids coming from Harlem, oh my god." But it was all good. And so through that program, Upward Bound, through the college readiness program at Union Settlement house, Union Settlement [Union Settlement Association, New York, New York], 104th Street between 2nd [Avenue] and 3rd Avenue, I wind up filling out college applications and what have you and so forth, and got accepted at several colleges. And I went to State University, SUNY at New Paltz, which is about seventy-five miles from New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Now what made you chose that school?
Speaker 2: I, I remember going up there for a visit, where some of the other schools I had accepted out in Colorado--and I don't remember going to Colorado, how was I gonna get out there? But I remember--I went--going to SUNY New Paltz, and it's closer to home. Excuse me, part of college readiness and I got accepted in EOP program. And you don't know what EOP, Educational Opportunity Program, where in order to qualify at the EOP, your grades had to be marginal, not A and B, marginal, and your family's income had to be at a low level in order to qualify for EOP. So I qualified for EOP and got accepted under EOP program, and EOP, they would--when you're admitted you have to come up there for the summer so that they can bring you up to speed so that you'll be able to compete or be able to survive in your freshman year. So, which is a good program. And EOP currently exists today, Educational Opportunity Program.
Speaker 1: Does Upward Bound still exist?
Speaker 2: I think that--I don't know if Upward Bound exists, but I st- I believe that they still have college readiness, because some of the students at that time went to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], and I went--so they went to CUNY [City University of New York, New York, New York], I went to SUNY. And I think even, I think '68 [1968], '69 [1969], CUNY was still free at that time. And at certain point in time, I think '70 [sic. 1976], oh I forgot what year, they started to charge tuition. So there's a movement even now to get CUNY back to where it was before, free college for all those that graduate from high school.
Story_ID: 660520
Speaker 1: --Bernie Sanders' campaign (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let me tell you one thing that I remember at, at the Union Settlement [Union Settlement Association, New York, New York], I remember playing basketball in the gym and wind up breaking my, my, my wrist playing basketball. Very, very clear. I remember this guy who went to go shoot from the side and I went to go block his shot (gesture)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So I remember playing basketball in the gym at Union Settlement and I was about maybe sixteen years old, fifteen or sixteen, and I went to go block this guy's shot, he was getting ready to shoot from the side and he faked. And all of a sudden flip, I flipped over him and I broke my wrist, this right wrist and that was--it was like this and the other one was this way with a big lump in the middle (laughter). And I remember going to the emergency room and had a cast from here up to here for six weeks and then it went down from here. And I remember when I--up in the park playing basketball with my cast on being able to play with one hand. So, you know, when you're young, you know, you think you're, you know, you're invincible and what have you and so forth. But I remember that very, very clearly as if today. And my wrist is--no negative impacts as an adult whatsoever (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's great, probably because you were young when it happened, that's probably why (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I agree, right.
Story_ID: 660521
Speaker 1: You were growing up in New York City [New York, New York] during a time of significant civil unrest in the country.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: And I remember that.
Speaker 1: What do you remember?
Speaker 2: Being in junior high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York], in the classroom. I forgot what grade, it was--that was in '63 [1963] and I left there in that school in sixty- sixty- '66 [1966], yeah. So I guess I was in the seventh grade. In the afternoon when the announcement came over the speaker that the president has been assassinated. And obviously everyone was devastated, you know, because in our history as students, this is the first time we've ever heard a president being shot and killed. So I mean obviously that was not only in our classroom but around the country and around the world. So I, I remember that very, very clearly in the classroom.
Speaker 1: And you know, he was shot and killed, Malcolm X, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] all in a--in fairly close succession.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In terms of what's going on in the country, in your household--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in your family were you and your parents [Zelma Jackson Chu and Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu] talking about what was going on in civil rights?
Speaker 2: I don't remember us sitting like at a kitchen table because, quite frankly, our homes were too small and our kitchens to have a table where nine children could sit (laughter), could sit around, but obviously there were discussions about it, but I don't remember with any detail of us sitting around. If anything we would be sitting, we'd be sitting in the small living room that we had. And you know, obviously it was discussed, but nothing of extensive nature where I can remember that obviously. But I do know that--that--and when Martin Luther King was assassinated, I remember going back, the blackouts in New York City, the riots that occurred and I remember them telling us that as a result of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s assassination, which led to riots all over the country, the federal government put money into programs in order to get these young, young people out of the inner city into school. So I went in in 1969 through EOP and in fact the Educational Opportunity Program at SUNY New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York] when I went in, it was not called EOP, you know what the name of it was? Project A. That's what it was, Project A, and mind you that was after the summer of the assassination and so they poured money into various things such as programs like that.
Speaker 1: Right because King was killed in '68 [1968] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Six- '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: --and you went to college--
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: --in '69 [1969]. So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, through EOP, through pro- and Project A was the first name of the EOP program was called Project A.
Story_ID: 660522
Speaker 1: And at SUNY New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York], I was one of--there were no more than about, at that time, about for- forty blacks and Latinos on the campus of SUNY New Paltz, of a school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which had about how many stu--
Speaker 1: Five thousand white, and when I left--when I, I left there in '74 [1974], from an official records point of view, my graduation was May '75 [1975], but I left in '74 [1974] with one course uncompleted and I completed it, but so from a technical legal point of view, my graduation was--is not registered until May of '75 [1975] even though I, I say I graduated in '74 [1974] 'cause that's when I left. So when I left, SUNY New Paltz at that time they had about four hundred blacks and Latinos up on the campus.
Speaker 2: That was significant.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What did you major in in college?
Speaker 1: Sociology, urban studies.
Speaker 2: And why did you make that choice?
Speaker 1: Well for me, college was just a transition from high school [Benjamin Franklin High School; Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York]. It was--it was like for me, I was going to college, it was just a transition. Ask me what I was, you know, wanted to major in or anything like that (shakes head). Mind you, inner city youth growing up poor, had the opportunity to go to college and I went to college.
Speaker 2: But you didn't have a plan?
Speaker 1: Didn't have a plan. I think though that, you know, I was involved in a lot of stuff from a social point of view. I was the president of the black student's union [Blacks for Black Liberation] for about a year. I played varsity basketball, varsity volleyball. Socializing with all the other students, partying, hanging out, smoking and stuff like that. So, it, it was more of hey, this is another part, transition of life.
Speaker 2: And being in--in a majority white environment on the heels of King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being assassinated and even though you're in the North, it's still affecting the whole country. How--what is the tone of race relations at your school?
Speaker 1: I, I think it was pretty good, because at that time, SUNY New Paltz was a quote, unquote partying, drug school, had a reputation. Smoking pot, taking acid, you know, Sly and the Family Stone, Jimi Hendrix, you know, rock. And so, in fact myself coming from an environment where growing up in inner city of New York City [New York, New York] where, you know, black--young black men were wearing tailored made silk pants and alpaca sweaters and what have you and so forth. When I got to SUNY New Paltz, they basically hung in the closet and I wore jeans and T-shirts and smoked pot like everybody else and hung out, and so it was that environment. But, but the racism was there, it, it sprouted its ugly head every once in a while on the campus. And obviously for us, I mea- us meaning the blacks and Latinos from the inner city, oh it was known that we used to tell people, especially when you became a sophomore or junior we used to try to educate the freshmen. You don't go into these stores and think you can, you know, shoplift something 'cause they're watching you, and they watch you. When you go into those stores in town, they watched us like a hawk. In fact, you know, I used to be--helped to go to Kingston county jail [Ulster County Jail, Kingston, New York] to get people out of jail. And I used to go to the courthouse right there in New Paltz [New York], and we used to tell people that when you're driving here and you're coming toward--from Main Street to the campus, don't speed because they're, they're willing, they're gonna stop you. And so I used to go, literally, and sit in the courthouse in New Paltz and talk to Judge Schneider [Rexford Schneider] about some of the situations.
Speaker 2: As a student?
Speaker 1: Yeah as a student, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And who were you talking to the judge about, were these people of color (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm talking to him--yeah, of course, you know. And you see not only student--students of color, all kinds of people because they stop people, you know, the can--the police, not the campus police, the town police, SUNY New Paltz. And so yeah, I used to go and talk to the judge there, you know. Why not (laughter). So you get to know, and then like I said, I used to go with the counselors if somebody got caught shoplifting, they were arrested and if they went to jail, sometimes we'd have to drive to Kingston [New York], drive to Kingston to get them out.
Speaker 2: So you're the president of the student union, is this why you were making this choice to go to the--I mean, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, I--
Speaker 2: --this is not a common story.
Speaker 1: Well I don't, I don't remember all the--I remember clear- I was the president of the black student unions for at least one year, may have been more than that, but at least one year. And mind you, when you--after your first year, your second year, you know, black student union, playing basketball, you know, so- socializing, I was a social butterfly at the same time, and you know. You know, doing a lot of things that everyone else did. Smoking cigarettes, smoking cigars, smoking marijuana, dropping acid, you know, and I, I survived that.
Story_ID: 660523
Speaker 1: I think that my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] knows that she was one of the responsible people that helped me to where I am today.
Speaker 2: Did you meet her there?
Speaker 1: Met her at SUNY New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York]. She was a, a foreign student. My wife's from Tanzania, East Africa.
Speaker 2: And she came to the United States to go to school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, her brother-in-law [Salim Ahmed Salim] brought her here. Her mother passed away at a young age, forty something in 1972, I think. And then her brother-in-law who was--he was at that time the ambassador to the United Nations [UN] from Tanzania wind up bringing my--his, his sister--sister-in-law, my wife, to New York and she wind up, well I think six months or one year at high school and then off to SUNY New Paltz, that's where I met her.
Speaker 2: Now back to--for a moment, SUNY New Paltz and its--New Paltz [New York] was right near where--Woodstock [New York] is not far from there?
Speaker 1: Not far at all.
Speaker 2: Is it. So on the West Coast and the East Coast, right in that area was like hippies--
Speaker 1: That's correct--
Speaker 2: --that--that culture (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I said, New Paltz was the place to go for hanging out and for, you know, listening to The Who and Sly and the Family Stone and all the other groups, Jimi Hendrix and all that.
Speaker 2: Did you know that when you applied?
Speaker 1: Yeah. As I said to you, I went for a visit there, uh-huh, yeah. Sunny campus, not too far from, from New York [New York]. Some people used to call it the suitcase college, because many kids were from Long Island [New York] and New York City and on the weekend they would go home. Hour and fifteen minutes.
Speaker 2: Did you go home?
Speaker 1: Sometimes. Sometimes, depends, you know. I think initially I didn't have a car, but at a certain point in time I, I purchased a car and I used to drive until--when I, I got hit by a car when I was a little kid, when I was four years old. So my dad, Eddie Chu, filed a lawsuit and I had a settlement and at age eighteen I was able to capture that money, a couple of thousand dollars, not a whole lot. And so one of the first things I did, is I bought a car (laughter).
Speaker 2: And you were still in college?
Speaker 1: Yeah. I had--I had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that gave you--then you had wheels.
Speaker 1: --Cougar XR7 [Mercury Cougar] with mag wheels, four on the floor. And so (laughter).
Speaker 2: So whi- while you're--what year did you meet your--
Speaker 1: My wife?
Speaker 2: --who would be your wife, yeah?
Speaker 1: My wife. When she came to SUNY New Paltz, I think maybe '73 [1973], I guess.
Speaker 2: So she's younger than you?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well she came, she came to the school after you?
Speaker 1: Yeah after me, but she is a--I think fifteen months younger than I am--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --fourteen or fifteen months (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But she, but she came to the school a couple years after you were there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660524
Speaker 1: Was it while you were at school [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York] that you decided what you wanted to do for your work?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, I graduated, as I said, in '74 [1974], even though technically my degree says '75 [1975]. I left '74 [1974] and went to New York [New York], went home, was hanging out, it's summertime, it's May, June, July, August. Ev- everybody's home from college, I mean, you know. And then end of August, beginning of September everyone's gone, everyone's back in school. And so, I started looking for a job (laughter). I found a job in March of 1975, under the CETA program.
Speaker 1: And what was that?
Speaker 2: Comprehensive Employment and Training Act [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973]. Federal program to get people jobs concerning the high unemployment rate. Comprehensive Employment--CETA. And so I was hired on the CETA program on March 6th, 1975. And why do I remember that date, my brother [James Chu] was born, my younger brother was born on March 6th, not in 1975, but probably 1952 I think, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was his birthday (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I was born in '50 [1950]--I was born in '50 [1950] and he came after me.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So I remember that date. And there--I worked for the State of New York as an investigator aide.
Speaker 1: What does that mean?
Speaker 2: That means I helped the investigators, you know, whatever, you know, deal with cases. I investigated unemployment insurance fraud.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I became an investigator aide, subsequently assistant investigator, I took the exam to become permanent, and I was a unemployment insurance investigator, basically from 1975 to 1980. So investigated fraud. I used to go out in the field and I didn't have accounting so I had to take nine credits in accounting in order to examine employers' books and records, you know, receipts, expenditures, you know, corporate books, because we have to find out where there was fraud, you know, where--so we used to, for example, if you were collecting unemployment and somebody knew you were working, in essence you're cheating the government, they'd drop a dime on you, they're putting an anonymous complaint. "[HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson is working at Domino's pizza or Rob's Grocery Store [ph.] and he's collecting unemployment, he's cheating the system." So you have--you have a case, so now you have to go and investigate it. You don't tell them what you're there for. You know, at that time when I was investigator I had a badge and my ID, state ID investigator. Well I show my badge, it said special agent State of New York. I didn't wear--didn't have a gun, just that was the ID. And so you investigate to determine whether or not you're working there or not. Let me see your cancelled checks. Let me see your ex- your disbursements, your receipts. Are you paying them by cash, you know. We've interviewed people, we take affidavits. Somebody may say yeah I've seen him every day come in to work in the afternoon, so you wait outside. You see if they would come in the afternoon or they come in now, not--now they do everything online, but before you used to have to come to the unemployment insurance office and wait on line. So you come in, if you worked ABC Ai- Air Conditioning Company and the people dropped a dime, then you have your, you know, you have your shirt on with ABC Company. So and then--or you drive up in the ABC Air Conditioning truck that you park and they don't think they know. So, so we used to sometimes take surveillance pictures and what have you and so forth.
Story_ID: 660525
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, this was your first job?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in--I used to--I worked on major fraud cases. Major fraud cases where you set up a phony company and you sell unemployment insurance claims, five hundred dollars apiece to different people. And with setting up phony companies they even--some people went to the extent where they would apply to the Small Business Administration [U.S. Small Business Administration] and get loans for the phony companies, and so you worked on major fraud cases with FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], with the city police, so forth and so on, and do raids on all of these people that we have the profiles on. So I did that for five years (laughter).
Speaker 1: When you started out was, was it scary at all?
Speaker 2: Not doing that, because you--you're not up against people with guns and stuff like that, you know. You're basically, basically spying on people, you know. So I set up the surveillance system in the Department of Labor [New York State Department of Labor] offices in New York City [New York, New York]. So where in this office knowing the, the setup, where could we take surveillance pictures with our cameras of you signing for unemployment when you're working. In essence, you're committing fraud, you're committing perjury. You're saying that you're unemployed and you're not, and you're working, whether it's off the books or on the books. And then once, once we, we get the goods on you we call you in, downtown to 2 World Trade Center [New York, New York], that's where the investigations unit was. And so we interview you. We ask you whether or not you are collecting unemployment and working. "No I'm not." "No? Is this your picture here, picture of you signing in the office," and what have you and so forth with undercover pictures. Or, "We have affidavits from people that they saw you working."
Speaker 1: And do then did these people go to jail (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then you have to pay back all the money.
Speaker 1: Oh you have to pay back the money.
Speaker 2: This wa- these were simple cases, you don't go to jail for that. But if the major fraud cases, oh you get arrested and they prosecute you, uh-huh. So I did that for five years.
Story_ID: 660526
Speaker 1: After that, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I--we went--well when I worked for the State of New York, we had an association, the New York State Labor Enforcement Association [ph.], which was a state wide association of investigators, people working in the investigation section. And we used to collect dues from our people and we had a big basic association that had meetings, had a basketball team where we played other teams in the mental health and what have you and so forth and with the real--and then our union at that time was--in New York, people would know these unions CSEA, the service--the Civil Service Employees Association. Our un- our union broke away from CSEA and formed the New York State Public Employees Federation, PEF, the acronym is PEF. But PEF only represented one union of state government employees, and that unit was the PS and T unit. What's PS and T? Professional, scientific and technical unit of employees who work for the State of New York. Investigators, parole office, nurses, doctors, engineers, scientists, you know, social workers. These are all the professional, scientific and technical employees. So that's--I went to go work for the union in 1980 and I worked for them for twenty-two years, first as a field representative for about ten years representing people in grievance meetings and discipline meetings, and you know, arbitrations, discipline arbitrations, contract arbitrations, unfair labor practices. And then I went up to Albany [New York] headquarters, it was basically about six, eight months as the statewide labor management coordinator, coordinating about forty different statewide labor management teams. And then back to New York [New York] as the director of field services for the downstate area of New York and Long Island [New York], overseeing about eighteen thousand members and about fifteen staff members. And then I was elec- so I did that for twenty-two years.
Story_ID: 660527
Speaker 1: And when I ran for the city council of New York [New York City Council]--
Speaker 2: While you're in that job?
Speaker 1: While I'm in that job. I ran for that in September 2001 in the Democratic primary, and November 2001 in the general election, elected and I took office in January 2002. So I took a leave of absence from my union job as a director [at the New York State Public Employees Federation]. But my activity--activities really that brought me to where I ran for the city council was not my union job. I think my union job helped me to be the type of leader that I was. Because as a union staff member, we used to train and educate union members how to be leaders. So if you're elected as a shop steward, we give training, shop steward training, how to represent members in counseling sessions or when you--call you into an interrogation that you did something wrong. We used to teach our officers of your locals how to be leaders, how to speak and project yourself so people can hear you in the room loud and clear. You know, leadership skills. So that helped me in the community where I lived in Washington Heights [New York, New York] with respects to the parents' association where my kids went to school, the tennis association that I was involved with. Then they ran me for this community school board where I was elected to the school board for five terms of office, fifteen years, and this is a public office where, where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this while you were still in your union job, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Where, where on the community school board [New York City Community School Board District 6], they elected me president of the school board every year for about seven to eight years.
Speaker 2: And your children--
Speaker 1: So that's what--that community activity and Democratic club president of the Democratic Club of Northern Manhattan [Barack Obama Democratic Club of Upper Manhattan]. All of these activities are the ones that got me elected to the city of council of New York representing northern Manhattan. But my union job, you know, taught me the skills in order to teach other people and be able to, you know, advocate on the issues and concerns of education, of housing, so forth and so on.
Story_ID: 660528
Speaker 1: You were giving some background in terms of leading up to elective office (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: And I wanna fill that in a bit more. Let's start--when did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married April 27th, 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay, so shortly after you finished school [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I finished school in May of '74 [1974]. My wife was still in school. We got married and April 27th, 1975, and she was four and a half months pregnant.
Speaker 1: All right. And how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: One hundred and five. No I'm joking (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: No, we have--my wife and I have three girls. Saadiya Raheem Jackson [Saadiya Jackson Owens], Asmahan Raheem Jackson [Asmahan Jackson], and Sumaya Raheem Jackson [Sumaya Jackson].
Speaker 1: And your mo- your, your wife was from Tanzania you said?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: These--are these names Islamic names?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Yes. So--
Speaker 2: I was waiting for you to beg the question.
Speaker 1: Oh I'm not begging--I--I'm just looking at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Ask the question, I'm joking, I'm joking.
Speaker 1: Well you know because she's from East Africa so there, there--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --she could be--
Speaker 2: Her name is Faika, Faika Ali Rifai [Faika Rifai Jackson], Ali Rifai because in our religion we name our children after our father. So her name is Faika, her father's name is Ali Rifai [ph.]. My daughters Saadiya Raheem Jackson, Asmahan Raheem Jackson, and Sumaya Raheem Jackson. Who is Raheem Jackson, you're looking at him.
Speaker 1: And so when you grew up--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what church did you grow up with?
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: Or did you--?
Speaker 2: I think that we were baptized at Convent Avenue Baptist Church [New York, New York], I believe we were. We were not a churchgoing family. We would go to church on Easter or maybe Christmas, but you know, not every Sunday, or I don't remember going often at all. And then they--growing up when I was living in the Bronx [New York], I used to go to a Pentecostal church with some friends of mine that lived in the building. I remember, I remember going there more often than ever going to Convent Avenue Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: And your father, Eddie [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu], what was his religion?
Speaker 2: Don't know.
Speaker 1: So when you met your wife, you converted to Islam?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So since you weren't particularly religious at home, that wasn't a--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a big deal.
Speaker 1: Right. When did you convert, upon marrying?
Speaker 2: Yeah in 1975. They call that a sh- a shahada and that's when you accept Islam into your life.
Speaker 1: Shara?
Speaker 2: Shahada.
Speaker 1: Shahada.
Speaker 2: So I took my shahada in 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Live and learn, right.
Story_ID: 660529
Speaker 1: Where are you all living? Your family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where we--
Speaker 1: After you get married, where do you live?
Speaker 2: Washington Heights [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and where you've been living?
Speaker 2: Well we lived about three blocks further down, but basically we've lived in Washington Heights for about forty-one and a half years. We live in the current place just thirty-nine years. The current apartment where we live, so.
Speaker 1: And your children, did they go to public school?
Speaker 2: Yes, they all three went to our local public school. Now mind you, let me back up. So when we got married, April 27th, '75 [1975], my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] was still in college. And so I remember very clearly in August of '75 [1975], she went up to have her exam by her, her doctor and he said, "Nope it--it's time, you're not going back to New York [New York]." 'Cause it was summertime, school had not started yet. And so she called me to say that--that, "He said it's time now and he's not letting me go back to New York." And so my, my wife delivered our first child [Saadiya Jackson Owens] up in Kingston, New York. And if you know Kingston, New York, it's the first capital of New York State. And there's only two hospitals at that time and even now in Kingston. You have Kingston general [Kingston Hospital, Kingston, New York], which is the public hospital, and St. Benedictine [Benedictine Hospital, Kingston, New York] is the Catholic hospital, private hospital. So that's where we went to the private high school--hospital with no insurance and I had to pay out of my pocket (laughter).
Speaker 1: Were you, was she living at school and you were in--
Speaker 2: In New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) New York at this time?
Speaker 2: Yep. And so she delivered and then when she went back to school in September, the baby went back up there with her to campus and with the environment there, when my wife had class, other classmates would take care of Sumaya [sic.], our youngest daughter, because we had a single room in Shango Hall. Shango Hall was a part of the old dormitories at the SUNY New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York], which Shango Hall was basically where all of the blacks and Latinos lived there. They were almost exclusively. And so she had a single room where when she had class, other classmates would take care of our daughter Sumaya and I would come up there on weekends and then when she had--when she had exams I would bring the baby to New York and I would take care of my daughter and take her to my mother's [Zelma Jackson Chu] house when I had to go to work and pick her up. So we juggled (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and so while she was finishing school you had one child or did you have more than one?
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: One and it was later that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She finished in '76 [1976], yeah. And Asmahan [Asmahan Jackson] was born July 31st, 1980. So my wife was already working at the United Nations [United Nations Headquarters, New York, New York]. July--and I was already working at the union, the New York State Public Employees Federation. I was no longer working for the state at that time.
Speaker 1: What was your wife doing at the UN?
Speaker 2: She was an administrative person working in the office of general--United Nations under general, General Assembly affairs I believe, yeah. So she worked there for thirty-nine--thirty-five years and retired about--they had mandatory retirement, so when she reached the age of thity- sixty, she had no choice, she had to go, mandatory retirement.
Story_ID: 660530
Speaker 1: I know that education has been--
Speaker 2: My salvation?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there you go (laughter).
Speaker 2: For sure.
Speaker 1: And, and from what I've read, your focus on education really occurred as your children are being educated, what happened?
Speaker 2: Very simply and matter of factly the truth, in 1980 when our oldest daughter turned five, my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] went to go register her at our local school. We did not know at the time, you know, when people move sometime they wanna know what is the educational school like, because if they're good schools you're gonna get these people moving in because they want their kids to go to good school. So when we moved from 180th [Street] and Pinehurst Avenue in--in Washington Heights [New York, New York] to 499 Fort Washington [Avenue] where we currently live, we didn't know that was a catchment area for our school. So happened that that school was, in many people's opinion, the best school in the entire district. And so my kids went to P.S.I.S. 187 [P.S.I.S. 187, Hudson Cliffs School, New York, New York]. So when my wife went to register Saadiya [Saadiya Jackson Owens] at that school, they asked her to get involved in the parents' association and she said, "Okay, I'll send my husband." And so she sent me to go to get involved in the parents' association and that's what started my activity as far as education is concerned at the local level. Involved in the parents' association on the executive committee--board rather, thirty-three members of the executive board, almost all of them white. All--thirty of them women, three of them men, myself and two other men. They educated me. They gave me responsibility, I helped out. We used to do photocopies, you know, now you photocopies, yeah, you know you print it out on a computer, no, no, no. Back then mimeograph machine (makes sound), making copies in order to distribute, getting real dirty. But so I became chairman of the ways and means committee, vice president and president of the parents' association over the course of several years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what were your goals?
Speaker 2: What was the goals of what?
Speaker 1: Being the--not just you, but the goals of the--
Speaker 2: Parents' association?
Speaker 1: --parents' association? At the--you say it was considered the best school in the district, what were some of the concerns in this school?
Speaker 2: Well, when you look at the district overall, and I'm talking about the community school district, we were--there's thirty-two community school districts in New York City [New York, New York] and we were District 6 [New York City Community School District 6], that's our number, District 6. And at that time, it was like, excuse me, one of the most worst performing districts in the City of New York. Out of thirty-two districts, we may have been thirty-one or thirty-two or something like that, or twenty-nine in that area, at the bottom of the thirty-two districts. At a certain point in time, it was the most overcrowded district in the City of New York. So overcrowded that in Washington Heights we were sending--we're taking over a school in Harlem [New York, New York] in another district, District 5 [New York City Community School District 5]. So overcrowded that we went across the river into the Bronx [New York] and took over, literally took over a whole school in the Bronx to meet our needs. So overcrowded that we were going down to District 1 [New York City Community School District 1] in Lower East Side [New York, New York]. And, and so that's how overcrowded our district was. And we, you know, being involved at 187, many people in the district, especially within a near area of the school, would try to get their kids into 187 and to the point where they used to ask my help to help kids get into 187. And of course, you know, you try to help and you got kids in there, I talked to the principal and you know, they wanna know okay who is the child and let me see their records and what have you and so forth. Where do they live at, that happens all the time, or happened all the time. And so the bottom line though, was that everyone in my opinion want the best for their children. And so sometimes you say, I used to laugh, the parents would tell their kids, "If somebody asks you where you live, you tell--." "So kid where do you live?" "Oh no, I can't tell you. My mother said don't tell people where I live." Because they (laughter)--they didn't live in the district of the, the zoned area for that school, you know.
Speaker 1: Because they were getting in, but then that could be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they didn't live in the zone.
Speaker 1: And in New York City, I don't know about other places, but that's a challenge. You're supposed to go to the school--
Speaker 2: Zoned.
Speaker 1: --in your catchment area.
Speaker 2: Right, right. But now and there's different things, but you know--
Speaker 1: A little bit.
Speaker 2: --so (laughter), so that's what it was. And so--
Story_ID: 660531
Speaker 1: I was involved with that and then in 19--in 1986, an individual was representing us from our school [P.S.I.S. 187, Hudson Cliffs School, New York, New York] on the school board [New York City Community School Board District 6], he said he was not gonna run again and so they needed to have somebody on the school board to, to do their bidding to make sure that they were protected and had knowledge of what was going on. Bottom line is, when he wasn't gonna run, they said that, "We want you, [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson to run for the school board."
Speaker 2: This is 1986?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I ran for the school board, basically I won the election, basically from that catchment area, even though I got votes other parts of the district [New York City Community School District 6] but the majority was from there, for the term of office of three years. So the bottom line is, I was elected for five terms of office for fifteen years, from, from '86 [1986], '96 [1996] to 1997 or something like that. Basically I was on the school board until I was elected to the city council of New York [New York City Council] to 2001.
Speaker 2: So you were on the school board while also working at the union [New York State Public Employees Federation]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I--I'm sure the work at the union helped you to be a better school board member, did it?
Speaker 1: Well at, at--you know, I knew about leadership skills, I used to teach leaders about that, you know. I'm college educated so hopefully I can read and write and understand, and I'm, I'm dealing with discipline arbitrations and contract arbitrations where I'm up against attorneys all the time and people would ask me, "Are you an attorney at law?" No, I'm not an attorney, I'm a labor relations specialist. And as I said to you, when I worked for the State of New York, I was an investigator, so I had my investigative techniques. And then also I told you, I didn't have--take accounting credits in college [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York] so I wind up in order to be a good investigator I took nine credits in accounting. So I had all those skills on the school board and that's how I assume, along with some of the politics, because with nine members the magic number of nine is what, five in order to pass a vote. You need five members to pass a vote. And so my colleagues elected me president for about seven years. But during that time, we had to hire an attorney 'cause every school board had an attorney. And so I recommended--our team recommended someone and Guillermo Linares, who was a city councilmember, state assembly member [New York State Assembly], who was a commissioner for immigration affairs under Mike Bloomberg [Michael Bloomberg], when he was on the school board at the same time I was whether was six- '89 [1989] or something like that, they recommended this attorney Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell]. And anyway, they had five votes and we had four, so Michael Rebell was our attorney, 'cause you need five votes to pass. And that's where I was the president of the board and obviously being the president the buck stops with me when the chancellor or anyone calls to, you know, about the district they call the president of the board. And later on in 1992 or 1991--
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: --they were doing cut backs and so I turned to Michael Rebell, our attorney, and said, "Michael, something has to be done about these cuts, even if we have to file a lawsuit by ourselves." And so Michael started to give me a song and a dance about there was a group out on Long Island [New York] ten years before, they filed a lawsuit and basically the highest court turned them down. In essence, he was trying to tell me that we, we were not gonna win. And basically I told him, "The bottom line is, you are our attorney, find a way to get it done." That was his mandate that I gave him and he found a way to get it done. That started the Campaign for Fiscal Equity.
Story_ID: 660532
Speaker 1: But I need to go back. So Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell], now mind you, was our attorney [at the New York City Community School Board District 6] and we had one situation that occurred where an assistant principal was blowing the whi- or somebody blowing a whistle in the yard at a different school and the little kid, I think they had a bullhorn, and a little student I guess had touched the bullhorn and (makes sound), it went off and the princ- grabbed the kid by the neck and left some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The principal?
Speaker 1: No assistant principal, and left some (unclear)--left a mark. And so they recommended action taken against the principal, AP, assistant principal, and they went down to central, and central recommended that a letter goes in the file with a warning to don't do it again. Okay, so that's some disciplinary action, the child wasn't really injured even though you shouldn't do that, you know. With--within a week, the same thing happened with another child, with the same assistant principal. And the management level, they sent it down to central labor relations [Office of Labor Relations] and central labor relations said, "A letter in the file." We said, "Wait a minute, this is totally unacceptable for us as a school board. We dis- this is not acceptable, we want action taken." They refused, central board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education], to take action. We told Michael Rebell, "You are our attorney, you draw up the charges and we will file them." He drew up the charges and filed them, and we, you know, moved forward on the discipline and that assistant principal retired and agreed never to work in the city department of education again. But that's the type of advocacy that we had as a school board and Michael Rebell as our attorney, he was doing what we instructed him to do. And so--
Speaker 2: And that occurred prior to?
Speaker 1: Prior to '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: So when I said find a way to get it done, he came back to me and he said that we're gonna form the Campaign for Fiscal Equity which is, may we--we're gonna get school boards to join nonprofit organizations like the Hispanic society and other groups like that in order to look at filing a lawsuit.
Speaker 2: And, and can you explain what specifically were the cut backs that were being considered, what kinds of things?
Speaker 1: Oh my gosh. Well when you're cutting a million dollars or $1.5 million from your budget, and so I'm going back to the superintendent and the school board and saying our cut this year is 1.5 million and superintendent now you have to then move that and to dividing this cut of the schools, but the last place we want you to cut is in the classroom. So, you cut out some art programs, you cut out some school aides, paraprofessionals, you know. If, if you're a principal of a school and your cut is $100,000, we're going back in 1991, '92 [1992], you've got to make the cuts, you don't have a choice. So some peo- parents, mind you Washington Heights [New York, New York] and Inwood [New York, New York] is not a rich area. The average right now in a family of four, thirty-seven thousand dollars a year.
Speaker 2: Average in 2016. We're going back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Going back to 1991, '92 [1992].
Speaker 2: So, so was this the beginning of the dissolution of art, music--?
Speaker 1: School aides. People was--parents were taking their kids to school early 'cause they gotta go to work.
Speaker 2: Right, food?
Speaker 1: And there's no school aide in the yard to watch the kids before sch- school starts. That's a problem.
Speaker 2: So then it's unsafe?
Speaker 1: Yeah of course, and parents gotta work. I'm talking about, these are working parents, they're not earning a whole lot of money. Some of them working two jobs. They gotta get there early. So.
Speaker 2: And often pick their kids up late, so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or find somebody else, some other arrangements. The bottom line is though, that's what started CFE, the Campaign for Fiscal Equity.
Story_ID: 660533
Speaker 1: In preparation, preparing for it, we actually filed the lawsuit in May of 1993. And we had informed the city department of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education] that we were gonna file a lawsuit. They said, "Don't worry, wait, hold on a second, you don't have to file a lawsuit, we will file a lawsuit on behalf of the children." City of New York [New York] said that to us, uh-huh. And so I remember us--
Speaker 2: And this lawsuit is against the state?
Speaker 1: The state for not providing our children enough money to provide them the opportunity to receive a sound basic education.
Speaker 2: And so even though you are bringing forth this petition within your district [New York City Community School District 6], it has now become citywide?
Speaker 1: Strategy. It's not for the district, it's for the entire city. The city was being shortchanged by the state. And in fact, so let me just quickly move forward. The city said, "Do we--don't worry, we will file a lawsuit," and we met, I remember meeting in a--in the conference room and we discussed this CFE. And we said, we said to the city thank you, but no thank you. Because you and I know that most cases, legal cases when lawsuits are filed, they're settled out of court, 99 percent of them are settled out of court. And we wanted to be at the table to say yes or no to a settlement. And if the city would've filed the lawsuit, we would not be at the table. So, we moved forward if a parent--and city was helpful in giving us the information we needed so forth and so on, and they were preparing their lawsuit. Bottom line, city jumped the gun, they filed the lawsuit first. And then we subsequently filed maybe a month to two months later, and the judge combined both cases together. Right, same thing. Different players, City of New York, Campaign for Fiscal Equity, school boards, you know, [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson, Sumaya Jackson, Asmahan Jackson, Heather Lewis and her kids, parents and their kids are named plaintiffs in the lawsuit [Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. State of New York], me and my kids.
Speaker 2: So was yours a class action suit or is that?
Speaker 1: Class action, yeah.
Speaker 2: It is, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But these are all individuals, okay. And community school boards were named in there. But, when we went to trial, okay, at the supreme court level [New York State Supreme Court], the judge at the initial ruling ruled that the City of New York did not have standing to bring a lawsuit, and that CFE, yes you have standing but not these individuals, not Community School Board 6 [New York City Community School Board District 6], 15 [New York City Community School Board District 15], 26 [New York City Community School Board District 26], all of the school boards didn't have standing to bring a lawsuit. But you have standing as individuals. So if we were to listen to the City of New York that would've been thrown out, okay. Everyone appealed it to the next level, the Appellate Division, and the bottom line is, the Appellate Division basically said, "Yes, the supreme court judge is right as far as no standing from the city and the community school boards, but they're wrong that these individuals have standing." So they dismissed it. We appealed it, everyone appealed it to the highest court, court of appeals [New York State Court of Appeals]. Court of appeals says, "Yes, the judge was right in the beginning, the city does not have standing over community school boards because they are creatures of state law, and as such, they do not have standing." So if we were to listen to the city we would've been up the river without a paddle, you've heard that saying, okay. But the highest court said yes you have standing, CFE, to all of these parents and other community based organizations, and they--the highest court, sent it back to the supreme court judge for a trial.
Story_ID: 660534
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now mind you we filed the lawsuit [Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. State of New York] in '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It took us several years to get to the highest court [New York State Court of Appeals], and the highest court ruled in 1995, so it took two years to get to the highest court. Sent us back to the court [New York State Supreme Court] and I remember asking Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell], "So Michael, how soon do you think that we're gonna go to trial?" And he said about two years. And I said, "It'll probably take four years." 'Cause even when the lawsuit going back when we were getting ready to start the lawsuit I said to Michael, "Michael I wanna see some results and when my youngest Sumaya [Sumaya Jackson], before she graduates from high school." And when did it finally end, when my youngest daughter was in college. It took thirteen years of litigation to win the case, thirteen years. So the bottom line is that we went to trial in 1999 under Justice Leland DeGrasse, a supreme court judge, black, his parents are from the Caribbean who went to Catholic school, St. John's University [Queens, New York], Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington D.C.] came to work in Harlem Legal Services [New York, New York] and he wind up being the judge that handled the case. And he ruled in our favor. And we filed it on two claims, one that the State of New York was discriminating against the City of New York children, 84 percent children of color, okay, in violation of Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964]. And number two, they were disc- they were cheating the children out of billions of dollars in the formula that they were shortchanging New York City [New York, New York]. That's our two claims. So when we went to trial, the judge ruled in our favor in January of 2001, ruled in our favor. And of course, the state appealed it to the Appellate Division, huh. And the Appellate Division, First Department [First Judicial Department], 25th Street and Madison Avenue, in their ruling said, no the state is only obligated to educate children equal to sixth grade in reading and eight grade in math. That's what they said to us. And I said to Michael Rebell, I said, "Michael, I know that when we filed this appeal to the highest court they cannot agree that the state is only obligated to educate our children equal to sixth grade in reading and eighth grade in math." So, we, we appealed it to the highest court. And the highest court ruled in our favor. I think that may have been 2001 or 2003. Anyway, I, I said to Michael, "We gonna--when we go to Albany [New York], I'm gonna walk all the way to Albany." And so from May 1st, 2003 to May 8th, I along with initially hundreds of people walked from 25th Street and Madison Avenue, the Appellate Division, First Department of the supreme court that said that our children are only obligated to sixth grade in reading and eighth grade in math, we walked from there all the way to the highest court in Albany, 150 miles. And we walked all the way up Broadway and mind you, the, the lawsuit started in District 6 [New York City Community School District 6] with our school board [New York City Community School Board District 6] and so up in District 6 they had thousands of students out of every school in District 6 on Broadway cheering us on. And mind you in the initial start, the chancellor was there, city councilmembers were there, education advocates were there that walked with us, so people walked some distance. Mind you, I was already in the city council [New York City Council] at the time--
Speaker 2: I was gonna say, because you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was city council.
Speaker 2: --'cause it's going on so long--
Speaker 1: Right, I was elected to the city council January 2002. So I was a member of the city council. I was a member of the education committee [Committee on Education]. I chaired the contracts committee. So we walked all the way to Albany. Eight days, and the theme was, Walk a Mile for a Child. That was the theme of the walk. And we've talked to people, I've said this is, you know, you have to be able to engage people. I said Michael Rebell is the brains and I'm the brawns, and together we can't be beat. And that was the theme of it, Walk a Mile for a Child.
Story_ID: 660535
Speaker 1: Walk a Mile for a Child. And so I remember on the seventh day of the walk, okay, Samira Ahmed [ph.], who was the deputy director who organized the walk and we mapped it out beforehand. She said, "Robert [HistoryMaker Robert Jackson], we're gonna be in court tomorrow, please make sure you put on your suit so you can look good in court." And I turned to her and says, "Samira, I didn't bring a suit. I wanna go in the court room smelling as funky as I can be so they will be able to smell me from the back of the courtroom." And literally, we walked into the courtroom after having a press conference right outside the courtroom at twelve o'clock. We walked in with our tee shirts that said Walk a Mile for a Child, with our buttons and stickers on and they knew we were there. How did they know, we were doing radio interviews on the way walking up, it was in the newspapers, it was on the Internet, they knew we were coming, huh. And they ruled in our favor. They basically--at that point in time, and the court said, "State legislator and governor, determine how much it costs to implement a sound basic education and move forward with it and you have to do it by--," I think, by the budget of April. And did the state do it, no they did not. And so when they did not follow the court, the court then directed, the judge, Leland DeGrasse, Leland DeGrasse put together three administrators, hearing officers to hold hearings in New York City [New York, New York] to take testimony of what it would cost to give our children a sound basic education. And at the hearing, the hearing officers and the report recommended to Leland DeGrasse that it would take $5.5 billion in expense money and $11 billion in capital money. And Justice Leland DeGrasse then basically said, his report basically mirrored, mirrored what the hearing officers recommended. State appealed it to the Appellate Division, again, I mean it's just appeal, appeal, appeal. And I knew after denying us twice that they were gonna deny us again. We were shocked. The Appellate Division agreed and said yes on this, and so the finality in 2006 at the highest court, the third time in this lawsuit, something symbolic happened, one of the judges at the highest court was termed out, based on age. The only black African American judge on the court of appeals [New York State Court of Appeals]. Our Governor Pat- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was termed out?
Speaker 1: Yeah, of age, 'cause he was seventy. Pataki [George Pataki] did not extend his term and so he was no longer a court of appeals justice. Governor Pataki appointed a very conservative judge from the Buf- Buffalo [New York] area. He was sworn in the day on the last trial that we had going to the third time. So, while we going in at two o'clock, he was sworn in at twelve o'clock. Bottom line is, that the court ruled in our favor and he wrote the major decision. But he only gave us $1.9 billion in 2004 dollars, now mind you the decision was 2006. But he gave us based on 2004 dollars, so you equate that to 2006, 1.9 would've been about 2.2 billion. And basically they said since the lawsuit was started in New York City, the remedy is only for New York City schools. That's what they said. And so that's what--in 2006 was the last decision in the Campaign for Fiscal Equity [Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. State of New York]. Eliot Spitzer, who was running for governor, said to me, "R.J., when I become governor we will finally settle the CFE lawsuit." When he became the governor, within one year, he put the package together to bring about, about $8 billion with 5.5 billion for New York City, 3 billion for the rest of the state. The 5.5 billion, three point--3.3 or 3.2 from the state and 2.2 or 2.3 from the city for the 5.5 billion. And Pataki had the year before, had already signed into law for the capital money, $11.2 billion at a warehouse in Sunset Tar- Park, Brooklyn [Sunset Park, Brooklyn, New York] where they've been fighting for a high school for over thirty years and couldn't get one built. And I remember years ago as a member of city council [New York City Council], they say--I went to a meeting out there and said, "Why can't we get our school built?" And my response to them, "Because the people that have the authority won't get it done." Not like they don't have the money, 'cause when you're dealing with 5 or $8 billion in capital money to build new schools and make major repairs, and the school costs 100 million, it's because the people who have the decision are not getting it done.
Story_ID: 660536
Speaker 1: So that was the story of CFE [Campaign for Fiscal Equity] and right now, 2016, there are two lawsuits that are pending because CFE has not been fi- fully, fully come forward because the--in essence, in 2006, 2007 they came up with a formula, the cam- Contract for Excellence [sic. Contracts for Excellence], just to let the money to come down to Foundation Aid to New York City [New York, New York] and other parts of the state. Well the state was doing okay, it's 2006, 2007, but 2008, 2009, the state fell into financial crisis. And as a result of that, they stretched out those dollars and they're stretching it out. And the state came back in the black, we want our money, they're not giving it to us. So Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell] filed another lawsuit on behalf of all of New York State in February of 2014. Went to court, the judge rules in our favor. We had a case, the state was trying to dismiss the case. Bottom line is, the state appealed it to the Appellate Division. Appellate Division has ruled in our favor again. Now the state is appealing it to the highest court again [New York State Court of Appeals].
Speaker 2: Right now?
Speaker 1: Right now. So and there's another case, small cities and small schools which was in Albany [New York], and the lawsuit that was filed, they lost that and they're appealing it. Meaning the plaintiffs lost. So, the struggle continues every single day to fight for the type of resources to guarantee our children an adequate education. And sometimes when I go speak in front of people and I'm talking loud and communicating with enthusiasm, and I say to parents, "How many of you want a sound basic education for your kids, raise your hand." And almost everybody in the room raised their hand. Then I turn to them and I say, "No you don't, because a sound basic education is the least education standard that the state is obligated to give, and you don't want that for your children. You want an excellent education for your kids." You gotta educate people, you see. And then sometimes I go to talk to children in schools and I tell them the story about my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] and I climbing Mount Kilimanjaro, and if you don't know, Mount Kilimanjaro is the highest free standing mountain in all of Africa, 19,300 feet. And so when I tell them I've climbed Mount Kilimanjaro, the highest free standing mountain in the world, then I turn to them and say, "Ask me did I make it to the top." And then the kids said, "Did you make it to the top?" And I tell them, "No I did not." And of course not. But I told them, "The most important thing is I tried my best and that's what I want you to do in school, try your best." And that's what it's about. Educating our children, trying their best so they can be whatever they want to be; the future leaders of our city, our state and our country and the world. And my three daughters, two of them were named plaintiffs, our oldest one [Saadiya Jackson Owens] is an M.D., pediatrician at Children's hospital [Children's National Medical Center] in Washington D.C., emergency room. Asmahan Jackson, plaintiff in the lawsuit [Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. State of New York]. She's a math specialist in Woodbridge, Virginia in the public school systems there. Sumaya Jackson, named plaintiff in the lawsuit. She went to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], she's an artist, she's a dancer, and she's a general manager at Magnolia Bakery at the Rockefeller Center store [New York, New York]. Successful, young women. The welfare cycle that I grew up in has stopped with our children and that's what most people want for their kil- their children. And that's what I've been about--and that's why if you go to--go to my Twitter or my Facebook account, my Twitter account says, former New York City Council member, champion of education for our children. That's what it's about.
Story_ID: 660537
Speaker 1: And that's the type of work that's continuing for me, for our children and the Campaign for Fiscal Equity, Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell], a, a group that was formed to file a lawsuit where Michael Rebell--I've seen Michael Rebell, let me tell you, he could work--had make millions of dollars in private industry. I think he either went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard la- Harvard undergrad or, or Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] and so he could've taken anything.
Speaker 2: And so, how was he compensated?
Speaker 1: We raised money.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, the school board [New York City Community School Board District 6]?
Speaker 1: No, no, no. No we raised money, he raised money through foundations and what have you, and one foundation which was very crucial for us was the Schott Foundation [Schott Foundation for Public Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts], S-C-H-O-T-T. And there were two individuals, mother and father [sic. son, Greg Jobin-Leeds], they both passed away recently, Lilo [Lilo Leeds] and, the Leeds, L-E-E-D-S. And they have children that are very involved in many progressive things. They help fund CFE, they help fund the Alliance for Quality Education, they help fund other organizations that help students to develop to go into college so, so we can develop our future leaders of our country. And a lot of those students that were helped are children of color. And these two individuals are not people of color, so--and Michael Rebell is not a person of color and the, the other lawfo- lawsuit, law firm we were involved with was Simpson Thacher and Bartlett [Simpson Thacher and Bartlett LLP, New York, New York], and they had two partners and four associates and a whole team of paralegals working on this case [Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. State of New York], which took thirteen years. I've seen some of the attorneys in speaking, literally cry, cry over the conditions that our children were learning in. And they did it (gesture) in their heart. This is what they believe in.
Speaker 2: Now how much (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) These are people that are not people of color that have given their lives and years and years fighting to make sure children get a good education.
Story_ID: 660538
Speaker 1: How much money actually has gotten to the school system [New York City Department of Education] at this point?
Speaker 2: Billions. 'Cause mind you, Pataki [George Pataki] signed into law $11 billion in capital. We built a lot of schools, made major repairs. I say billions, a couple of billions have already gone as far as through the Foundation Aid formula. Part of the formula is, if you're at school, then let's say 60 percent are regular students. Okay, so you get a, let's say, a 1 percent allocation, I'm just giving this as an example. But if you have children with special needs, then you get an allocation more like 1.5 for children with special needs. And so, billions have been already allocated, but AQE, the Alliance for Quality Education says that the state schools overall are shortchanged right now as we dealt--of the financial crisis of New York State from 2008, 2009, $3.9 billion, round it off to 4 billion. How much is owed to New York City [New York, New York], 1.8 or $1.9 billion to New York City students. So, and AQE has it broken down how much each school is missing. So the school where my kids went to [P.S.I.S. 187, Hudson Cliffs School, New York, New York], they're missing $2 million. What could you do with $2 million if you were a principal? A lot.
Speaker 1: And so how is this money get- at this point, how is the money getting to the schools or is it getting to the schools?
Speaker 2: Well, we're pursing through lobbying, organizing to try to get the legislature to give the money. So quickly in one minute last year, AQE led the fight and basically the state assembly [New York State Assembly], we have two houses, state assembly 150 members in New York State, you had the state senate [New York State Senate], sixty-three members and the governor. So you have the executive branch, the legislative branch and judicial branch. We've already talked about the judicial. Well last year, the state assembly said that we will fund CFE [Campaign for Fiscal Equity], the 3.9 billion over a two year period. Well, the state senate which is controlled by the Republicans and the state assembly was controlled by the Democrats, Democrats said, "Over two years we'll give you the 3.9 billion." The state senate, which controlled by Republicans, said, "Unh-uh, we'll only give you 20 percent." And the governor, a Democrat, said, "Ah, 6 percent only." So in essence, the three su- three bodies, executive and two branches of the legislature could not agree, so nothing.
Story_ID: 660539
Speaker 1: Well I'm asking this because as, as one with a child in school in New York City [New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --one of the things that I see is that it's still really bad in many s- in many schools. I mean as, you know, we, we're seeing gentrification occur, we're seeing families with a lot more money moving to many of these neighborhoods with the schools, there's a big question as to are the schools up to--
Speaker 2: The standard--the standard that's accept- yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The basic standard of, as you pointed out what you don't even wanna accept to the basic standard, and then, there's also the question of the charter schools.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I think that the standard, that's why Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell] went back into court. Because the highest court [New York State Court of Appeals] when they ruled in 2006 basically, in a nutshell, said the state is obligated to educate the children of New York State so they graduate from high school knowing how to read, knowing how to write, knowing how to serve on a jury, okay, and being able to hold competitive employment. And working at McDonald's and Burger King or Walmart is not competitive. This is what the state, highest court said and that they determined to be an adequate education, which we equate that to be a sound basic education, and that's not what they're being--getting. So that's why we're going after the money. And that's where politics comes into play with the Republicans denying us, the assembly [New York State Assembly] Democrats saying yes, and the governor [Andrew Cuomo], Democrat, denying us. So the struggle continues every day to try to get justice. But we let them know, every day that passes we're losing hundreds of kids.
Speaker 1: Well I, I remember asking Walcott when, when he--
Speaker 2: Dennis Walcott was the chancellor.
Speaker 1: --when he was the chancellor, I remember asking him when, would you put your children in New York City public schools [New York City Department of Education], you know. I have a child who's not in New York City public schools because what you just described is not adequate enough. And so, this fight, which is a really important fight then gets stymied and the money doesn't get there. And even with the money getting there, where are the visionaries in the school to make sure it's going where it needs to go?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I agree. But that's part of the management of the system. Obviously, you know, you have a chancellor right now in 2000- when Bill de Blasio came in, Carmen Farina who is an educator. She was a teacher, a principal, a superintendent and she's a chancellor so she is someone that has actually been in the classroom that knows. Whereas about four or five of the previous chancellors, none of them--none of them were educated--educators that is. People said well Dennis Walcott taught for a year or two. None of them met the minimum qualifications to be chancellor. So all of those, Dennis Walcott, Cathie Black, Harold Levy [Harold O. Levy], so forth and so on had to get a waiver in order to be the chancellor. I think the last chancellor who had the qualifications to be a chancellor in New York City was--he passed away hard a--had a heart attack, Richard Green.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, I believe, I believe he was the last one. I know, what's his name, Quinones [Nathan Quinones], he wasn't a--he met the qualifications and Richard Green, but Harold Levy, Dennis Walcott, Cathie Black, Dennis Walcott, none of them met the minimum qualifications to be the chancellor unless they got a waiver.
Story_ID: 660540
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about that line of thinking as it relates to the national scene?
Speaker 2: Go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it, so right now, moving into the new administration, a Trump administration [President Donald John Trump], the person who has been earmarked to run education [Betsy DeVos]--
Speaker 2: A billionaire.
Speaker 1: With no education background who is pro charter schools. Bigger is no education background. So how does that, when, when at a national level, the person in charge of education does not have the experience (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know education, even though--education is basically at the state level. So most of the policies and procedures are at the state level. When it comes to federal funding, you know, they may have certain requirements at the state level to get federal funds, but most of the nitty gritty stuff is at the state level. But obviously this is gonna have an impact, obviously just like, you know, our, our president elect with a lot of other stuff. And I think that's where people have to organize, organize, organize. If you disagree with something you have to speak out on it. If you disagree with something you have to write a letter. If you disagree with something, you have to email. If you disagree with something, you have to go and buttonhole your legislators and if they don't do what the general population say is needed, you gotta vote them out of office. Because I've sat as a public official within the city council [New York City Council] for twelve years, I chaired the education [Committee on Education] for eight years, I co-chaired the New York City Council Black, Latino and Asian Caucus, I co-chaired that for eight years. Bottom line is, they want--people want people that's gonna represent them. And sometimes you have to fight the system and that representation. So as a co-chair of the Black, Latino and Asian Caucus, we filed briefs in stop and frisk lawsuits in New York City [New York, New York]. We filed briefs and of--along with the Vulcan Society [New York, New York] and FDNY [New York City Fire Department] with 94 percent white and discriminat- discriminating against blacks and Latinos. So we--you gotta take action. And so we're hoping that if people disagree, people need to take action. And I say to you that I'm involved in several Democratic clubs, the Uptown Community Democrats [New York, New York], the Muslim Democratic Club of New York [New York, New York]. I went to Barack Obama Democratic Club in Washington Heights [Barack Obama Democratic Club of Upper Manhattan, New York, New York]. Many of the Democratic clubs are meeting--having meetings discussing all of the issues coming up with the appointment and trying to come up with an action plan to be involved to express our disappointment, to lobby our legislators, even the Republican ones at the federal level to let them know that we're unhappy because it is a fact that Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] won the popular vote by two po- over 2.2 million votes. And obviously there's a recount that's taking place in several states and people still feel with the recount that even if the Electoral College to change, it won't change the results of changing it where Trump would not have 270 votes to be elected by the Electoral College as the president of the United States. But the struggle continues every day. There's a movement now to try to change the [U.S.] Constitution to move it away from the Electoral College to a general populate--popular vote. Is that gonna happen, we don't know, but you gotta try. Some people said to me going back, "Are you crazy? You can't sue the state." Said, "Oh yeah, then I'm crazy." But if it means fighting for our kids, I guess I am crazy (laughter).
Story_ID: 660541
Speaker 1: Now we've been--how many years has it been since you started this fight?
Speaker 2: Since 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's been a long time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1991. I guess, what's 2001--it's 2016, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, while there have--clearly have been victories--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the money is still hanging in the balance for the most part?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we still--we receive billion dollars in capital and we see billion dollars in expense, but we still have not received what we're entitled to as per what the agreement was reached, as per the Foundation Aid formula that they put in place. And that's $3.9 billion for the students of New York State. And the state legislature [New York State Legislature] and the governor are giving tax breaks to the rich. Invest in education, don't invest in the prison industrial complex. Don't invest in the welfare system, invest in our children to help them stay out of jail, out of prisons, out of homelessness, out of dependency on the government so they can be the engineers, the attorneys, the scientists, the environmentalists and things like that so they can help people. And that's what it's about. So when we do that, than as a country we will become greater. You didn't hear I didn't say I didn't say we'd become great, 'cause we're still great as a country, but we will become greater than we are.
Speaker 1: Is--perhaps this is a philosophical question, I would like for it not to be but, why do you think it is that there wouldn't be an interest in ensuring that our children are educated?
Speaker 2: Oh I think there is an interest. I think that all of them are interested. Long Island [New York], Nassau County [New York], you better make sure that they're gonna get their money for education, that's why the New York State Senate, John Flanagan [John J. Flanagan], and I'm talking to people that may not know he is the Senate majority leader of the New York State Senate, which is Republicans. He's from Nassau County. You better believe that Nassau County is gonna get the money they need to make sure that their kids get an excellent education. And I spoke on the steps of city hall [Albany City Hall] when we just recently walked to Albany [New York] again. AQE [Alliance for Quality Education] had a march from October 2nd to October 12th where we marched to Albany and I spoke on the steps of the court of appeals [New York State Court of Appeals], and I said that I, I believe you that the governor, our governor, my governor too, Andrew Cuomo, I bet his kids did not go to our public schools in New York City [New York, New York]. I know where they go to college, they go to college at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island]. They're getting an excellent education and college education, okay. If you believe that our schools are good, you know what the sign of a good school is, when you're teachers and principals are sending their kids to the same kid's school that you're going to. 'Cause they're gonna make sure that their kids get a good education. But I've said to people, that if you are involved as a parent in your kid's education, and you're making sure that they're reading, that they're doing their homework. You're making sure if they need to special needs students and they getting the services that they desire, that they need, not desire, that they need. Then if you're engaged in your children's education, more than likely they're gonna be successful. They're gonna graduate from high school, they're gonna graduate from college, okay. But you've gotta be involved. But if you're working two jobs and English is not your primary language and now they're learning in English and you have only gone to elementary school or junior high school and you can't help them with the work that they're doing, it becomes a problem. So we have to have the services to help the parents also, but also afterschool programs for our children, so forth and so on, and that costs money, it costs the will and determination to get it done.
Story_ID: 660542
Speaker 1: Talk to me about the charter school effort and what is your perspective on charter schools in the mix of this conversation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well in New York City [New York, New York] the biggest charter school network is Success Academy [Success Academy Charter Schools, New York, New York]. And the head of Success Academy is Eva Moskowitz. And I worked for Eva when she was a chair of the education committee [Committee on Education] on the city council [New York City Education]. For the first four years in the city council from 2002 to two thousand- two, three--end of 2005, she chaired the education committee and I was a member. And I sat with her, her ki- she used to bring her babies to the meetings and I would hold a child, and you know, we juggled. But she--I know that Success Academy, I've heard, parents have told me that the children are not behaving properly and a disciplinary process that they, they suspend them for a period of time. That they coached them out, especially with children that they can't meet their needs or not behaving properly. They coached them out, and just like in private school, just like in parochial school, if kids are not behaving or not producing, they basically dismiss them and where do the kids go? Back to their local public school. The public school must take all of them in. So, in my opinion, yes the majority of the children that are in charter schools are black and Latino and I do think though that part of what it is is because they do not have to abide by the rules and regulations of the city board of education [New York City Department of Education] and maybe the state education department [New York State Education Department]. And I do think though that if they--they're successful, they have a longer school day, longer school year, and I think that even going back in District 6 [New York City Community School District 6], we wanted to have an all year round school system going back. I'm talking about in District 6 because we had two schools, brand new schools that are air conditioning, and we wanted to have that. But at that time, the city department of education, city budget did not give us the money to do that. Because kids lose a lot when they're out for the whole summer instead of being out for shorts period of time. But the bottom line is though that, I'm, I'm against charter schools coming in and taking over space to the negative consequences of students in the regular school system. So one example was P.S. 194 [P.S. 194, Countee Cullen School] in Harlem [New York, New York] on 144th Street between 7th [7th Avenue; Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard]. The charter school from Eva Moskowitz that was the Mahalia Jackson School [P.S. 123, Mahalia Jackson School, New York, New York] on 141st Street. They marched from that school to this other school, literally to try to take it over. If you march to my house and try to take over my house, you have a fight on your hand. And so that's the type of clashes that have occurred with Eva Moskowitz and the charter schools. There's some charter schools which are not affiliated with her, the transition to their charter into a school has been very easy. But, you know, politics play into it, hedge fund money play into it. The governor and others, and so.
Speaker 1: Well, plenty of people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ju- the struggle continues as far as to make sure that all children receive an excellent education. And someone, as a parent of three girls, all of them went to our local school. One went to Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], one went to humanities high school [Bayard Rustin High School for the Humanities, New York, New York], SUNY New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York] my oldest daughter [Saadiya Jackson Owens] who's an M.D. My daughter Asmahana [Asmahana Jackson] went to University of Buffalo [Buffalo, New York], public. Sumaya [Sumaya Jackson], our youngest one, she got accepted to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], public [sic.], for dance. We, my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] and I as a team, my wife wanted her to attend the Dwight School [New York, New York], a private high school. That's where she went to high school. I never hid the fact from anyone, even in speaking that we made a decision that the Dwight School is where we sent our daughter, private high school. And then she went to Juilliard. She went to Juilliard. Juilliard cost $220,000 for four years, and that's going back. She's already--she's thirty years old, she graduated when she was twenty-one. That's what it cost then. A lot of money. But, what I say to parents, I would never tell you what's best for your child. You have to make the decision based on their needs. My fight is to make sure that our public schools--given the resources so we can give the best education that we want for our children, that's the fight. And when that occurs, educators, administrators, and parents will all send their kids to the New York City public school system. That's the fight.
Story_ID: 660543
Speaker 1: --Wanted to ask you about the, the structure for the fight? You know, you were on the school board [New York City Community School Board District 6]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when this came up and then you mentioned attorney Robert Rebell [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell].
Speaker 1: Excuse me. Michael (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) R-E-B-E-L-L, Michael Rebell.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Michael Rebell, who came on to work with you. Just structurally why is it that it--the founding of the Campaign for Fiscal Equity was necessary as opposed to just doing it through the school board, and what was that exactly?
Speaker 2: The thing is that, you know, I'm not an attorney, I'm the school board president, I'm working full time. Michael Rebell is our attorney. His mandate from me was find a way to get it done. And so he came back with a proposal to form a nonprofit organization, Campaign for Fiscal Equity, which comprised of nonprofit organizations, individual school districts, District 6 [New York City Community School District 6], District 5 [New York City Community School District 5], 26 [New York City Community School District 26] is Queens [New York], you know, 15 is--District 15 [New York City Community School District 15] is in Brooklyn [New York], I'm talking about school board that is, and a--individual plaintiffs because that's what--I guess he felt that was needed based on the research that he has done. Mind you, he's referred to the (unclear) Long Island [New York] case ten years earlier that went to the highest court [New York State Court of Appeals]. And so that's what was done. And obviously we said yes to that and that's where we moved forward. And so I was the lead plaintiff in the lawsuit [Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. State of New York] and I was the chair of--of the Campaign for Fiscal Equity, a nonprofit organization, I was the chair of that. When I was elected to public office [New York City Council], I resigned as chair 'cause they didn't want a elective public official to be chair. So I was a member of the board, but not the chair. And so that was the strategy obviously in order to move forward, and I told you earlier that the city wanted to file it themselves. So even if we had filed it only with the school boards it would've been denied, because the highest court and the lower courts, both the supreme court justice [New York State Supreme Court] and the Appellate court division [Appellate Division] and the highest court said there--you're barred from stature by law, you don't have the right to file a lawsuit on behalf of the children. [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson, Sumaya [Jackson's daughter, Sumaya Jackson], Asmahan [Jackson's daughter, Asmahan Jackson], Heather Lewis, her kids, these, you know, nonprofit organizations, yes. And I, I mentioned to you that our claim was discrimination because New York City [New York, New York] was 84 percent color of children discrimination in violation of Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964]. Well on appeal, not--later on in our appeal process, but before--I think it may be 2003, the highest court in the United States, not ruled in our case but ruled in another case, that individuals did not have a right to sue under Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, only the states could sue. Can you imagine that? So in essence, our claim of discrimination was blown out of the water by the U.S. Supreme Court decision.
Speaker 1: Well and, so on that topic, the--there's been erosion of the, of that act over time in recent years, and there's a big question as to what would happen on the Supreme Court given the new administration [President Donald John Trump] and who gets put onto the Supreme Court as it relates to many--
Speaker 2: Many issues (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) many issues, but among them the Civil Rights Act?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and so that's hanging in the balance right now as well?
Speaker 2: It is and I--
Story_ID: 660544
Speaker 1: Obviously we're in trouble. When I say we, the country is in trouble. But you may ask, you know, 50 percent of the country and they may so no we're not in trouble, we're doing good, because they believe that Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] is the--you know, obviously he's been elected--he's the president elect.
Speaker 2: But of that 50 percent, a lot of those people are what many call the invisible people. Because they're a lot of poor white Americans who are not benefiting from good education based upon where they live, not so much it--maybe not as much as New York [New York], although there're pockets of New York. So ultimately, isn't there a question for the majority of the country?
Speaker 1: Of course there is. I, I--and I say of course there is, but we, in New York City, we live in a bubble. New York City, I say we live in a bubble in New York City because New York City is majority blue, meaning Democrat and in fact, of the five boroughs; Manhattan [New York], Bronx [New York], Brooklyn [New York], Queens [New York], Staten Island [New York], Hillary Clint- Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] won four of those boroughs, the most populous Brooklyn, huh, Queens, Manhattan and the Bronx in that order with the most population over 80 percent. Where she lost the least populous borough of Staten Island, she got 46 percent and Donald Trump got 54 percent. So New York City is all blue and thus, we, you know, we're all in basically the same page. But you go outside of New York City, when we walked to Albany [New York], we saw so many Donald Trump signs on the lawns, okay. And that's just 150 miles of going up to Albany. And if you looked at the map when the election results was coming in, basically Hillary won the East Coast--some of the East Coast, the West Coast, California, Washington, Oregon. Hillary won New York State, New Jersey, Connecticut, you know, but most of the country is red. And so whether they're rich or they're poor, people want the change. And quite frankly I listen to one radio program, WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] on Sunday or one morning, and they were talking about, you know, "In Michigan, Hillary lost," and they said on the radio, "With all these black people in Detroit [Michigan], they get--?" They didn't get their butts out to vote. I mean, some people just thought that, that you could sit home. But that's why this country overall and certain countries like I think in Australia, you're mandated to vote. If you don't vote you're fined, okay. But some people would say no, that's not a democracy, that's--you know, to dictate that what I have to do, that I have to vote, you know. New York City has a very low voter turnout, you know. I think that, you know, that's democracy and you know, the lessons learned. I think that some people says that--what is the saying goes, make a--something like you know, you--if--what's the saying my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] used to say, that you--if, if you don't listen you, you fall and you--something like that.
Speaker 2: Certainly repeat history, there's that.
Speaker 1: So I just think that, yeah, engagement is very important. And that's why education is so important, so the more you're educated the more you can understand, the more you can read in between the lines, the more you can be involved in the various processes of life. The--one of the things that I say to people, whoever you are, whatever organization you're gonna go to, know the rules of the game. You don't know the rules of the game, you will be used in the process, and so take that to the bank. You will be used in the process. So, parents' association, you get the bylaws. School board, you get the bylaws. [U.S.] Constitution, Democratic club, whatever it is, so that you know what the rules and regulations are and you know when they're not following them and, and abusing them, and using you in the process. That's important.
Story_ID: 660545
Speaker 1: You served for eight years as a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chair of the education committee [Committee on Education].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: After leaving the council [New York City Council] what, what have you been doing?
Speaker 2: I ran for borough president of the--Manhattan [New York]. There's 1.8 million people that live in the borough of Manhattan. I ran for that, I lost.
Speaker 1: When, when did you run?
Speaker 2: Two thousand thirteen [2013], while I was in the city council, I was term limited out. So me and two other people that were term limited out, Gale Brewer [Gale A. Brewer] and Jessica Lappin, we--three of us were term limited out, we ran for borough president of New York along with one individual who was a restaurant owner. And I came in third. Gale Brewer is the borough president of Manhattan. And the following year I ran for state senate in the 31st senatorial district [New York State Senate District 31] in Manhattan, the state senator was Adriano Espaillat, in which he wo- he won. And I ran just this year, 2016, for the New York State Senate and there was four of us in the race, and three of us basically split 95 percent of the vote, and one--the fourth person got 5 percent, and the state senator elect is Marisol Alcantara. She was supported by Adriano Espaillat, who is our congress member elect, he's replacing retiring Charles Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel]. And so she won and she has agreed to caucus with the IDC in New York City [New York, New York], if don't know, IDC is the Independent Democratic Conference. These are Democrats and I'm calling them rogue Democrats that are not caucusing with the Democrats, but they're caucusing with the Republicans to help to keep the Republicans in the leadership control of the New York State Senate. And as a result of that, the $3.9 billion that the state assembly [New York State Assembly] would agree to phase in over two years is not being phased in. The DREAM Act [Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act], which gives people, youngsters that came here that were not citizens the right to go to college, criminal justice reform, raising the age, they call it. There's only two states in the country that treats sixteen year olds as criminals, New York State and North Carolina. We want to raise the age to eighteen. The state senate is holding that up. Housing issues in New York City that's negatively impacting over a million households of being negatively impacted by the New York State Senate. This is a result of the rogue Democrats caucusing with the Republicans. It has such a negative impact on New York City, and especially people of color. So Marisol Alcantara, who is a Democrat, she's agreed to caucus with the IDC and the, and the Republicans, and before they took her in she hardly raised any money. And subsequently when they got involved, they put together a half a million dollars, five hundred thousand dollars for the state senate race. And so, money talks. And so that's what we're up against overall. And that's what we, whoever, has to deal with, whether you're a Democrat or a non-Democrat, these are the issues from a political point of view that have to be dealt with in order to make the changes that we hope and expect that will benefit, not only the people of New York City, but the entire state.
Story_ID: 660546
Speaker 1: I'm curious as to your focus as you have made the effort to step into these important roles that could help to further the work that you've put so much effort into thus far. And, and it's a democracy, so somebody wins and other people don't win.
Speaker 2: Some people won, somebody wins, somebody lose (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. What do you do next? What, what do you do given that thus far you haven't gotten into one of these roles?
Speaker 2: Well clearly, you know, I've played a leadership role my entire life. parents' association, tenants' association, community school board [New York City Community School Board District 6], city council [New York City Council], co-chair Black, Latino and Asian Caucus, Democratic club. In my family, my personal family I'm the one that, you know, dealt with administrative matters of my mom [Zelma Jackson Chu], and my dad [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu] and my dad [James Rudd], you know, putting together his will and just, you know, being the administrator in surrogate court, I've handled all of that. So they know, my siblings know, that I'm the one to turn to in order to make sure that we collectively get things done. So I've said to people when, when I left the city council or when I lost, people ask, "So what are you gonna do now?" "So what are you doing?" In essence, they wanna know what am I doing to survive, how am I living. And I tell people, I'm okay, I'm fortunate. I've worked forty years as an adult, forty years, uh-huh, and I have two pensions, and I get my social security in a month. So and my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] is retired and she has a pension and she gets her social security in fifteen months. So we, my wife and I as a family, we're fine financially. Say that to my wife, she would say no we're not (laughter). But no really, when you look at the average family and you look at us, my wife and myself at this point in time, we're fine. The most important thing that we have to do is to stay healthy and to try to help our family abroad in Tanzania, to help our kids when they need help, to try to put money in our grandkids' college fund, that's what we want to do and we're trying to do overall. But, I want to be able to play a role from a legislative point of view to move the bills and put pressure on our legislators and our executives to do the right thing on behalf of the people that we represent in New York City [New York, New York], people of color, people of lower means that--that are not wealthy. We're all in the same boat struggling to survive to put food on the table, to pay rent, you know. Afterschool programs, child care.
Story_ID: 660547
Speaker 1: When you look at your career that you've worked so hard at building and supporting the people of New York City [New York, New York] in your district [New York City Community School District 6], what do you hope your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been asked that question. What's my legacy? A champion of education. 'Cause I've said, no one person can say that as a result of the action that they took has brought billions of dollars to the children of New York City and New York State, no one. And in fact, in January 4th, January 1st or 2nd, New York One [NY1], New York One is a cable program--television program in New York City, New York One named myself and Michael Rebell [Michael A. Rebell] and the Campaign for Fiscal Equity, New Yorkers of the Year, as a result of that particular lawsuit. But I received so many awards where I've left office, I, I have to rent a storage unit, boxes and boxes of plaques and proclamations and things like that that are not in my home. I got a picture recently, a couple days ago, the New York City Council honored the Ed Walkers and if you go hashtag Ed Walkers on the AQE, the Alliance for Quality Education, because we walked to Albany [New York], a proclamation. So AQE has an annual fundraiser where they honored Betty Rosa [Betty A. Rosa] who is the chancellor for the state board of regents [New York State Board of Regents] and this other gentleman, I forgot his name. He's with the Ford Foundation [New York, New York], he is one of their se- senior staff persons that help to give grants on behalf of the Ford Foundation and the Ed Walkers, and they gave all of us a picture that we took up in Albany. And I put that up on the wall near the door of my house, because several of these individuals had to go to the emergency room with hairline fractures, sprained ankles, blisters, stuff like that in this walk to Albany. And someone spoke on our behalf at city hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York] when they was giving us the proclamation, Danny Dromm [Daniel Dromm] the chair of the education committee [Committee on Education] and Melissa Mark-Viverito who is the speaker and they insisted that I speak also. And I said as someone that has walked thirteen miles--thirteen years earlier, my role was to be the type of leader and foundation for these new Ed Walkers and I was a drum major, I literally beat a drum with a plastic bucket all the way to Albany to give them rhythm to give them the spirit that they can do it. But our governor's spokesperson said that basically, that this was sort of like a charade or show that we were just putting on. But that tells you the type of attitude that some people have. These people are parents and activists that are fighting to make sure their kids and all of the kids get a good education. The same type of education that many of these legislators and governor is doing for their children. That's the fight and that's what this is about. I'm telling you.
Story_ID: 660548
Speaker 1: When you look at your career do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Do I have any regrets? No, not at all. I mean, let me just tell you clearly. I don't know if I could've spent all of that time and energy if I did not have my lifetime partner, my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson], because she said yeah you were involved with that while I was taking care of the kids at home. There's some people that don't have a partner or a wife or a husband, and they cannot do it because they have to work one or two jobs and they have to be home with the kids, where I had that at home. So I was fortunate. So my wife is not involved in this aspect, the political aspect of the limelight, some people may call it limelight, though--but she takes care of home, and she did. So, she's my pa- my lifetime partner. And even going way back, when we had our first child [Saadiya Jackson Owens] and I said to her, that no matter what happens, even if we separate or if we ever divorce, one thing I'd say to you, I would never fight you for the kids. Because I know, I know, me, that she's a good mother and a good provider for our children, and I made that pledge. But I've also said that I married you for life and no matter if we argue, fuss and fight, we gotta make up 'cause I'm not going anywhere (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you haven't.
Speaker 2: So we've been together now about forty-one, forty-two years.
Story_ID: 660549
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for young people who might wanna step into the political--
Speaker 2: Oh my gosh--
Speaker 1: --sphere?
Speaker 2: --we hear it all the time, "I'm gonna run for office." "Oh yeah?" Many people don't know what it's like. They don't know how difficult it is. They think it's easy and it's not easy at all. In fact, I was just the other day talking to some young people, young attorneys, at the Muslim Democratic Club [Muslim Democratic Club of New York, New York, New York] meeting and I was telling them some of the stuff that happens, and so you know, I told them you wanna get involved, join a Democratic club, okay. Join a Democratic club, go to meetings, start to learn who the players are, start to learn, you know, what the discussions are about, so forth and so--these attorneys. Run for county committee, what's a county committee, okay. Run for judicial delegate. Run for democratic district leader. What is an ED? Electoral district. Electoral district is a small geographical area and there's anywhere from--in northern Manhattan [New York] eighty-five to ninety EDs in a assembly district, and each ED has a minimum four hundred people that live in there. You run as a county committee member for that ED that you're responsible for the people in that ED that you run. If you win, you have to set up point persons in each one of the buildings, get their email addresses and everything so that any issues or concerns that they have they can email you as the county committee person. You're the local liaison to that Democratic club. You're the local liaison to the district leader. The district leader is for bigger area. You're the local liaison when you go to the Democratic club when the city councilmember, when the state assembly, when the state senator, when a congress member or the U.S. senator they come and speak. That's the learning process. Then, then you elevate yourself through the learning process, then you run for an open seat. You may run for city council. You may run for state assembly, state senate. By that time you've already learned and come up through the ranks in essence. So you've got to pay your dues. Trump [President Donald John Trump] didn't have to pay dues. And some people get lucky and don't have to pay dues, meaning you don't have to go through the process and you don't have to learn the things, 'cause Trump doesn't know. If you ask him right now what is a county committee member and what is the geographical area of a county committee member in New York State, I guarantee you he couldn't answer that. I'm telling you.
Story_ID: 660550
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about being a Muslim leader, political person in these times when there's been so much pushback--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and, and fear instilled in people about Muslims in our country?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, it's pretty tough, not necessarily for me, 'cause people look at me, you're looking at me, the cameraman is looking at me, who do they see? They see a person of color in a suit and tie whose name is [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson, he's not a Muslim. When I--people say, "Are you a Muslim?" I say yes. "Oh, you don't look like a Muslim." And then I ask them the question, "What does a Muslim look like?" And I say to you, a Muslim looks like everyone in this world, black, white, yellow, brown, from Africa, from Asia, from Europe, from Hawaii, every part of the world. My--what's my name, my legal name is Robert Jackson. I told you my kids' name, their first names and then Raheem Jackson, that is my legal name also. And that's what they call me, that they know that I'm their father, they know their birth certificate says, you know, Raheem, you know, Sumaya Raheem Jackson [Sumaya Jackson], I'm the--I'm their father, I'm a Muslim, but I don't look like a Muslim. I don't have a name like Zead Ramadan. And Zead Ramadan is a real person. He's a friend of mine. He's a member of the Muslim Democratic Club of New York [New York, New York]. He ran for the city council [New York City Council] in the seat that I once held. He's a Palestinian Muslim. His name is Zead Ramadan. So and there are many other Muslims that have Muslim or Islamic names. In my opinion, you know, we are who we are. And as I said to you, if you, by look at my past and my upbringing, growing up on welfare with a family of nine, growing up with two fathers not knowing who my biological father is, whether it's Eddie Chu or whether it's James Robert Rudd [James Rudd] or somebody that I never met in my life, it made me who I am today. I'm proud of who I am, so I'm not afraid to speak up about it to let people know though no matter who you are, you can be successful. And as a Muslim, never be ashamed of who you are. So, my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson] does not wear a hijab, but my sister-in-law wears a hijab and we are together all the time. And obviously people look, that's normal. And so for me it doesn't bother me at all.
Speaker 1: What about your daughters?
Speaker 2: My daughters, they do not wear hijabs, but their names are Saadiya, Asmahan [Asmahan Jackson], Sumaya. And I think they don't--they say Saadiya Jackson. So my daughter's name is Saadiya Jackson Owens 'cause she's married to my son-in-law Danell Owens. So that's her name. And so my grandkids are Isa, Isa is an Islamic name, Isa Lee Owens [ph.]. Lee Owens last name is Owen, Lee we found out just over the Thanksgiving Day holiday, is his great-grandmother's middle name and that Lee is in his family from his grandparents, his father has Lee--he has Lee middle name and he named, they named their kids with Lee in the middle names. So my grandkids are Isa Lee Owens and Amir, A-M-I-R, Lee Owens [Amir Owens]. And they are being raised as Muslims. So I'm (laughter), it--it's being proud of who you are, not ashamed of who you are and understanding that this is the diversity of the United States of America, and especially in New York City [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 660551
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to share that I have not asked you?
Speaker 2: No, I just think that I hope that my grandkids at a certain point in time and my siblings have an opportunity to see this and know that, hopefully they feel that I've done a good job in representing us from a truthfulness point of view and not being ashamed point of view. And just like I plan on, with my daughter [Saadiya Jackson Owens], making sure that when we map out and finalize all the census stuff and hopefully from my Chinese dad, Eddie York Chu [Jackson's stepfather, Eddie Chu], I can find all of his information so I can share that with my family, because all of them, my other siblings, they know that we have two fathers, so to share the information with all of them. As I said to you, half of us were named Jackson and half of them named Chu. So who is still alive right now, Donald Jackson who I said to you when you look at the pictures that I put together with the nine of us when we were young, you can look at my brother Jack and see he's half Chinese, just like my brother Chu. And then--
Speaker 1: Though they bo- have two different names?
Speaker 2: Huh, yeah. So, my brother Donald Jackson, Ruby Mae Jackson [Ruby Jackson], Emma Mae Jackson [Emma Jackson], [HistoryMaker] Robert Jackson and Diane Chu, those are the ones that are still living. So, my sister Diane was--the Chu was Eddie--Edward Chu, Zelma Ann Chu [Zelma Chu], my younger sister that died of overdose of drugs in Harlem [New York, New York], heroin, heroin addict in the '70s [1970s]. My brother James Chu, below me clearly Jimmy Rudd's [James Rudd] son, clear, but named Chu. And my sister Diane, in my opinion clearly not Eddie's daughter. But, Diane, my sister, named her son Robert and his name is Robert Chu [ph.]. So when he was in school, the administration, all of the kids with Asian, Chinese names they called them down to the office for whatever reason, and so Robert said, "Why you calling me down here, I--I'm not Chinese." They said, "Well your name is Robert Chu, C-H-U, right?" That's a Chinese surname, that's why they called him down to the office. And so that's one example of people making assumptions based on names. Another assumption was, I told you the article that I was written up in The New York Times maybe this was 1993 or 1994, and I talked about my nephew, Lamont Jackson [ph.], Emma, my sister Emma's son. And Lamont is about 6'3" and pretty, you know, healthy individual. So Lamont was living, you know, in my mom's house with my mother [Zelma Jackson Chu] and my gra- his grandfather, and so he was in the subway and he saw my father, his grandfather, Eddie Chu. And so he went to talk to his grandfather and the police officer said, "Hey young boy, leave that man alone." He said, "What are you talking about? That's my grandfather," and he said it with emotion. And obviously a police officer, Chinese man 5'1", ninety-five pounds, there's this young black boy and he--as far as complexion, maybe he's my complexion or maybe a little lighter, he's not darker than I am, 6'3", 220 pounds. You know, police officer say, "Get out of here, this not your grandfather." It's his grandfather. So people make all types of assumptions and I say that you know what they say when you assume things, right?
Speaker 1: What's that?
Speaker 2: You know what they say. Spell it out. How do you spell assume? A-S-S-U-M-E, you make a donkey out of you and me, and I'm, I'm being nice by saying donkey (laughter). So I don't, you know, I'm, I'm proud of who I am, I'm happy with my life, you know.
Story_ID: 660552
Speaker 1: I'm proud of what I've done on behalf of myself as an individual. As I said to you, my wife [Faika Rifai Jackson], by marrying her, helped me to where I am today, 'cause who knows if I didn't marry her where I would be. I could be alive, I could be dead, I could be married, I can have no kids, I could have five kids. Some people say well what adult was, influenced you in your life. I point to Irwin Goldberg, our track coach [at Benjamin Franklin High School; Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York], who put that application in my hand, who cared for me as a young black kid, Irwin Goldberg, a male, Jewish male, he was our track coach. Not only helped me, my brother [Raymond Jackson], he helped many, many people in the neighborhood, black and Latino, but mainly basically that's what it was, Irwin Goldberg. 'Cause if I didn't meet him and he didn't take the actions that he did, I may not have ever went to New Paltz [State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, New York]. I never may have been in Upward Bound. So you never know, you know, what changes your life by who you run into and who you meet. So that's important. So I'm proud of who I am. I hope to continue to encourage people to be involved and to get a good education. As James Brown said, without an education you might as well be dead. Education is the key (gesture) (makes sound) to life.
